   #copyright

Åland

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; European
Countries

                            Landskapet Åland
   Ahvenanmaan maakunta
   Åland Islands

   Flag of Åland Coat of arms of Åland
   Flag          Coat of arms
   Motto: none
   Anthem: Ålänningens sång
   Location of Åland
   Capital
   (and largest city) Mariehamn
                      60°7′N 19°54′E
   Official languages Swedish
   Government         Autonomous province
    - Governor        Peter Lindbäck^1
    - Premier         Roger Nordlund
        Autonomy
    - Declared        1920
    - Recognized      1921^2
    Accession to EU   January 1, 1995^3
                                   Area
    - Total           13,517 km² ( n/a)
                      5,267 sq mi
    - Water (%)       89
                                Population
    - 2005 estimate   26,711 ( n/a)
    - n/a census      n/a
    - Density         17.5/km² ( n/a)
                      45.3/sq mi
       GDP ( PPP)     n/a estimate
    - Total           n/a ( n/a)
    - Per capita      n/a ( n/a)
      HDI  (2003)     n/a (n/a) ( unranked)
        Currency      Euro (€)^4 ( EUR)
       Time zone      EET ( UTC+2)
    - Summer ( DST)   EEST ( UTC+3)
      Internet TLD    .ax^5
      Calling code    +358 (area code 18)
   ^1 The governor is an administrative post appointed by the Government
   of Finland, and does not have any authority over the autonomous
   Government of Åland.
   ^2 Settled by the League of Nations following the Åland crisis.
   ^3 Åland held a separate referendum and then joined at the same time as
   the rest of Finland.
   ^4 Until 1999, the Finnish mark.
   ^5 Replacing .aland.fi from August 2006.

   Åland (pronounced IPA: ['oːland] in Swedish), also called the Åland
   Islands or Ahvenanmaa(n maakunta) (in Finnish, meaning " Perch Land"),
   is an archipelago in the Baltic Sea. It is situated at the entrance to
   the Gulf of Bothnia and forms an autonomous, demilitarised,
   monolingually Swedish-speaking administrative province of Finland.

   The islands consist of the main island Fasta Åland (where 90% of the
   population resides) and an archipelago to the east that consists of
   over 6,500 skerries and islands. Fasta Åland is separated from the
   coast of Sweden by forty kilometres (twenty-five miles) of open water
   to the west. In the east, the Åland archipelago is virtually contiguous
   with the Finnish Archipelago Sea. Åland's only land border is extremely
   short and strangely shaped; it is located on the uninhabited island of
   Märket, which it shares with Sweden.

   Due to Åland's autonomous status, the powers exercised at the
   provincial level by representatives of the central state administration
   in the rest of Finland are largely exercised by the Government of Åland
   in Åland.

Autonomy of Åland

   The autonomous status of the islands was affirmed by a decision made by
   the League of Nations in 1921 and, in a somewhat different context,
   reaffirmed in the treaty on Finland's admission to the European Union.
   By law, Åland is politically neutral and entirely demilitarised. The
   islands were granted extensive autonomy by the Parliament of Finland in
   the Act on the Autonomy of Åland of 1920, which was last replaced by
   new legislation by the same name in 1951 and 1991.

   In connection with Finland's admission to the European Union, a
   protocol was signed concerning the Åland Islands that stipulates, among
   other things, that provisions of the European Community Treaty shall
   not force a change of the existing restrictions for foreigners (i.e.
   persons who do not enjoy "home region rights" (hembygdsrätt) in Åland)
   to acquire and hold real property or to provide certain services,
   implying a recognition of a separate nationality.

History

   The museum ship Pommern is anchored in the more western of Mariehamn's
   two harbours, Västerhamn
   Enlarge
   The museum ship Pommern is anchored in the more western of Mariehamn's
   two harbours, Västerhamn

   The Åland Islands were part of the territory ceded to Russia by Sweden
   under the Treaty of Fredrikshamn in September 1809. As a result, they
   became part of the semi- autonomous Grand Duchy of Finland.

   During this process, Sweden was unable to secure a provision that the
   islands not be fortified. The issue was important not only for Sweden
   but also for the United Kingdom, which was concerned that a military
   presence on the islands could threaten Britain's security and
   commercial interests.

   In 1832, Russia started to fortify the islands with the great fortress
   of Bomarsund. This was captured and destroyed by a combined British and
   French force of warships and marines in 1854 as part of the campaign in
   the Baltic during the Crimean War. In the Treaty of Paris (1856), the
   entire Åland Islands were demilitarized.

   During the Finnish Civil War, in 1918, Swedish troops intervened as a
   peacekeeping force between the Russian troops stationed on the islands
   and "White" and "Red" Finnish troops that came from Finland over the
   frozen sea. Historians however point out that Sweden may have in
   reality planned to occupy the islands. Within weeks, the Swedish troops
   gave way to German troops that occupied Åland by request of the "White"
   ( conservative) Finnish Senate.

   After 1917, the residents of the islands worked towards having the
   islands ceded back to their mother country, Sweden. A petition for
   secession from Finland was signed by 96.2% of Åland's native adults
   (those working or living abroad excluded), although serious questions
   were later raised regarding this extraordinarily high figure. Swedish
   nationalist sentiments had grown strong particularly due to the
   following issues: anti-Swedish tendencies in Finland, Finnish
   nationalism fuelled by Finland's struggle to retain its autonomy, and
   the Finnish resistance against Russification. In addition, the conflict
   between the Swedish-speaking minority and the Finnish-speaking majority
   (on the mainland), which since the 1840s had been prominent in
   Finland's political life, contributed to the Åland population's
   apprehension about its future in Finland.

   Finland was however not willing to cede the islands and instead offered
   them an autonomous status. Nevertheless the residents did not approve
   the offer, and the dispute over the islands was submitted to the League
   of Nations. The latter decided that Finland should retain the
   sovereignty over the province but that the Åland Islands should be made
   an autonomous territory. Thus Finland was obliged to ensure the
   residents of the Åland Islands the right to maintain the Swedish
   language, as well as their own culture and local traditions. At the
   same time, an international treaty established the neutral status of
   Åland, whereby it was prohibited to place military headquarters or
   forces on the islands.

   In the course of the 20th century, increasing numbers of the islanders
   have perceived Finnish sovereignty as benevolent and even beneficial.
   The combination of disappointment about insufficient support from
   Sweden in the League of Nations, Swedish disrespect for Åland's
   demilitarised status in the 1930s, and some feelings of a shared
   destiny with Finland during and after World War II has changed the
   islanders perception of Åland's relation to Finland from "a Swedish
   province in Finnish possession" to "an autonomous part of Finland".

Politics

   The Åland Islands during the Crimean War.
   Enlarge
   The Åland Islands during the Crimean War.

   The Åland Islands are governed according to the Act on the Autonomy of
   Åland and international treaties, which guarantee autonomy and a
   demilitarised status. The Government of Åland, or Landskapsregering, is
   dependent on the Parliament of Åland, or Lagting, according to the
   principles of parliamentarism.

   Åland has its own national flag, has issued its own postage stamps
   since 1984, has its own police force, and is a member of the Nordic
   Council. The islands are demilitarised, and the male population is
   exempt from conscription. Åland autonomy preceded the creation of the
   regions of Finland, but the autonomous government of Åland also handles
   what the regional councils do.

   Finland has sovereignty over Åland, which is thus not independent. The
   Åland Islands are guaranteed representation in the Finnish parliament,
   to which they elect one representative.

Administration

   The State Provincial Office on the Åland Islands has a somewhat
   different function from the other Provinces of Finland, due to its
   autonomy. Generally, a State Provincial Office is a joint regional
   authority of seven different ministries of the Government of Finland.
   In Åland, the State Provincial Office also represents a set of other
   authorities of the central government, which in Mainland Finland has
   separate bureaucracies. On the other hand, duties which in Mainland
   Finland are handled by the provincial offices, are transferred to the
   autonomous government of Åland.

   Åland has its own post office but uses the Finnish five-digit postal
   code system, in which postal codes beginning with 22XXX are reservated
   for it. The smallest postal code is for the capital Mariehamn, 22100,
   and the highest 22950 for Jurmo.

Municipalities

     * Brändö
     * Eckerö
     * Finström
     * Föglö

                  * Geta
                  * Hammarland
                  * Jomala
                  * Kumlinge

                                * Kökar
                                * Lemland
                                * Lumparland
                                * Mariehamn

                                              * Saltvik
                                              * Sottunga
                                              * Sund
                                              * Vårdö

Geography

   Åland Islands (larger map)
   Enlarge
   Åland Islands ( larger map)

   The Åland Islands occupy a position of great strategic importance, as
   they command one of the entrances to the port of Stockholm, as well as
   the approaches to the Gulf of Bothnia, in addition to being situated
   near the Gulf of Finland.

   The Åland archipelago consists of nearly three hundred inhabitable
   islands, of which about eighty are inhabited; the remainder are merely
   some 6,000 skerries and desolate rocks. The archipelago is connected to
   Turkuland archipelago in the east ( Finnish: Turunmaan saaristo,
   Swedish: Åbolands skärgård) — the archipelago adjacent to the southwest
   coast of Finland. Together they form the Archipelago Sea.

   The surface of the islands is generally rocky, the soil thin, and the
   climate keen. There are several excellent harbours, most notably at
   Ytternäs.

   The islands' landmass occupies a total area of 1,512 square kilometres
   (583  sq. mi). Ninety per cent of the population live on Fasta Åland
   (the Main Island), also the site of the capital town of Mariehamn.
   Fasta Åland is the largest island in the archipelago, extending over
   1,010 square kilometres, more than 70% of the province's land area, and
   stretching 50 kilometres (31  mi) from north to south and 45 kilometres
   (28 mi) from east to west.

   During the Åland crisis, the parties sought support from different maps
   of the islands. On the Swedish map, the most densely populated main
   island dominated, and many skerries were left out. On the Finnish map,
   a lot of smaller islands or skerries were, for technical reasons, given
   a slightly exaggerated size. The Swedish map made the islands appear to
   be closer to the mainland of Sweden than to Finland; the Finnish map
   stressed the continuity of the archipelago between the main island and
   mainland Finland, while a greater gap appeared between the islands and
   the archipelago on the Swedish side. Although both Finns and Swedes of
   course argued for their respective interpretations, in retrospect it is
   hard to say that one is more correct than the other. One consequence is
   the oft-repeated number of "over 6,000" skerries, that was given
   authority by the outcome of the arbitration.

Economy

   A transnational Euroregion encompasses Åland and nearby coastal
   archipelagoes (skärgårdar).
   Enlarge
   A transnational Euroregion encompasses Åland and nearby coastal
   archipelagoes (skärgårdar).

   Åland's economy is heavily dominated by shipping, trade and tourism.
   Shipping represents about 40% of the economy, with several
   international carriers owned and operated off Åland. Most companies
   aside from shipping are small, with fewer than ten employees. Farming
   and fishing are important in combination with the food industry. A few
   high-profile technology companies contribute to a prosperous economy.

   The main ports are Mariehamn (south), Berghamn (west) and Långnäs on
   the eastern shore of the Main Island.

   The abolition of tax-free sales on ferry boats travelling between
   destinations within the European Union made Finland demand an exception
   for the Åland Islands on EU's VAT rules. The exception allows for
   maintained tax-free sales on the ferries between Sweden and Finland
   (provided they stop at Mariehamn), but has also made Åland a different
   tax-zone, meaning that tariffs must be levied on goods brought to the
   islands.

   Unemployment is well below that of surrounding regions, 1.8% in 2004.

   The Finnish State collects taxes, duties and fees also in Åland. In
   return, the Finnish Government places a sum of money at the disposal of
   the Åland Parliament. The sum is 0.45 per cent of total Government
   income, excluding Government loans. In 2005, the sum was over 225
   million USD.

Demographics

   Most inhabitants have Swedish (the sole official language) as their
   first language: 92.4% in 2004, and 5.0% speak Finnish. The language of
   instruction in publicly financed schools is Swedish, but an Ålandic
   municipality is free to provide teaching of Finnish. (In the rest of
   Finland, both Finnish and Swedish are official languages.) 0.3% (77
   people) are English speakers.

   Regional citizenship or the right of domicile (hembygdsrätt/
   kotiseutuoikeus) is a prerequisite for the right to vote or stand as a
   candidate in elections to the Legislative Assembly, to own and hold
   real estate in Åland or to exercise without restriction a trade or
   profession in Åland.

   The vast majority of the population, 94.8%, belongs to the Evangelical
   Lutheran Church.

   The issue of the ethnicity of the Ålanders, and the correct linguistic
   classification of their language, remains somewhat sensitive and
   controversial. They may be considered either ethnic Swedes or
   Swedish-speaking Finns, but their language is closer to the adjacent
   dialects in Sweden, i.e. Uppländska, than to adjacent dialects of
   Finland Swedish.
     * Listen to Ålandish

Culture

     * The Åland Islands are mentioned as the location where the character
       Hooper Hamilton in H.G. Wells' book The Shape of Things to Come
       committs suicide.

Holidays

   Date English Name Local Name Remarks
   January 1 New Year's Day Nyårsdagen
   January 6 Epiphany Trettondagen
   March 30 Åland's Demilitarisation Day   Peace in 1856 after the Crimean
   war
   Moveable Friday Good Friday Långfredag The Friday before Easter Sunday
   Moveable Sunday Easter Sunday Påskdagen
   Moveable Monday Easter Monday Annandag påsk The day after Easter Sunday
   April 30 Walpurgis Night Valborgsmässoafton
   May 1 May Day Första maj
   Moveable Thursday Ascension Day Kristi himmelsfärdsdag 40 days after
   Easter
   Moveable Sunday Pentecost Pingstdagen 50 days after Easter
   Moveable Monday Whitmonday Annandag Pingst 51 days after Easter
   June 9 Åland's national holiday   First congregation of the regional
   government
   Third Friday of June Midsummer Eve Midsommarafton
   Third Saturday of June Midsummer Day Midsommardagen
   First Saturday of November All Saints Day Alla helgons dag
   December 6 Independence day Självständighetsdagen Independence of
   Finland ( 1917)
   December 24 Christmas Eve Julafton
   December 25 Christmas Day Juldagen
   December 26 Boxing Day Annandag jul

Gallery

   Cruiseferries offer transport from Åland to both mainland Finland and
   Sweden.

   Östra Hamnen - The Eastern Port of Mariehamn, sailing ship Linden in
   the centre

   Sjökvarteret in Mariehamn

   Sailing ship Pommern and a racing boat

   Knutsbodaberget in Lemland, with 4 wind power generators

   The Lemströms canal

   Schooner Linden in the waters south of Mariehamn

   Ferry in Åland archipelago.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%85land"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
