   #copyright

2005 Sumatra earthquake

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Natural Disasters

   Epicentre map from NOAA
   Enlarge
   Epicentre map from NOAA
   USGS image depicting earthquake zones for the Sunda Trench - Damage
   zones for 1833 and 1861, then 26 December 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake,
   and 28 March 2005 Sumatran earthquake.
   Enlarge
   USGS image depicting earthquake zones for the Sunda Trench - Damage
   zones for 1833 and 1861, then 26 December 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake,
   and 28 March 2005 Sumatran earthquake.

   The 2005 Sumatra earthquake was a major earthquake on March 28, 2005,
   located off the west coast of northern Sumatra, Indonesia.
   Approximately 1300 people were killed by the earthquake, mostly on the
   island of Nias. The event caused panic in the region, which had
   recently been devastated by the massive tsunami triggered by the 2004
   Indian Ocean earthquake, but this earthquake generated a relatively
   tiny tsunami that caused limited damage.

   The earthquake occurred at 16:09:36 UTC (11:09:36 P.M. local time) on
   March 28, 2005. The hypocenter was located at 2°04′35″N, 97°00′58″E, 30
   km (18.6 miles) below the surface of the Indian Ocean, where subduction
   is forcing the Indo-Australian Plate to the south-west under the
   Eurasian plate Sunda edge. The area is 200 km west of Sibolga, Sumatra,
   or 1400 km northwest of Jakarta, roughly halfway between the islands of
   Nias and Simeulue. Seismic recordings give the earthquake a magnitude
   of about 8.7, and effects were felt as far away as Bangkok, Thailand, a
   distance of 1000 km .

Earthquake and damage

   The earthquake lasted for about two minutes in total. In the
   twenty-four hours immediately after the event, there were eight major
   aftershocks, measuring between 5.5 and 6.0. A debate arose among
   seismologists over whether this should be considered an aftershock of
   the December 2004 event, or a "triggered earthquake" as it was larger
   than typical aftershocks but on the same fault.

   On the Indonesian island of Nias, off the coast of Sumatra, hundreds of
   buildings were destroyed by the earthquake. The death toll on Nias was
   at least one thousand, with 220 dying in Gunungsitoli, the island's
   largest town. Nearly half of Gunungsitoli's population (27,000) fled
   the town. The control tower at the nearby airport ( Banaka) collapsed,
   forcing relief flights to operate out of Sibolga on nearby Sumatra.

   The earthquake was strongly felt across the island of Sumatra, and
   caused widespread power outages in the Indonesian city of Banda Aceh,
   already devastated by the December 2004 tsunami, and prompted thousands
   to flee their homes and seek higher ground . It was also strongly felt
   along the west coast of Thailand and Malaysia, and in Kuala Lumpur
   high-rise buildings were evacuated. The earthquake was felt less
   strongly in the Maldives, India, and Sri Lanka.

Tsunami

   The earthquake caused great concern around the Indian Ocean that it
   might trigger a tsunami similar to the massive one generated three
   months earlier by the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake on December 26,
   2004. Evacuations were carried out in coastal regions of Thailand,
   Malaysia, and Sri Lanka. This earthquake, however, produced a
   relatively tiny tsunami. A three-meter tsunami caused moderate damage
   to port and airport facilities on Simeulue, and a two-meter tsunami was
   recorded on the west coast of Nias. Much smaller waves, most detectable
   only in tide gauge recording systems, were recorded across the Indian
   Ocean; for example, a 25 cm wave was recorded at Colombo, Sri Lanka.

   Tsunami warnings were issued by the Pacific Tsunami Warning Centre,
   operated by the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
   (NOAA) , and by the government of Thailand. There were initial concerns
   that a major tsunami could be generated, particularly travelling south
   from the event's hypocenter.

   Portions of Thailand's southern coast were evacuated as a precaution,
   and NOAA advised an evacuation of 600 miles of coastline in Sumatra.
   Evacuations also occurred in the northern Malaysian states of Penang
   and Kedah, as well as the eastern coast of Sri Lanka, where ten people
   were killed in the confusion of the evacuation. Many of the southern
   states of India were also put on high alert; all of these areas had
   seen significant damage from December's tsunami. After the detection of
   a minor tsunami south of the epicenter, including a 30 cm tsunami on
   Australia's Cocos Islands, the island states of Mauritius, Madagascar,
   and the Seychelles in the Indian Ocean issued warnings to their
   populations.

   Although tsunami warning systems for the region had been actively
   discussed since the December 2004 earthquake, none had yet been
   implemented in the Indian Ocean.

Humanitarian response

   The United Nations worked with the Indonesian government to take
   further actions to prevent a possible catastrophe after the strong
   earthquake, and the US State Department has announced that it will help
   countries affected by a possible tsunami. The government of India
   announced aid of USD 2 million for the earthquake victims .

   Australia announced it would provide AUD 1 million in emergency aid,
   and, at the request of the Indonesian Government, dispatched Australian
   Defence Force medical teams and equipment to Nias. The Australian naval
   ship HMAS Kanimbla , having only recently left Aceh, was redeployed to
   the region from Singapore. At about 9:30 (UTC) 2 April 2005, one of
   Kanimbla's two Sea King helicopters, Shark 02, crashed on the island of
   Nias while taking medical personnel to a village. Nine personnel were
   killed, and two others sustained injuries but were rescued from the
   site by the other helicopter. The crash occurred one day before a state
   visit by President of Indonesia Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono to Australia,
   where he and Prime Minister of Australia John Howard expressed mutual
   sorrow for their countries' losses.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2005_Sumatra_earthquake"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
