   #copyright

A Christmas Carol

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Novels

   CAPTION: Title A Christmas Carol

   A Christmas Carol frontpiece, first edition 1843.
   Frontpiece, first edition 1843
     Author   Charles Dickens
    Country   United Kingdom
    Language  English
    Genre(s)  Novel
   Publisher  Chapman and Hall
    Released  19 December 1843
   Media type Print ( Hardback, Paperback)
      ISBN    NA

   A Christmas Carol in Prose, Being a Ghost Story of Christmas (commonly
   known as A Christmas Carol ) is what Charles Dickens described as his
   "little Christmas Book" and was first published on December 19, 1843
   with illustrations by John Leech. The story was instantly successful,
   selling over six thousand copies in one week and, although originally
   written as a potboiler to enable Dickens to pay off a debt, the tale
   has become one of the most popular and enduring Christmas stories of
   all time.

   Contemporaries noted that the story's popularity played a critical role
   in redefining the importance of Christmas and the major sentiments
   associated with the holiday. A Christmas Carol was written during a
   time of decline in the old Christmas traditions. "If Christmas, with
   its ancient and hospitable customs, its social and charitable
   observances, were in danger of decay, this is the book that would give
   them a new lease," said English poet Thomas Hood.

Plot summary

   Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.

   A Christmas Carol is a Victorian morality tale of an old and bitter
   miser, Ebenezer Scrooge, who undergoes a profound experience of
   redemption over the course of one evening. Mr Scrooge is a
   financier/money-changer who has devoted his life to the accumulation of
   wealth. He holds anything other than money in contempt, including
   friendship, love and the Christmas season.
   Ebenezer Scrooge encounters "Ignorance" and "Want" in A Christmas Carol
   Ebenezer Scrooge encounters "Ignorance" and "Want" in A Christmas Carol

   In keeping with the musical analogy of the title, "A Christmas Carol",
   Dickens divides his literary work into five "staves" instead of
   chapters. The story begins by establishing that Jacob Marley, Scrooge's
   business partner in the firm of Scrooge & Marley, was dead—the
   narrative begins seven years after his death to the very day, Christmas
   Eve. Scrooge and his clerk, Bob Cratchit, are at work in the
   counting-house, with Cratchit stationed in the poorly heated "tank", a
   victim of his employer's stinginess. Scrooge's nephew, Fred, enters to
   wish his uncle a "Merry Christmas" and invite him to Christmas dinner
   the next day. He is dismissed by his relative with "Bah! Humbug!" among
   other unpleasantries. Two "portly gentlemen", collecting charitable
   donations for the poor, come in afterwards, but they too are rebuffed
   by Scrooge, who points out that the Poor Laws and workhouses are
   sufficient to care for the poor. When Scrooge is told that many would
   rather die than go there, he mercilessly responds, "If they would
   rather die ... they had better do it, and decrease the surplus
   population." At the end of the workday, Scrooge grudgingly allows
   Cratchit to take Christmas Day off, but to arrive to work all the
   earlier on the day after.

   Scrooge leaves the counting-house and eventually returns to his home,
   an isolated townhouse formerly owned by his late business partner,
   Jacob Marley. In keeping with his miserly character, Scrooge lives in a
   small suite of largely unfurnished rooms within the house which he
   keeps dark and cold (the rest of the rooms in the building having been
   let as offices). While he unlocks his door Scrooge is startled to see
   the ghostly face of Marley instead of the familiar appearance of his
   door knocker. This is just the beginning of Scrooge's harrowing night.
   A spectral hearse charging up the broad staircase in the dark, the
   sliding of bolts and slamming of doors elsewhere in the house, and the
   inexplicable ringing of the ancient and neglected bell pull system
   precedes a visit from Marley as Scrooge eats his gruel by the
   fireplace. Marley has come to warn Scrooge that his miserliness and
   contempt for others will subject him to the same fate Marley himself
   suffers in death: condemned to walk the earth in penitence since he had
   not done it in life in concern for mankind. A prominent symbol of
   Marley's torture is a heavy chain wound around his form that has
   attached to it symbolic objects from Marley's life fashioned out of
   heavy metal: ledgers, money boxes, keys, and the like. Marley explains
   that Scrooge's fate might be worse than his because Scrooge's chain was
   as long and as heavy as Marley's seven Christmases ago when Marley
   died, and Scrooge has been adding to his with his selfish life. Marley
   tells Scrooge that he has a chance to escape this fate through the
   visitation of three more spirits that will appear one by one. Scrooge
   is shaken but not entirely convinced that the foregoing was no
   hallucination, and goes to bed thinking that a good night's sleep will
   make him feel better.

   Scrooge wakes in the night and the bells of the neighboring church
   strike twelve. The first spirit appears and introduces himself as the
   Ghost of Christmas Past. This spirit leads Scrooge on a journey into
   some of the happiest and saddest moments of Scrooge's past, events that
   would largely shape the current Scrooge. These include the mistreatment
   of Scrooge by his uncaring father (who did not allow his son to return
   home from boarding school, not even at Christmas), the loss of a great
   love sacrificed for his devotion to business, and the death of his
   sister, the only other person who ever showed love and compassion for
   him. Unable to stand these painful memories and his growing regret of
   them, Scrooge covers the spirit with the large candle snuffer it
   carries and he is returned to his room, where he falls asleep.

   Scrooge wakes at the stroke of one. After more than fifteen minutes, he
   rises and finds the second spirit, the Ghost of Christmas Present, in
   an adjoining room. The spirit shows him the meagre Christmas
   celebrations of the Cratchit family, the sweet nature of their crippled
   son, Tiny Tim, and a possible early death for the child; this prospect
   is the immediate catalyst for his change of heart. They also show the
   faith of Scrooge's nephew in his uncle's potential for change, a
   concept that slowly warms Scrooge to the idea that he can reinvent
   himself. To further drive the point, the Ghost reveals two pitiful
   children who huddle under his robes which personify the major causes of
   suffering in the world, "Ignorance" and "Want", with a grim warning
   that the former is especially harmful. At the end of the visitation,
   the bell strikes twelve. The Ghost of Christmas Present vanishes and
   the third spirit appears to Scrooge.

   The Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come takes the form of a grim spectre,
   completely robed in black, who does not speak and whose body is
   entirely hidden except for one pointing hand. This spirit frightens
   Scrooge more than the others, and harrows him with visions of the
   Cratchit family bereft of Tiny Tim, of Scrooge's own lonely death and
   final torment, and the cold, avaricious reactions of the people around
   him after his passing. Without explicitly being said, Scrooge learns
   that he can avoid the future he has been shown, and alter the fate of
   Tiny Tim—but only if he changes.

   In the end, Scrooge changes his life and reverts to the generous,
   kind-hearted soul he was in his youth before the death of his sister.

   The story deals extensively with two of Dickens' recurrent themes,
   social injustice and poverty, the relationship between the two, and
   their causes and effects. It was written to be abrupt and forceful with
   its message, with a working title of "The Sledgehammer". The first
   edition of A Christmas Carol was illustrated by John Leech, a
   politically radical artist who in the cartoon "Substance and Shadow"
   printed earlier in 1843 had explicitly criticised artists who failed to
   address social issues.

Characters

Principal

     * Ebenezer Scrooge
     * Jacob Marley (who appears in the story only as a ghost)
     * Bob Cratchit
     * Tiny Tim
     * The Ghost of Christmas Past
     * The Ghost of Christmas Present
     * The Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come
     * Fred (Scrooge's nephew)

Supporting

     * Fezziwig (to whom Scrooge had been apprenticed as a youth)
     * Fan (Scrooge's late sister)
     * Belle (a young woman to whom Scrooge was once engaged)
     * Mrs. Cratchit (Bob Cratchit's wife)
     * Peter Cratchit (Bob's eldest son)
     * Martha Cratchit (Bob's eldest daughter)
     * Mrs. Dilber (Scrooge's charwoman)
     * The Laundress
     * Old Joe (a receiver of stolen goods; in the "future" segment of the
       story, he is given the dead Scrooge's belongings, after his room
       and his body have been plundered by Mrs. Dilber and the Laundress)
     * The Two Portly Gentlemen

Dramatic adaptations

   'A Christmas Carol' was the subject of Dickens' first public reading,
   given in Birmingham Town Hall to the Industrial and Literary Institute
   on 27 December 1852. This was repeated three days later to an audience
   of 'working people', and was a great success by his own account and
   that of newspapers of the time. Over the years Dickens edited the piece
   down and adapted it for a listening, rather than reading, audience.
   Excerpts from 'A Christmas Carol' remained part of Dickens' public
   readings until his death.

   A Christmas Carol has been adapted to theatre, film, radio, and
   television countless times. According to the Internet Movie Database,
   various movie adaptations of the story were filmed as early as 1910.

   Perhaps the most popular and critically acclaimed film adaptation of
   the story was made in Britain in 1951. Originally titled Scrooge (and
   renamed A Christmas Carol for its American release), it starred
   Alastair Sim as Scrooge, and was directed by Brian Desmond-Hurst with a
   screenplay by Noel Langley.

   Most modern adaptations refer to the Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come as
   the "Ghost of Christmas Future" instead.

   Adaptations of the story include:
     * Scrooge (1935), an English movie starring Sir Seymour Hicks as
       Scrooge.
     * A Christmas Carol (1938) starring Reginald Owen as Scrooge and Gene
       Lockhart and Kathleen Lockhart as the Cratchits.
     * A Christmas Carol (1938), a radio dramatization featured on The
       Campbell Playhouse and starring Orson Welles as Scrooge; the
       following year the story was adapted again on the same program,
       this time with Lionel Barrymore starring.
     * Scrooge (1951) starring Alastair Sim as Scrooge and Mervyn Johns
       and Hermione Baddeley as the Cratchits, this adaptation is
       recognized as one of the most popular Christmas adaptations in film
       history.
     * A Christmas Carol (1954), a musical television adaptation starring
       Fredric March as Scrooge and Basil Rathbone as Marley. A filmed
       episode of the series Shower of Stars, and the first version in
       colour.
     * The Stingiest Man in Town (1956), the second musical adaptation,
       starring Basil Rathbone and Vic Damone as the old and young
       Scrooge. A live episode of the television series The Alcoa Hour.
     * Mister Magoo's Christmas Carol (1962), an animated musical
       television special featuring the UPA character voiced by Jim
       Backus, with songs by Jule Styne and Bob Merrill.
     * Scrooge (1970), a musical film adaptation starring Albert Finney as
       Scrooge and Alec Guinness as Marley's Ghost.
     * A Christmas Carol (1970 original stage adaptation written by Ira
       David Wood III), performed for the last 31 years on stage at
       Raleigh's Memorial Auditorium. Theatre In The Park, in Raleigh NC,
       has produced the show since its premiere. Wood's "A Christmas
       Carol" is the longest running indoor show in NC theatre history.
     * A Christmas Carol (1971), an Oscar-winning animated short film by
       Richard Williams, with Alastair Sim reprising the role of Scrooge.
     * Rich Little's Christmas Carol (1978), a television special in which
       impressionist Rich Little plays several celebrities and characters
       in the main roles.
     * The Stingiest Man in Town (1979), an animated made-for-TV musical
       produced by Rankin-Bass. Stars Walter Matthau as the voice of
       Scrooge and Tom Bosley as the narrator. This had originally been
       done as a live-action musical on television in 1956.
     * An American Christmas Carol (1979), an adaptation starring Henry
       Winkler at the height of his fame from the television series Happy
       Days, where the story is set in Depression era New England, and the
       Scrooge character is named Benedict Slade.
     * Bugs Bunny's Christmas Carol (1979), an animated television special
       featuring the various Looney Tunes characters.
     * Mickey's Christmas Carol (1983), an animated short film featuring
       the various Walt Disney characters, with Scrooge McDuck fittingly
       playing the role of Ebenezer Scrooge. This version was based on a
       1972 audio musical entitled Disney's 'A Christmas Carol'. Most of
       the cast remained unchanged, however, in the audio version, the
       Blue Fairy (from Pinocchio) and the Queen (from Snow White, in her
       hag guise) portrayed the Ghosts of Christmas Past and Future,
       respectively (the Present Ghost, like in the film version, was
       portrayed by Willie the Giant).
     * A Christmas Carol (1984), a television movie version starring
       George C. Scott.
     * The Gospel According to Scrooge (1986), a stage musical that
       emphasizes the religious elements of the story, often performed by
       American Christian churches.
     * X-mas Marks The Spot (1987) was an episode of the animated series,
       " The Real Ghostbusters" that spoofed the Dickens classic,
       depicting the heroes accidentally capturing the three spirits and
       ruining Christmas for the future.
     * Scrooged (1988): a remake in a contemporary setting with Bill
       Murray being a misanthropic TV producer who is haunted by the
       ghosts of Christmas. Directed by Richard Donner.
     * Blackadder's Christmas Carol (1988): a parody where philanthropist
       Ebenezer Blackadder becomes a bad guy after a visit by the Spirit
       of Christmas.
     * In 1991, the Focus On The Family children's radio program
       Adventures In Odyssey produced an episode entitled "A Thanksgiving
       Carol", in which the gang at Whit's End produces the show for Kid's
       Radio. Bernard Walton ( Dave Madden) becomes Ebenezer Stooge,
       Eugene Meltsner ( Will Ryan) becomes Bob Wretched, Connie Kendall
       (Katie Leigh Pavalovich) takes on the roles of Cheerful Lady (the
       portly gentlemen rolled into one), Mrs. Wretched, and Teeny Tom.
       Officer David Harley (also voiced by Will Ryan) becomes Jacob
       Arley, and Whit (the late Hal Smith) becomes Terence Clodbody, all
       three Spirits of Christmas rolled into one.
     * Alvin and the Chipmunks adapted the basic storyline in a 1992 TV
       Special, Alvin's Christmas Carol. Alvin becomes a Scrooge-like
       chipmunk who only views Christmas as a time of getting. But Dave,
       Theodore and Simon show him that Christmas is a time of giving.
       Incidentally, Alvin's elderly neighbour on his paper route has a
       cat named Ebenezer.
     * The Muppet Christmas Carol (1992) featuring the various Muppet
       characters, with Michael Caine as Scrooge.
     * Scrooge: The Musical (1992), a British stage musical adapted from
       the 1970 film and starring Anthony Newley.
     * The Flintstones Christmas Carol (1994), animated adaptation
       featuring Fred Flintstone as 'Ebonyzer Scrooge', Barney as 'Bob
       Cragit' and Mr. Slate as 'Jacob Marbley'
     * Ebbie (1995), a television movie in which the role of Scrooge is
       played by a female with Susan Lucci as Elizabeth "Ebbie" Scrooge,
       the cold-hearted owner of a department store.
     * A Solstice Carol (1996), a holiday episode of Xena: Warrior
       Princess that replaced Scrooge with a miserly king and replaced the
       three spirits with the three fates of Greek Mythology.
     * Beavis and Butt-head has a parody adaptation of the story where
       Beavis played as a cruel manager at Burger World, and went through
       the revelations of the three ghosts, that came out of the TV while
       he was trying to watch a porno. Although the story ended up being a
       dream and Beavis is still the same as ever.
     * Focus On The Family Radio Theatre adapted the story in a 1996
       production hosted by David Suchet, narrated by Timothy Bateson, and
       with Tenniel Evans as Scrooge. This production expands on the
       events of Scrooge's past and takes a few other liberties with the
       storyline, especially after Scrooge's awakening from his encounter
       with the Ghost of Christmas Yet To Come. It emphasizes the
       underlying Christian themes of the story.
     * Ebenezer (1997), a Canadian TV production Western-themed version
       starring Jack Palance and Rick Schroder.
     * A Christmas Carol (1997), an animated production featuring the
       voice of Tim Curry as Scrooge as well as the voices of Whoopi
       Goldberg, Michael York and Ed Asner.
     * Ms. Scrooge (1997), a televison movie starring Cicely Tyson that
       aired on USA Network.
     * A Christmas Carol (1999), a television movie starring Patrick
       Stewart, inspired by his one-man show, but featuring a full
       supporting cast. This was the first version of the story to make
       use of digital special effects.
     * The Family Man (2000) Though not a direct adaptation, this film's
       story, involving a wealthy, but cold-hearted businessman ( Nicolas
       Cage) who learns the true meaning of Christmas through a
       supernatural misadventure, recalls Dickens' novel.
     * A Christmas Carol (2000) A modern-day version starring Ross Kemp as
       Eddie Scrooge, an unscrupulous loan shark.
     * A Diva's Christmas Carol (2000), a humorous adaptation starring
       Vanessa Williams as bitchy diva Ebony Scrooge who is transformed
       into a kind-hearted soul.
     * A Carol Christmas (2003) Made-for-TV adaption on the Halmark
       Channel. Stars Tori Spelling as "Scroogette." William Shatner makes
       a special appearance as the ghost of Christmas Present.
     * Christmas Carol: The Movie (2003) an animated version produced by
       Illuminated Films (Christmas Carol), Ltd/The Film Consortium/MBP;
       screenplay by Robert Llewellyn & Piet Kroon; with the voices of
       Simon Callow, Kate Winslet, Nicolas Cage, Jane Horrocks, Rhys
       Ifans, Michael Gambon, and Juliet Stevenson.
     * Steve Nallon's Christmas Carol (2003) theatrical adaptation
       starring the noted impressionist, as a number of famous people.
     * I'm Sorry I Haven't A Christmas Carol (2003) a BBC Radio 4 parody
       in which the curmugeonly Ebeneezer Scrumph (played by the
       curmugeonly chairman of I'm Sorry I Haven't A Clue, Humphrey
       Lyttelton) is visited by three ghosts played by the regular
       panelists.
     * A Christmas Carol (2003 film), an Animé animated version of the
       Dickens's classic, distributed in the United States by Goodtimes
       Entertainment, written by Jack Olesker, directed by Toshiyuki
       Hiruma Takashi, animation by Amisong Productions among others, with
       the voices of Tony Ail, Nathan As well, and Cheralynn Bailey
     * VeggieTales released a parody entitled " An Easter Carol" in 2004,
       with the zucchini Nebby K. Nezzar in the Scrooge role.
     * A Christmas Carol: The Musical (2004), starring Kelsey Grammer.
     * Caroll's Christmas (2004), in which modern versions of the three
       spirits visit the wrong man's house on Christmas Eve.
     * An IESE Christmas Carol (2005) at Google Video, a short business
       school version by the IESE theatre club in which Scrooge is played
       by women.
     * A Learning Carol (2004), a three episode podcast by The Radio
       Adventures of Dr. Floyd (ep. 205-207)
     * A Sesame Street Christmas Carol (2006), a direct to DVD special
       featuring Oscar the Grouch in the Scrooge role.
     * Bah Humduck! (2006), a Looney Tunes spoof of the classic with Daffy
       as Scrooge.
     * A Camden Christmas Carol (2006), a multimedia stage adaptation by
       Rutgers-Camden Centre for the Arts in Camden, NJ supported by a
       grant from the Knight Foundation.
     * A Christmas Carol (2006)
     * A Christmas Mikey (2006 television episode) Final episode of Season
       1 of Kappa Mikey, pitting Ozu in the role of Scrooge, and three
       Ghosts who resemble Japanese samurai.
     * Weebl and Bob (2006) A Bob cartoon parodies A Christmas Carol.
     * Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends - In part of the epsode "A Lost
       Claus", Bloo parodies this in order to squeeze more presents out of
       Mr. Herriman. Bloo, essentially, gets the ghosts wrong: Bob Marley
       instead of Jacob Marley; the Ghost of a Christmas present instead
       of the Ghost of Christmas Present; and as the Ghost of Christmas
       Future, he dresses up as a deadly robot. Bloo completely skips over
       the Ghost of Christmas Past.
     * I'm Sorry I Haven't a Christmas Carol - An edition of I'm Sorry I
       Haven't A Clue, where the usual games are woven into the story of A
       Christmas Carol.

   In addition, others have noted that the classic film It's a Wonderful
   Life is essentially A Christmas Carol in reverse. That is, instead of a
   miserly and selfish man changing his ways with a supernatural
   experience on Christmas Eve, the film depicts the story of a
   compassionate businessman who sacrificed his dreams to help his
   community and feels he is a failure. In the depths of despair, there is
   a supernatural occurrence to show him that his choices were more than
   worthwhile.

Sequels

   Dickens wraps up the story with two short paragraphs telling us that
   sickly Tiny Tim survives and stingy Ebenezer Scrooge becomes renowned
   for his newfound goodness—basically a "happily ever after" ending—but
   he provides no detail on what happens to any of the characters.
   Following the every-good-story-deserves-a-sequel idea, a number of
   authors have crafted their own versions of what befell Scrooge and
   company. Ranging from Internet stories to best-selling novels (and even
   a television screenplay), several different works have picked up the
   characters and events of Dickens' classic to spin new tales for the
   story's aftermath.

   Here are but a few:
     * A Christmas Carol II, (1985), an episode of the TV series George
       Burns Comedy Week in which it's revealed that Scrooge is
       good-natured to a fault, and all of Camden Town takes advantage of
       his generosity, prompting the spirits to return and make sure
       Scrooge reaches a median between his past and current behaviour.

     * Marley's Ghost, (2000), by Mark Hazard Osmun: The prequel to A
       Christmas Carol. A novel imagining the life and afterlife of
       Scrooge's partner, Jacob Marley and how Marley came to arrange
       Scrooge's chance at redemption.

     * Timothy Cratchit's Christmas Carol, 1917: A Sequel to the Charles
       Dickens Classic (Dickens World, 1998) by Dale Powell. In this
       version, an elderly Tiny Tim is a wealthy immigrant living in
       America who experiences his own spiritual visitations on Christmas
       Eve.

     * The Trial of Ebenezer Scrooge (Ohio State University Press, 2001)
       by Bruce Bueno De Mesquita. A uniquely philosophical take on the
       Scrooge mythology set in the afterlife with Scrooge on trial to
       determine if he merits entry into Paradise.

     * "Scrooge & Cratchit" (scrooge-and-cratchit.com, 2002) by Matt
       McHugh. Beginning seven years after the events of the original, Bob
       Cratchit is now Scrooge's partner in business as they both face the
       wrath of bankers every bit as ruthless as Scrooge in his prime.

     * The Last Christmas of Ebenezer Scrooge: The Sequel to A Christmas
       Carol (Wildside Press, 2003) by Marvin Kaye. This sequel picks up
       right where the original left off, with Scrooge trying to right an
       unresolved wrong. This version was also adapted for the stage.

     * Mr. Timothy (HarperCollins, 2003) by Louis Bayard. Here again is an
       adult Tiny Tim, only this time as a 23-year-old resident of a
       London brothel who becomes embroiled in a murder mystery. Mr.
       Timothy was included in the New York Times's list of Notable
       Fiction for 2003.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Christmas_Carol"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
