   #copyright

Abbadid

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Ancient History,
Classical History and Mythology

   The Abbadids ( Arabic,بنو عباد)comprised an Arab Muslim dynasty which
   arose in Al-Andalus on the downfall of the Caliphate of Cordoba
   (756–1031). Abbadid rule lasted from about 1023 until 1091, but during
   the short period of its existence it exhibited singular energy and
   typified its time. The name of the dynasty should not be confused with
   that of the Abbasids of Baghdad.

History

   Abu al-Qasim Muhammad ibn Abbad (ruled 1023–1042), the cadi of Seville,
   founded the house in 1023. He functioned as the chief of an Arab family
   settled in the city from the first days of the conquest. The Beni-abbad
   had not previously played a major role in history, though they were of
   noble pedigree, hailing from Bani Lakhm, the historical kings of
   Al-Hira. The family also did have considerable wealth.

   Al-Qasim gained the confidence of the townsmen by organizing a
   successful resistance to the Berber soldiers of fortune who had grasped
   at the fragments of the caliphate. At first, he professed to rule only
   with the advice of a council formed of the nobles, but when his power
   became established, he dispensed with this show of republican
   government, and then gave himself the appearance of a legitimate title
   by protecting an impostor who professed to be the caliph Hisham II.
   When al-Qasim died in 1042 he had created a state, which, though weak
   in itself, appeared strong as compared to the little powers about it.
   He had made his family the recognized leaders of the Muslims of Arab
   and native Spanish descent against the Berber element arrayed under the
   king of Granada.

   Abbad II al-Mu'tadid (1042–1069), the son and successor of al-Qasim,
   became one of the most remarkable figures in Spanish Muslim history. He
   had a striking resemblance to the Italian princes of the later Middle
   Ages and the early Renaissance, of the stamp of Filippo Maria Visconti.

   Abbad wrote poetry and loved literature; he also appears as a poisoner,
   a drinker of wine, a sceptic, and a man treacherous to the utmost
   degree. Though he waged war all through his reign, he himself very
   rarely appeared in the field, but directed the generals, whom he never
   trusted, from his "lair" in the fortified palace, the Alcázar of
   Seville. He killed with his own hand one of his sons who had rebelled
   against him. On one occasion, he trapped a number of his enemies, the
   Berber chiefs of the Ronda, into visiting him, and got rid of them by
   smothering them in the hot room of a bath. He habitually preserved the
   skulls of the enemies he had killed—those of the meaner men to use as
   flower-pots, while those of the princes he kept in special chests. He
   devoted his reign mainly to extending his power at the expense of his
   smaller neighbours, and in conflicts with his chief rival the king of
   Granada. These incessant wars weakened the Muslims, to the great
   advantage of the rising power of the Christian kings of León and
   Castile, but they gave the kingdom of Seville a certain superiority
   over the other little states. After 1063 Fernando El Magno of Castile
   and Leon assailed him, marched to the gates of Seville, and forced him
   to pay tribute.

   The son of Abbad II, Muhammad al-Mu'tamid (1069-1091)—who reigned by
   the title of Al-Mu'tamid—was the third and last of the Abbadids. A no
   less remarkable person than his father, and much more amiable, he also
   wrote poetry and favoured poets. Al-mu'tamid went, however,
   considerably further in patronage of literature than his father, for he
   chose as his favourite and prime minister the poet Ibn Ammar. In the
   end, the vanity and feather-headedness of Ibn Ammar drove his master to
   kill him.

   Al-Mu'tamid came even more under the influence of his favourite wife,
   Romaica, even more than that of his vizier. He had met her paddling in
   the Guadalquivir, purchased her from her master, and made her his wife.
   The caprices of Romaica, and the lavish extravagance of Abbad III in
   his efforts to please her, form the subject of many stories.

   In politics, Al-Mu'tamid carried on the feuds of his family with the
   Berbers, and in his efforts to extend his dominions proved himself
   capable of as much faithlessness as his father. His wars and
   extravagance exhausted his treasury, and he oppressed his subjects with
   taxes.

   In 1080, Al-Mu'tamid brought down upon himself the vengeance of Alfonso
   VI of Castile. He had endeavoured to pay part of his tribute to the
   Christian king with false money, but a Jew, one of the envoys of
   Alfonso, detected the fraud. Abbad, in a moment of folly and rage,
   crucified the Jew and imprisoned the Christian members of the mission.
   Alfonso retaliated with a destructive raid.

   When Alfonso took Toledo in 1085, Abbad called in Yusuf ibn Tashfin,
   the Almoravid ruler. During the six years which preceded his deposition
   in 1091, Abbad behaved with valour on the field, but with much meanness
   and political folly. He endeavoured to curry favour with Yusuf by
   betraying the other Muslim princes to him, and intrigued to secure the
   alliance of Alfonso against the Almoravids. Probably during this period
   he surrendered his beautiful daughter-in-law Zaida to the Christian
   king, who made her his concubine—some authorities suggest he married
   her after she bore him a son, Sancho. The vacillations and submissions
   of Abbad did not save him from the fate which overtook his
   fellow-princes. Their scepticism and extortion had tired their
   subjects, and the mullahs gave Yusuf a fatwa authorizing him to remove
   them in the interest of religion.

   In 1091, the Almoravids stormed Seville. Muhammad, who had fought
   bravely, weakly ordered his sons to surrender the fortresses they still
   held, in order to save his own life. He died in prison in Africa in
   1095.

Abbadid Rulers of Seville

     * Abbad I, born Abu al-Qasim Muhammad ibn Abbad, ( 1023- 1042)
     * Abbad II al-Mu'tadid ( 1042- 1069)
     * Muhammad al-Mu'tamid ( 1069- 1091)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abbadid"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
