   #copyright

Abidjan

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography

   SOS Children has projects in Abobo Gare in Abidjan. For more
   information see SOS Children in Cote d'Ivoire, Africa

                                               CAPTION: District d'Abidjan


                                                          District logo
                                                          (District logo)

                                   District map
                           Région                                  Lagunes
                District Governor                   Pierre Djédji Amondji
                                                       ( FPI) (since 2002)
                             Area                                2,119 km²
                     Subdivisions             10 communes of Abidjan Ville
                                 3 subprefectures outside of Abidjan Ville
                       Population
              unofficial estimate
           2003 official estimate
                      1998 census
                                                   between 4 and 5 million
                                                                 3,660,682
                                                                 3,125,890
                          Density                         1,728/km² (2003)
                         Web site                        www.abidjan-da.ci

   Abidjan is the largest city and former capital of Côte d'Ivoire. It is
   the commercial and banking centre of Côte d'Ivoire as well as the de
   facto capital. (Yamoussoukro is the official capital.) It stands in
   Ébrié Lagoon on several converging peninsulas and islands, connected by
   bridges. There are an estimated 4 to 5 million inhabitants in the
   metropolitan area. The city is a study in contrasts. On one hand the
   city is hot and humid, congested and full of street hawkers. On the
   other hand, Abidjan is referred to as the "Paris of West Africa"
   because of its parks, broad boulevards, universities, exotic fashions
   and museums. Neighborhoods include Cocody, an upscale residential area
   located east of the modern business district, and Treichville, located
   southward on Petit-Bassam Island, with its busy traditional market.
   Banco National Park lies north of the city. Abidjan harbors numerous
   government departments. It is also the hub of the national road system
   and the terminus of the Abidjan-Niger Railway, which extends northward
   into Burkina Faso.

   Since the start of the Ivorian Civil War in 2002, insecurity in Abidjan
   has risen, with frequent riots targeting foreigners as well as a sharp
   increase in criminality. Once one of the wealthiest and most peaceful
   cities in Africa, Abidjan is now considered one of the most dangerous
   cities on the continent.

Administration

Before 2002

   Before 2002, there existed a City of Abidjan (Ville d'Abidjan). The
   city of Abidjan was subdivided into ten communes, with each their
   municipal council and their mayor. Above the 10 communes was the
   central city hall, with a city-wide mayor (maire d'Abidjan), often
   colloquially called "super-maire".

   The city of Abidjan was inside the département of Abidjan. This
   département was made up of the city of Abidjan, plus three
   subprefectures outside of the city of Abidjan. The département of
   Abidjan was itself inside the Lagunes région.

Since 2002

   In August 2001, the government of Ivory Coast disbanded the City of
   Abidjan. Instead, the ten communes of Abidjan were merged with the
   three subprefectures beyond the City of Abidjan to create the District
   of Abidjan (District d'Abidjan), whose limits match those of the
   département of Abidjan. The new District of Abidjan (2,119 km²/818 sq.
   miles) is thus much larger than the former City of Abidjan (422 km²/163
   sq. miles). The reform was implemented in 2002, with local elections
   taking place that year.

   The district of Abidjan is made up of the following subdivisions:
     * Abidjan Ville (422 km²/163 sq. miles): the territory of the former
       City of Abidjan, made up of ten autonomous communes, with each
       their mayor and their municipal council. These ten communes are:
       Abobo, Adjamé, Attécoubé, Cocody (the wealthiest commune of
       Abidjan), Koumassi, Marcory, Plateau (the business district and
       central government area), Port-Bouët, Treichville, and Yopougon
       (the largest and most populous commune).
     * outside of Abidjan Ville: three subprefectures (1,697 km²/655 sq.
       miles): Anyama, Bingerville, and Songon. Within the three
       subprefectures are found the communes of Anyama, Bingerville, and
       Songon, with their own municipal administrations, as well as rural
       areas.

   It should be noted that the distinction between Abidjan Ville and areas
   outside of Abidjan Ville is purely statistical, much like the
   distinction between Inner London and Outer London. The administration
   of the district is unified, covering both Abdijan Ville and areas
   outside of Abidjan Ville.

   Executive power is in the hands of the District Governor (Governor du
   District), appointed by the president of Ivory Coast. The governor
   serves a 5-year term. The governor of the district of Abidjan is the de
   facto mayor of Abidjan, and is often presented as such in international
   context.

   Legislative power is in the hands of the District Council (Conseil du
   District). The District Council is made up of 78 members, who serve a
   5-year term. One-third of the members are chosen by the municipal
   councils of the communes making up the district of Abidjan. Two-third
   of the members are directly elected every five years by the Ivorian
   citizens living in the District of Abidjan.

   The District of Abidjan is inside the Lagunes région, which is made up
   of the District of Abidjan plus five départements.

Geography and neighbourhoods

   Abidjan lies on the Ébrié Lagoon. The business district, Le Plateau, is
   the centre of the city. It lies with Cocody, Deux Plateaux (the richest
   neighbourhood with mansions, typically inhabited by diplomats and the
   wealthy) and the slum area of Adjamé on the north shore of the lagoon,
   while Treichville and Marcory (also poor areas) lie to the south,
   Abobo-Doume and Yopougon to the west and Boulay Island in the middle of
   the lagoon. Further south lies Port Bouët, home to the airport and main
   seaport. Abidjan is located at 5°25' North, 4°2' West (5.41667,
   -4.03333).

History

   The city grew after the construction of a new wharf in 1931 and its
   designation as the capital of the then French colony in 1933. The
   completion of the Vridi Canal in 1951 enabled it to become an important
   sea port. In 1983, Yamoussoukro was designated as the nation's capital,
   but most government offices and foreign embassies remained in Abidjan.

Places of interest

   The University of Abidjan, technical colleges, and the national library
   and museum are in the city.

   Sights in Abidjan include St Paul's Cathedral, designed by Aldo
   Spiritom, the Cocody Municipal Museum of Contemporary Art and the Parc
   du Banco rainforest reserve. Le Plateau is known for its skyscrapers,
   unusual in West Africa. It is the business centre of Abidjan. With its
   chic boutiques and outdoor cafes, le Plateau is a favourite place of
   business travellers. There are many different banks located in the le
   Plateau district.

Industry

   Major industries include food processing, lumber, automobile
   manufacturing, and the manufacture of textiles, chemicals, and soap.
   There is also a large oil refinery.

Transportation

   Trains on the line to Ouagadougou run from several stations in the
   city, the most important being in Treichville. Ferries link
   Treichville, Abobo-Doumé and Le Plateau. The airport is located
   approximately 10 mi/16 km from downtown Abidjan. Taxis and buses are
   available at the airport. Buses are considered unsafe, but the taxis
   are reasonably safe given the proper local knowledge. The taxis are
   metered and the fares are relatively low. Rental cars are also
   available, however the fees can be quite expensive. Vehicle accidents
   occur frequently, especially at night when roads are poorly lit.
   Roadblocks manned by government security forces are becoming magnets
   for corruption. Police officers routinely extort bribes from motorists.
   Travelers planning to travel outside of Abidjan should do so only in
   convoy, maintaining constant radio or satellite contact.

Port of Abidjan

   Abidjan's modern port opened in 1950, when the Vridi Canal was cut
   through a sandbar, linking the Ébrié Lagoon with the Gulf of Guinea and
   the Atlantic Ocean. Formerly West Africa's pre-eminent port, Abidjan is
   attempting to bring back traffic which veered to other ports during
   Côte d'Ivoire's political unrest. Since a military putsch in December
   1999, as well as widespread civil unrest in the ensuing years, traffic
   has switched to other main regional ports such as Accra, Lome, Cotonou
   and Dakar. Xenophobia and harassment of foreigners, as well as numerous
   illegal roadblocks along the country's roads, have further discouraged
   shippers from using Abidjan's port. The Abidjan Port Authority (Port
   Autonome d'Abidjan) has invited delegations of shippers from the
   landlocked countries of Mali, Burkina Faso and Niger -- which have seen
   increased difficulty in imports due to Abidjan's problems -- to working
   sessions to discuss improvements in the situation.

Port Bouet Airport (DIAP/ABJ)

   The airport has a 3,000-meter runway, Instrument Landing System 3B
   equipment, 25 check-in counters, and nine boarding access points.
   AERIA, Abidjan Airport Management Company, operates and manages the
   whole airport area and relevant indirect services. There is a military
   apron at the airport. Private aircraft usually park in the commercial
   area, away from the terminal. Fencing and lighting are adequate at this
   facility.

   A special airport police unit provides security at Abidjan's airport.
   X-ray machines and metal detectors are used to screen passengers and
   their baggage, but security measures at this facility are lacking both
   in terms of quality and coverage. Theft is a concern in the passenger
   terminal. Airport officials are known to be corrupt due to their low
   salaries. Incidents of theft and drug smuggling occur frequently. Do
   not allow ground service personnel to handle possessions without
   supervision.

Political unrest

   During times of political unrest, the Ivorian government closes the
   airport and imposes an overnight curfew for days at a time. There is
   also a French military base near the airport where protests may occur
   during times of political unrest.

   Occasional violence also occurs at the airport. Most recently, on 6
   November 2004, Ivorian troops raided Abidjan's airport in an attempt to
   destroy French aircraft. One aircraft was slightly damaged during the
   incident, but there are no details as to the extent or specificity of
   the damage. As a result of the attack, the airport perimeter was sealed
   and closed to air traffic.

   In the September 2002 mutiny, the Ivorian government closed Abidjan's
   international airport, as it usually does during times of unrest.
   Flights were diverted to neighboring Ghana and elsewhere. Unidentified
   gunmen briefly blocked the major highway leading in and out of Abidjan.
   Several carriers have cancelled service to Côte d'Ivoire.

   A French Army convoy was ambushed in Abidjan by The Young Patriots
   rebel militia which left 3 French Army soldiers dead and wounding 5
   including a VAB APC destroyed during the Côte d'Ivoire civil war.

Culture

   The musical group Magic System was founded in the city in the 1990s.

Security

     * The law requires that travelers in Abidjan carry one of the
       following: national identity card, employee card, consular card,
       residency permit or passport.

     * Although the overall situation in Abidjan has stabilized since the
       resurge in violence in November 2004, there are continual reports
       of violence. The U.N. has stated "its concern over the security
       situation" throughout Côte d'Ivoire, particularly in Abidjan. U.S.
       Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice ranks Abidjan as the second
       most dangerous city in the world. With a proper tour guide,
       however, the city of Abidjan is quite safe and even pleasant.

     * The current political situation is highly unstable and security
       risks are acute due to ongoing conflict. Foreigners should avoid
       all travel outside Abidjan, the former capital, as well as rural
       and outlying areas. Other threats include crime, carjacking and
       demonstrations.

Ongoing Conflict

   As the economic capital and largest city in Côte d’Ivoire, violence due
   to ongoing conflict remains a concern in Abidjan. Although the security
   situation has stabilized significantly since November 2004 and citizens
   have resumed regular daily activities, sporadic violence still occurs.
   Pro-government militia groups have previously been concentrated in the
   Adjamé district. There have been isolated incidents of violence between
   these militia and local residents.

Demonstrations

   Abidjan has been the site of sporadic protests, some of which have
   turned violent. Demonstrations have normally been over political issues
   revolving around political opposition groups and disgruntled military
   personnel. The Young Patriots , a pro-government youth group, conducted
   a series of protests throughout the country in March 2005 to demand the
   withdrawal of French peacekeeping troops.

   On September 6, 2006 hundreds of people protested in the streets after
   the death of two children who had inhaled fumes from toxic waste (See:
   2006 Ivory Coast toxic waste spill) .

Crime

   Even before the September 2002 mutiny, the crime rate has continually
   increased as a result of poor economic conditions, an influx of weapons
   and refugees from neighboring Liberia, and urban migration. Burglaries
   commonly occur at residences, restaurants, and small businesses. Petty
   theft is prevalent throughout Abidjan and armed gangs are a growing
   problem. Tourists are frequently robbed on the Houphouet-Boigny and
   Charles de Gaulle bridges; travelers should not cross these bridges on
   foot. Persons who are victims of armed robbery should not attempt to
   resist thieves.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abidjan"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
