   #copyright

Abu Dhabi

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; Middle Eastern
Countries

                City of Abu Dhabi
   أبو ظبي
   Skyline of City of Abu Dhabiأبو ظبي

   Official flag of City of Abu Dhabiأبو ظبي

   [[Flag of City of Abu Dhabi
   أبو ظبي|Flag]]

      Emirate     Abu Dhabi
       Sheikh     Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahayan
        Area
       - City     6700 km²
     Population
    - City (2006) 1,850,230
      - Density   293.94/km²
     Website: www.abudhabi.com (unofficial)
   View of Abu Dhabi
   Enlarge
   View of Abu Dhabi
   Satellite image of Abu Dhabi (March 2003)
   Enlarge
   Satellite image of Abu Dhabi (March 2003)

   Abu Dhabi (Arabic: أبو ظبي‎ ʼAbū Ẓaby, literally "Father of Gazelle")
   is the largest of the seven emirates that compose the United Arab
   Emirates and was also the largest of the former Trucial States. Abu
   Dhabi is also a city of the same name within the Emirate that is the
   capital of the country, in north central UAE. The city lies on a
   T-shaped island jutting into the Persian Gulf from the central western
   coast. An estimated 1,000,000 people lived there in 2000, with about an
   80% expatriate population. Abu Dhabi city is located at 24.4667° N
   54.3667° E. The Emirate has approximately 70% of the country's entire
   wealth. Al Ain is Abu Dhabi's second largest urban area with a
   population of 348,000 (2003 census estimate) and is located 150
   kilometres inland.

History

   Parts of Abu Dhabi were settled as far back as the 3rd millennium BC
   and its early history fits the nomadic herding and fishing pattern
   typical of the broader region. Modern Abu Dhabi traces its origins to
   the rise of an important tribal confederation the Bani Yas in the late
   18^th century, who also assumed control of Dubai. In the 19^th century
   the Dubai and Abu Dhabi branches parted ways.

   Into the mid-20^th century, the economy of Abu Dhabi continued to be
   sustained mainly by camel herding, production of dates and vegetables
   at the inland oases of Al Ain and Liwa, and fishing and pearl diving
   off the coast of Abu Dhabi city, which was occupied mainly during the
   summer months. Most dwellings in Abu Dhabi city were, at this time
   constructed of palm fronds (barasti), with the wealthier families
   occupying mud huts. The growth of the cultured pearl industry in the
   first half of the twentieth century created hardship for residents of
   Abu Dhabi as pearls represented the largest export and main source of
   cash earnings.

   In 1939, Sheikh Shakhbut Bin-Sultan Al Nahyan granted petroleum
   concessions, and oil was first found in 1958. At first, oil money had a
   marginal impact. A few lowrise concrete buildings were erected, and the
   first paved road was completed in 1961, but Sheikh Shakbut, uncertain
   whether the new oil royalties would last, took a cautious approach,
   preferring to save the revenue rather than investing it in development.
   His brother, Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahayan, saw that oil wealth had the
   potential to transform Abu Dhabi. The ruling Al Nahayan family decided
   that Sheikh Zayed should replace his brother as ruler and carry out his
   vision of developing the country. On August 6, 1966, with the
   assistance of the British, Sheikh Zayed became the new ruler. (See
   Al-Fahim, M, From Rags to Riches: A Story of Abu Dhabi, Chapter Six
   (London Centre of Arab Studies, 1995), ISBN 1-900404-00-1.)

   With the announcement by the UK in 1968 that it would withdraw from the
   Gulf area by 1971, Sheikh Zayed became the main driving force behind
   the formation of the United Arab Emirates.

   After the Emirates gained independence in 1971, oil wealth continued to
   flow to the area and traditional mud-brick huts were rapidly replaced
   with banks, boutiques and modern highrises.

Location

   Abu Dhabi is bordered by the Persian Gulf, Saudi Arabia and Oman.
   Enlarge
   Abu Dhabi is bordered by the Persian Gulf, Saudi Arabia and Oman.

   The emirate of Abu Dhabi is located in the oil-rich and strategic
   Persian Gulf region. It adjoins the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
   Sultanate of Oman. The emirate borders the emirate of Dubai to its
   north.

   Abu Dhabi city is on an island located less than a quarter-kilometer
   from the mainland and is joined to the mainland by the Maqta and
   Musaffah Bridges.

Language and literature

   The majority of the inhabitants of Abu Dhabi are expatriate workers and
   professionals from Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, Egypt, Philippines, the
   United Kingdom, and elsewhere. English, Hindi, Malayalam, and Urdu are
   widely spoken.

   The native-born population are Arabic-speaking Gulf Arabs who are part
   of a clan-based society. The al-Nahyan family, part of the al-Falah
   branch of the Bani Yas tribe, rules the emirate and has a central place
   in society.

Buildings and structures

   Abu Dhabi city is a modern city with broad boulevards, tall office and
   apartment buildings, and busy shops. Principal thoroughfares are The
   Corniche, Airport Road, Sheikh Zayed Street, Hamdan Street and Khalifa
   Street. Many streets are known for specialized businesses that tend to
   cluster on them. Hamdan Street is the main shopping street, Khalifa
   Street is lined with banks, Al Najdha Street is known for hardware
   stores, Defense St is filled with mobile telephone shops and Sheikh
   Zayed St (Also known as Electra Street) is the computer street.

   Abu Dhabi city is known in the region for its greenery; the former
   desert strip today includes numerous parks and gardens. Key buildings
   include the Qasr al-Hosn (a.k.a. Old Fort or White Fort), Clock Tower
   (now demolished due to construction of the new Corniche), headquarters
   of the Abu Dhabi National Oil Company (ADNOC) and its many
   operating-company subsiduaries and the Cultural Foundation. The
   Corniche, which was re-developed in 2005, is now one of the best sea
   front parks in the Gulf.

   The current developments in Abu Dhabi, like its neighbour Dubai,
   reflect a number of architectural masterpieces by, among others, Zaha
   Hadid and Frank Gehry.

   Other urban centers in the Abu Dhabi emirate are Al 'Ain and Ruwais. Al
   Ain is an agglomeration of several villages scattered around a valuable
   desert oasis; today it is the site of the national university, UAEU. Al
   Ain is billed as the Garden City of the UAE. Other work includes the
   1st prize international competition of the Abu Dhabi Library and
   Cultural Centre won by the Architects Collaborative, designed by Hisham
   N. Ashkouri of Boston, Massachusetts and New York, NY.

Current ruler

   His Highness Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahayan is the hereditary emir
   and ruler of Abu Dhabi, as well as the current president of the United
   Arab Emirates (UAE).

Postage stamps

   see: Postage stamps of Abu Dhabi

Climate

   Sunny/blue skies can be expected throughout the year. The months June
   through September are generally hot and humid with temperatures
   averaging above 40ºC (110ºF). During this time, sandstorms also occur
   intermittently, in some cases reducing visibility down to a few meters.
   The weather is usually pleasant from October to May. January to
   February is cooler and may require the use of a light jacket. This
   period also sees dense fog on some days. The oasis city of Al Ain,
   about 150 km away, bordering Oman, regularly records the highest summer
   temperatures in the country, however the dry desert air and cooler
   evenings make it a traditional retreat from the intense summer heat and
   year round humidity of the capital city.

Transport

   Abu Dhabi International Airport- (AUH) serves this city. The local time
   is GMT + 4 hours. Private vehicles and taxis are the primary means of
   transportation in the city, although public buses, run by the Abu Dhabi
   Muncipality, are available, but mostly used by the lower-income
   population. There are bus routes to nearby towns such as Baniyas,
   Habashan and the garden city of UAE Al Ain, among others. There is a
   newer service started in 2005 between Abu Dhabi and the commercial city
   of Dubai (about 160 km away)

City Planning

   The city was planned in the 1970s (all that remains of the previous
   settlement is Al Hosn Fort) for an estimated maximum population of
   600,000. In accordance with what was considered to be ideal urban
   planning at the time, the city has wide grid-pattern roads, and
   high-density tower blocks.

   On the northerly end of the island, where the population density is
   highest, the main streets are lined with 20-story towers. Inside this
   rectangle of towers is a normal grid pattern of roads with lower
   density buildings (2 storey villas or 6 storey low-rise buildings).

   Away from the high-density areas, land is primarily used for government
   buildings and private villas.

   Mail is delivered to post-office boxes only; there is no door-to-door
   delivery. There are many parks (or 'public gardens') throughout the
   city. Entrance is usually free for children, however there is often an
   entry fee for adults.

Planning Problems

     * The city's population far surpasses the original estimated maximum
       population when it was designed. This causes traffic congestion, a
       shortage of car parking spaces, and over crowding.
     * Having Post Office mail delivery only, and no widely-usable address
       system thus far for buildings, causes problems in describing
       building locations. This means directions must often be given based
       on nearby landmarks.
     * The lack of a comprehensive, reliable, and frequent public
       transport system has led to a near complete dependence on private
       cars as a means of transport.
     * Grid-pattern roads mean a public transportation system is difficult
       to implement without requiring a moderate amount of walking, which
       would be a large deterrent to usage.
     * Closely positioned, high-rise towers often means accommodation is
       dark and claustrophobic.

Future Development

     * The city's exhibition centre ( ADNEC) is currently experiencing
       huge development.
     * A metro, and improved bus services are planned to resolve traffic
       problems.
     * Parking meters are currently being tried out as a solution to
       parking problems.

   New developments on islands surrounding the city plan to increase the
   population of the city by up to 800,000.

Major Projects Under Construction

     * Saadiyat Island ('Island of Happiness')
     * Al Lulu Island
     * Reem Island
     * Al Raha

Culture and the Arts

   Abu Dhabi is home to a number of cultural institutions including the
   Cultural Foundation and the National Theatre. The Cultural foundation
   is home to the UAE Public Library and Cultural Centre. Various cultural
   societies such as the Abu Dhabi Classical Music Society have a strong
   and visible following in the city.
     * Progress on the creation of a major "up-scale cultural district" on
       Abu Dhabi's Saadiyat Island has begun with the groundwork for a
       $400 million Guggenheim Museum.

     * The Frank Gehry designed museum will display a "prestige
       collection" of modernist and contemporary art and is scheduled for
       completion in 2011. Upon completion, it is expected to be the
       largest exponent of the prestigious Guggenheim Museums.

     * The island development will also include museums for classical art
       and performing arts centers among other state-of-the-art cultural
       facilities.

     * $28 Billion has been set aside to budget this cultural development.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abu_Dhabi"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
