   #copyright

Abuja

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography

   SOS Children is building a new Village near Abuja. For more information
   see SOS Children in Abuja, Africa
   Abuja, Nigeria
   Abuja, Nigeria.
   Abuja, Nigeria.
   Map of Nigeria showing the location of Abuja in the center of Nigeria.
   Map of Nigeria showing the location of Abuja in the centre of Nigeria.
   Province Federal Capital Territory
   Minister Nasir Ahmad el-Rufai
   Area
    - City 713km km²
    - Land 713km km²
   Population
    - City (2005) 1,320,000
    - Urban 1,400,000
    - Metro 1,814,000
     estimated
   Time zone CET ( UTC+1)
    - Summer ( DST) CEST ( UTC+1)
   Website: http://www.fct.gov.ng/

   Abuja is the capital city of Nigeria, with an estimated population of
   2.5 million. When it was decided to move the national capital from
   Lagos in 1976, a capital territory was chosen for its location near the
   centre of the country. The planned city is located in the centre of
   what is now the Federal Capital Territory.

History

   In light of the ethnic and religious divisions of Nigeria, plans had
   been devised since Nigeria's independence to have its capital in a
   location deemed neutral to all parties. The location was eventually
   designated in the centre of the country in the early 1970s as it
   signified neutrality and national unity. Another impetus for Abuja came
   because of Lagos's population boom, that made that city overcrowded and
   conditions squalid. The logic used was similar to Brazil building its
   capital Brasília (which happened at around the same time).

   Construction broke ground and was dedicated in the late 1970s, but due
   to economic and political instability, the city in its initial stages
   was not complete until the late 1980s.

   Abuja officially became Nigeria's capital on 12 December 1991. The
   master plan for Abuja and the Federal Capital Territory was developed
   by IPA (International Planning Associates), a consortium made up of
   three American firms: PRC Corporation; Wallace, McHarg, Roberts and
   Todd; and, Archisystems, which was a division of the Hughes
   Organization. The master plan for Abuja defined the general shape and
   major design elements of the city, however a refinement of this design
   was accomplished by Kenzo Tange, a renowned Japanese architect, along
   with his team of city planners at Kenzo Tange and Urtec company.

   The crescent shape of the city reflects infrastructure considerations
   and the topography of the site, however some feel it reflects the will
   of the Muslim faithful, who sanctioned this design.

   Most countries moved their embassies to Abuja and maintain their larger
   former embassies as consulates in the commercial capital, Lagos.

   In addition to a major governmental centre, Abuja is the headquarters
   of the Economic Community of West African States or ECOWAS, as well as
   its Military arm, ECOMOG. It also has the regional headquarters of
   OPEC.
   Aso Rock
   Enlarge
   Aso Rock

   Abuja's feature is Aso Rock, a 400-metre monolith left by water
   erosion. The Presidential Complex, National Assembly, Supreme Court and
   much of the town extend to the south of the rock. "Aso" means
   "victorious" in the language of the (now displaced) Asokoro ("the
   people of victory").

   Other sights include the Nigerian National Mosque and the National
   Ecumenical Centre cathedral. The city is served by the Nnamdi Azikiwe
   International Airport, while Zuma Rock lies nearby. Much of the city
   has not yet been built as planned, and many buildings have not yet been
   completed.

Weather and climate

   The FCT experiences three weather conditions annually. These are the
   rainy season (the equivalent of spring in the temperate region) and the
   dry season (the equivalent of summer in the temperate climate). In
   between the two seasons, there is a brief interlude of harmattan
   occasioned by the North East Trade Wind, with the main feature of dust
   haze, intensified coldness and dryness. The rainy season begins from
   April and ends in October. The high altitudes and undulating terrain of
   the FCT act as moderating influence on the weather of the territory.
   Rainfall in the FCT reflects the territory's location on the windward
   side of the Jos Plateau and the zone of rising air masses. The annual
   total rainfall is in the range of 1100mm to 1600mm.

Vegetation

   The area now designated the Federal Capital Territory falls within the
   Savannah Zone vegetation of the West African sub-region. Patches of
   rain forest, however, occur in the Gwagwa plains, especially in the
   gullied train to the south and the rugged south-eastern parts of the
   territory. These areas of the FCT form one of the surviving occurrences
   of the mature forest vegetation in Nigeria. The dominant vegetation of
   the Territory is, however, classified into three savannah types.

   The Park or Grassy Savannah
          This is about 53 percent (i.e. 4,231 square km) of the total
          area of the FCT. Vegetation occurs annually and tree species
          found include; Albizia, Zygia, Butyrospernum paradoxum,
          Anniellia, Oliveri and Parkia Clappertoniana.

   The Savannah Woodland
          This region covers 12.8 percent of 1,026 square km of the
          territory. It occurs mostly on the Gurara, Robo and Rubochi
          plains and surrounding hills. Common trees found in this region
          include; afzelia, africana anogeissus, leiocarpus, butyroscarpus
          paradoxim, daniella oliveri, khaya senegalensis, prosopis
          africana, uapaca togoensis, albizia, zygia, vitex doniant,
          bombox costatum and ptrecarpus erinaceus.

   The Shrub Savannah
          This class of vegetation occurs extensively in rough terrain
          close to hills and ridges in all parts of the territory. It
          covers about 12.9 percent or 1,031 square km of the land area.
          Tree species found in it include: antiaris africana,
          anthocleista nobils, ceiba pentandra, cola gigantean, celtis
          spp, Chorophora excels (iroko), khaya grandifolia (Benin
          Mahogany) terminalia superb (afara), triplochiton scleroxylon
          and dracacna arborea. Certain tree species normally associated
          with other parts of the rain forest in the south of Nigeria are
          also found in some of the forest patches, e.g. piptadeniatrum
          africanum (agboin), lophira alata (ekki) and terminalia
          ivorensis (idigbo).

   Apart from the rain forest elements, some dominant tree species of the
   savannah wood lands yield high quality timber, e.g. Anogeissus
   leiocarpus, daneilla oliveri, khaya senegalensis and pterocarpus
   arenaceous.

Abuja Districts

   Abuja is divided into four districts.

Central District

   The city has been well planned and the Central District is located
   between the foot of Aso Rock and into the Three Arms Zone to the
   southern base of the ring road. It is like the city's spinal cord,
   dividing it into the northern sector with Maitama and Wuse, and the
   southern sector with Garki and Asokoro. While each district has its own
   clearly demarcated commercial and residential sectors, the Central
   District is the city's principal Business Zone, where practically all
   parastatals and multinational corporations have their offices located.
   An attractive area in the Central District is the region known as the
   Three Arms Zone, so called because it houses the administrative offices
   of the executive, legislative and judicial arms of the Federal
   Government. A few of the other sites worth seeing in the area are the
   Federal Secretariats alongside Shehu Shagari way, Aso Hill, the Abuja
   Plant Nursery, Parade Square and the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier across
   the road facing it. The Brigade of Guards organizes a twenty-four watch
   at the spot and they have a colourful ceremonial change of guard. The
   National Mosque and National Church are located opposite each other on
   either side of Independence Avenue.

Garki District

   The Garki District is the area in the southwest corner of the city,
   having the Central District to the north and the Asokoro District to
   the east. There are some interesting buildings, which include the
   General Post Office, Abuja International Conference Center, Abuja
   Sofitel Hotel, Agura Hotel, the Federal Secretariat Complex, Garki
   Shopping centre, several bank buildings and other commercial offices.
   At present it is the principal business district of Abuja.

Wuse District

   Wuse District is the northwestern part of the city, with the Maitama
   District to its north and the Central District to its south. The Wuse
   Market is Abuja's principal market. The second most important Post
   Office in the city is located here. This district also houses the
   Sheraton Hotel and Towers, Ibru International hotel, and the Nigerian
   Tourism Development Corporation.

Maitama District

   Maitama District is to the north of the city, with the Wuse and Central
   Districts lying to its southwest and southeast respectively. This area
   is home to the top bracket sections of society and business, and has
   the reputation of being very exclusive and also very expensive.
   Interesting buildings include the Transcorp Hilton Hotel, National
   Universities Commission, Soil Conservation Complex, and National
   Electoral Commission.

   Maitama District is home to many European embassies in Nigeria.

   Abuja is one of the cities bidding for the 2014 Commonwealth Games.

Transportation

   Abuja International Airport

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abuja"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
