   #copyright

AC/DC

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Performers and composers

   AC/DC, from left to right: Malcolm Young, Phil Rudd, Angus Young, Cliff
   Williams and Brian Johnson
   AC/DC, from left to right: Malcolm Young, Phil Rudd, Angus Young, Cliff
   Williams and Brian Johnson
   Background information
   Origin
   Sydney, Australia
   Genre(s) Hard rock
   Rock & Roll
   Blues rock
   Years active 1973 — present
   Label(s) Albert, Atlantic, ATCO, Elektra, Eastwest, EMI, Epic Records
   Members
   Angus Young — lead guitar
   Malcolm Young — rhythm guitar
   Brian Johnson — vocals
   Cliff Williams — bass
   Phil Rudd — drums
   Former members
   Bon Scott (Deceased)
   Dave Evans
   Mark Evans
   Chris Slade
   Simon Wright

   AC/DC are a hard rock band formed in Sydney, Australia in 1973 by
   brothers Angus and Malcolm Young. The band has sold over 150 million
   albums worldwide and over 68 million albums in the United States,
   making it one of the most successful hard rock acts ever. Their 1980
   album, Back in Black, has sold 42 million units worldwide (21 million
   in the US alone), and is the second highest selling album of all time
   and the biggest selling album by any band. In their recording career,
   the band has had two distinctive lead singers; Bon Scott and then
   later, Brian Johnson. For this reason, fans tend to divide its history
   into the "Bon Scott era" (1974–80), and the "Brian Johnson era"
   (1980–present).

   Although the group is generally considered to be a pioneer of hard rock
   and heavy metal music along with Led Zeppelin, Deep Purple and Black
   Sabbath, the members have always referred to their music as " rock 'n'
   roll". The band also accept the description "hard rock" (they are
   ranked number 4 on VH1's "100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock"), but they
   find the "metal" description offensive. At one point they were known as
   a punk band, with which designation they also disagreed.

   In 2005, the band finished second in a list of highest-earning
   entertainers from Australia—trailing The Wiggles—despite neither
   releasing an album nor touring that year.

History

   Born in Glasgow, Scotland, brothers Angus, Malcolm and George Young
   moved, along with most of their family, to Sydney, Australia, in 1963,
   when they were all still young children. George began playing guitar
   first and became a member of Australia's most successful band during
   the 1960s — The Easybeats, who were the first local rock act to score
   an international hit (" Friday On My Mind" in 1966). Malcolm and Angus
   soon followed in his footsteps. Malcolm first played with a Newcastle,
   New South Wales band called The Velvet Underground (not to be confused
   with the New York based Velvet Underground, which featured Lou Reed).

   In 1974, George Young and his ex-Easybeats bandmate, Harry Vanda, were
   recording an album as the Marcus Hook Roll Band, called Tales Of Old
   Granddaddy, when they introduced Angus and Malcolm to a recording
   studio for the first time, and invited them to contribute to the album.
   It was following this session that Vanda & Young took the newly formed
   AC/DC into the studio, marking the beginning of hugely successful
   collaboration.

Early years

   In November 1973, Malcolm and Angus Young started AC/DC. Malcolm played
   rhythm guitar and Angus played lead guitar, and they recruited drummer
   Colin Burgess (ex- The Masters Apprentices), bassist Larry Van Kriedt,
   and vocalist Dave Evans. They originally intended to have a
   keyboardist, but this idea was soon dropped. They played their first
   gig at a club called 'Chequers' in Sydney on New Year's Eve, 1973. They
   were later signed to EMI-distributed Albert Productions for Austraila
   and New Zealand.

   The early line-ups of the band changed often. Colin Burgess was the
   first member fired (it was rumoured this was because he passed out on
   stage, after someone spiked his drink), and a number of different
   bassists and drummers passed through the band over the next year, some
   lasting only a few weeks.

   A vital innovation was Angus Young's adoption of his now famous school
   uniform as a regular stage outfit; the original was reputedly Angus'
   real uniform from his secondary school, Ashfield Boys High School, in
   Sydney. This idea was suggested by the Young brothers' sister,
   Margaret. Angus had also tried different costumes such as Zorro, a
   gorilla and Super-Ang (a parody of Superman).

   The Young brothers soon felt that Evans wasn't a suitable frontman for
   the group — according to them, he was more of a " glam rocker",
   inspired by the likes of Gary Glitter. Occasionally Evans would be
   replaced onstage by the band's first manager, Dennis Laughlin (see Past
   members of AC/DC). When the band's driver, Ronald Belford "Bon" Scott —
   who already had experience as a vocalist — expressed an interest in
   becoming the vocalist, it soon became apparent that Evans' time with
   AC/DC was coming to an end. Evans also had personal problems with
   Laughlin, which contributed to the ill-feeling towards him.

Bon Scott era (1974–1980)

   In September 1974, Dave Evans was replaced by Bon Scott, former lead
   vocalist with The Spektors (1964–66), The Valentines (1966—70) and
   Fraternity (1970–73). This signified the beginning of the band's
   international success. With Evans, they had recorded one single, "Can I
   Sit Next To You"/"Rockin' In The Parlour". "Can I Sit Next To You" was
   eventually re-recorded with Bon Scott under the title " Can I Sit Next
   To You Girl".

   By January 1975, the Australian-only album entitled High Voltage was
   recorded, based on instrumental songs written by the Young brothers and
   lyrics written by Scott. Within a few months the line-up had stabilised
   with Scott, the Young brothers, Mark Evans (bass) and Phil Rudd
   (drums). Later that year, the band released the single, " It's a Long
   Way to the Top (If You Wanna Rock 'n' Roll)", which became their
   perennial rock anthem. It was included on their second album, T.N.T.,
   again only released in Australia and New Zealand. The album also
   featured another classic, " High Voltage".

   Between 1974 and 1978, aided by regular appearances on the
   nationally-broadcast TV pop music show, Molly Meldrum's Countdown,
   AC/DC became one of the most popular and successful acts in Australia.

International success (1976–1978)

   In 1976, AC/DC signed an international deal with Atlantic Records. They
   worked all over the UK and Europe to establish themselves, touring
   almost constantly and gaining invaluable experience on the stadium
   circuit supporting the top hard rock acts of the day, including Alice
   Cooper, Queen, Rainbow, Black Sabbath, KISS, Cheap Trick, Nazareth,
   Foreigner, Thin Lizzy, Moxy, and The Who.

   A compilation of tracks from the Australian LPs, High Voltage and
   T.N.T., was released by Atlantic Records in 1976. The album was also
   called High Voltage, and eventually sold three million copies. High
   Voltage was the first AC/DC album released worldwide, and attracted
   British punk listeners. The track selection of this album was in fact
   heavily weighted towards the more recent T.N.T.. Their next album,
   Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap, was released in the same year. Like its
   predecessor, this album exists in both Australian-only and
   international versions. Track listings varied worldwide and the
   international version of the album also featured one track from T.N.T.
   The original Australian version includes their popular song "
   Jailbreak", which is now more readily available on the 1984 compilation
   EP '74 Jailbreak, with a live version appearing on the Live album in
   1991. Dirty Deeds didn't reach the US until 1981 (after Bon Scott's
   death), when AC/DC were at the peak of their popularity.

Firing of Evans (1977)

   After the recording of 1977's Let There Be Rock, Mark Evans experienced
   personal differences with Angus Young and was sacked, being replaced by
   Cliff Williams, who began to share the background vocal duties with
   Malcolm Young.

   Neither of the Young brothers has ever gone into any great detail of
   the split. Conversely, the CEO of Epic Records, Richard Griffiths, who
   used to work as a booking agent for AC/DC in the mid-1970s, has stated,
   "You knew Mark wasn't going to last, he was just too much of a nice
   guy."

Continued Success (1977–1978)

   AC/DC first played in America on the radio station, AM 600 WTAC (based
   in Flint, Michigan). The station's manager, Peter C. Cavanaugh, booked
   the band to play in Flint's Capitol Theatre in 1977. The opening act
   was The MC5 who were briefly reunited and agreed to play the event.
   AC/DC opened with their popular song, " Live Wire" and closed with
   "It's a Long Way to the Top (If You Wanna Rock 'n' Roll)".

   The band were tagged as a punk rock band by the British press, but they
   managed to survive the punk upheavals of the late 70s, gaining a cult
   following in the UK, with Angus Young becoming notorious for mooning
   the audience. Their hard rock sound and Scott's image were a
   significant influence for Johnny Rotten, frontman of the popular punk
   band, the Sex Pistols.

   The release of Powerage (1978) marked the debut of bassist Cliff
   Williams and followed the blueprint set by Let There Be Rock with
   harder riffs. One of the concerts on the Powerage tour, at the Apollo
   Theatre in Glasgow, was recorded and released as If You Want Blood,
   featuring classic songs like " Whole Lotta Rosie", " Problem Child" or
   " Let There Be Rock". This album was the last one to be produced by
   Harry Vanda and George Young with Bon Scott on vocals.

   AC/DC's profile was raised in the UK by their appearance on the BBC's,
   Rock Goes to College series, on October 28, 1978 at Essex University,
   Colchester, England. The performance was broadcast on the TV channel
   BBC1.

   It was their sixth album, Highway To Hell, produced by Mutt Lange and
   released in 1979, that propelled them into the top ranks of hard rock
   acts. Its anthemic title track is still a radio staple in the U.S. and
   Australia. This album was the last to feature Bon Scott on vocals.

   The album's final track, " Night Prowler", has two breaths in quick
   succession at the start of the song, meant to set the fear and loathing
   tone. The previous albums gave some ground to unheard elements, like
   backing vocals, but still feature the AC/DC minimalism signature; loud,
   simple, pounding riffs and grooving backbeats.

Bon Scott's death (1980)

   Bon Scott died on 19 February, 1980 (see 1980 in music). He had passed
   out after a night of routine partying in London, and was left in a car
   owned by an acquaintance of his named Alistair Kinnear. The next day,
   Bon was found unconscious by Kinnear and immediately rushed to the
   King's College hospital in Camberwell, where he was pronounced dead
   upon arrival. Although common folklore cites pulmonary aspiration of
   vomit as the cause of his death, the official cause was listed as
   "Acute alcohol poisoning" and "Death by Misadventure".

   There are many inconsistencies in the official story, which in recent
   years have led to many conspiracy theories, many involving heroin
   overdoses. Some think it was murder, and that Bon Scott was killed by
   fumes from the exhaust being redistributed into the car, and some think
   Kinnear didn't even exist. It should be noted, however, that Bon was
   asthmatic and the temperature was below freezing that morning.

   Scott's family buried him in Fremantle, Western Australia, the area to
   which they emigrated when he was a child.

Finding a new voice

   After Bon Scott's death, the band members had considered quitting, but
   they decided that Bon would have wanted AC/DC to continue. Therefore,
   shortly thereafter, the band lined up various candidates to replace
   Bon. Among them were ex- Back Street Crawler vocalist Terry Slesser,
   ex- Moxy frontman Buzz Shearman (who passed on the opportunity due to
   vocal problems), and ex- Geordie singer Brian Johnson.

   With regard to Brian Johnson, Angus Young stated, "I remember Bon
   playing me "Little Richard" and then telling me the story of when he
   saw Brian singing. And he says about that night, 'there's this guy up
   there screaming at the top of his lungs and then the next thing you
   know he hits the deck. He's on the floor, rolling around and screaming.
   I thought it was great, and then to top it off —you couldn't get a
   better encore— they came in and wheeled the guy off!'" (Johnson was
   actually diagnosed with appendicitis later that night, which explains
   his writhing around on stage).

   At the AC/DC audition Johnson sang two songs; " Whole Lotta Rosie"
   (from Let There Be Rock) and " Nutbush City Limits" ( Ike & Tina
   Turner). A few days later, the band told Johnson he would be the new
   vocalist of AC/DC. Slesser, on the other hand, was not too excited
   about the idea of joining an established band from the start, and
   instead went on to have a solo career and co-wrote a song entitled
   "Rainbow's Gold" which was covered by Iron Maiden in 1984.

Brian Johnson era (1980–present)

   With Johnson, the band completed the songwriting that was started while
   Bon Scott was still alive and began recording Back in Black at Compass
   Point Studios in the Bahamas a few months after Scott's death. Back in
   Black, also produced by Lange, and became their biggest-selling album
   and a hard rock landmark, featuring hits like; " Hell's Bells", " You
   Shook Me All Night Long" and the title track, " Back in Black". The
   album was certified platinum a year after its release and by 1997 it
   had sold 16 million copies in the U.S. alone.

   The follow-up album, For Those About to Rock We Salute You, released in
   1981, also sold very well and was well received by critics. Two of the
   band's biggest hit singles to date were featured in this album, "Let's
   Get It Up", reaching #13 in the UK, and the title track, " For Those
   About to Rock", reaching #15 on the UK charts. The band split with
   Lange for their self-produced 1983 album, Flick of the Switch in an
   effort to find the rawness and simplicity of their early albums.

Departure of Rudd (1983)

   Amid rumours of alcoholism and drug-induced paranoia, drummer Phil
   Rudd's friendship with Malcolm Young was deteriorating; it is widely
   accepted that this friendship began deteriorating after Rudd made
   advances towards Malcolm's wife. After a long period of unfriendliness,
   the two's dislike for each other grew so strong that, at one point,
   they got into a fight. Two hours later, Rudd was fired from the band.

   Though Rudd finished most of the drum tracks for the next album, he was
   replaced by Simon Wright, after the band held an anonymous audition.
   With the new line-up, the band released and produced the less
   successful album, Flick of the Switch, which was was considered
   underdeveloped and unmemorable, and critics stated that the band had
   made "the same album nine times". AC/DC was also voted as the eighth
   biggest disappointment of the year in the 1984 Kerrang!'s readers'
   poll, however, Flick of the Switch eventually reached No. 4 in the UK
   charts. Fly on the Wall, produced by the Young brothers in 1985, was
   also regarded as underdeveloped and directionless. A music concept
   video with the same name, Fly on the Wall was also released. It
   featured the band at a bar, playing five of the album's ten songs and
   supplemented by a variety of goings-on, including an animated fly.

   In 1986, the group returned to the charts with the title track from Who
   Made Who, the soundtrack to Stephen King's film Maximum Overdrive. This
   album also included two new instrumentals along with previous hits such
   as "Hells Bells" and " Ride On".

   In February 1988, AC/DC were inducted into ARIA Hall of Fame.

Regained popularity (1988–present)

   The next album, Blow Up Your Video (1988), recorded on Miraval Studio
   in Le Val, France, saw them reunited with their original producers,
   Harry Vanda and George Young. The album was a selection of nineteen
   songs recorded for the album, and although it is criticized of having
   many " filler tracks", it was still successful; it enjoyed better sales
   than the band's two previous works, reaching No. 2 in the UK charts,
   the best position since Back In Black and with a British Top 20 single,
   " Heatseeker" and popular songs such as "That's The Way I Wanna Rock
   And Roll".

   The Blow Up Your Video World Tour started on February 1988 in Perth,
   Australia. After the shows in Europe in April, Malcolm Young stated
   that he needed a rest from touring, principally to reform his
   alcoholism, so the band temporarily hired another member of the Young
   family, Stevie Young.

   Following the tour, Wright left the group to work on the next Ronnie
   James Dio album Lock Up The Wolves, and was replaced by session
   veteran, Chris Slade. Johnson was unavailable for several months as he
   was finalising his divorce, so, the Young brothers wrote all the songs
   for the next album themselves, as they would do for all subsequent
   releases. The new album was produced by Bruce Fairbairn, who had worked
   previously with Aerosmith and Bon Jovi. Released in 1990, The Razors
   Edge was a big comeback for the band and included the hits "
   Thunderstruck" reaching #5 on Billboard's Mainstream Rock Tracks Chart
   and " Moneytalks" reaching #23 on the Billboard Hot 100. The album went
   multi-platinum and went into the top ten in the United States. Several
   shows of the Razor's Edge tour were recorded, and the live album titled
   Live was released on 1992. The album, produced by Fairbairn, is
   considered as one of the best live albums of the 90s. A year later, the
   band recorded the song " Big Gun", for the soundtrack of the Arnold
   Schwarzenegger movie " Last Action Hero".

   By 1994, Rudd had returned. Angus and Malcolm invited him to jam with
   them and eventually, they hired him to replace Chris Slade. His
   departure was, however, amicable and mainly due to the band's strong
   desire to return to working with Rudd. In Angus Young's opinion, Slade
   was the best musician in AC/DC, but the wish to regroup with Rudd was
   stronger.

   With the 1980—83 lineup back in position, the group recorded,
   Ballbreaker in 1995, with hip hop and heavy metal producer Rick Rubin.

   Five years later, the band released their sixteenth studio album, Stiff
   Upper Lip. Produced by George Young, the album was better received by
   critics than the previous Ballbreaker, but in part criticized by the
   lack of ideas. The Australian release includes a bonus disc with live
   performances of the band from 1996 recorded in Madrid, and three
   promotional videos.

Recent events

   In 2002, Q magazine put AC/DC at the very top of the "50 Bands To See
   Before You Die" list.

   In 2003, AC/DC have entered into a long-term, multi-album deal for new
   recordings, and released newly remastered AC/DC albums. These albums
   are a part of AC/DC's Remasters series, they contain expanded booklets
   with rare photographs, memorabilia, and notes. All the albums except
   Ballbreaker and Stiff Upper Lip were remastered in 2003; Ballbreaker
   was re-released in 2005, and Stiff Upper Lip will be re-released in
   2010, although a remastered version was released in the UK.

   In May 2003, Malcolm Young accepted a Ted Albert Award for Outstanding
   Service to Australian Music and paid special tribute to Bon Scott. That
   same year, the Recording Industry Association of America upgraded the
   group's US sales figures, increasing their cumulative sales from 46.5
   million to 63 million, making AC/DC the fifth-best-selling band in US
   music history, behind The Beatles, Led Zeppelin, Pink Floyd, and the
   Eagles. The RIAA also certified the classic Back in Black album as
   double diamond (20,000,000) US sales, making it the sixth-best-selling
   U.S. album in history. As of 2005, the album has sold 21 million
   copies, moving it into fifth place.

   On July 30 of the same year, the band gave a performance with the
   Rolling Stones at Molson Canadian Rocks for Toronto, in Toronto,
   Canada. Held before an audience of 500,000, the concert was held to
   help the city overcome the effects of the 2003 SARS epidemic. The
   concert currently holds the record for being the largest paid music
   event in North American history.

Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction

   During their induction to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in March 2003,
   AC/DC performed " Highway To Hell" and " You Shook Me All Night Long"
   with guest vocals by Steven Tyler of Aerosmith, who inducted the band
   into the hall. Tyler also called the band's power chords, "the thunder
   from down under that gives you the second most powerful surge that can
   flow through your body."

   The band thanked their fans for their support in an acceptance speech
   and Brian Johnson quoted the band's 1977 song "Let There Be Rock":


   AC/DC

   In the beginning, back in 1955, man didn't know about the rock 'n roll
           show and all that jive. The white man had the schmaltz,
   the black man had the blues, but no one knew what they was gonna do but
           Tchaikovsky had the news, he said: "let there be rock".


   AC/DC

Helen of Troy musical

   Since April 2003, Johnson has been working on a musical version of
   Helen of Troy with Sarasota Ballet coreographer, Robert de Warren. The
   musical is a Les Miserables-style musical with rousing anthems, tender
   ballads and minimal dialogue. He conceived the project with writers Ian
   La Frenais, Dick Clement and Brendan Healy after seeing Andrew Lloyd
   Webber's musical, Cats, and describing it as, "fucking shit,
   wrist-cuttingly bad".

   Malcolm McDowell, who made his recording debut singing one of the songs
   for the soundtrack in Brian's studio, has agreed to play Zeus. The
   Cranberries singer Dolores O'Riordan and Bruce Vilanch are also set to
   participate.

   The full show has yet to premiere, but a small public performance, that
   featured songs written for the musical, was given in New York on June
   13, 2005.
   The street sign for ACDC Lane, Melbourne
   Enlarge
   The street sign for ACDC Lane, Melbourne

ACDC Lane

   On 1 October 2004 a central Melbourne thoroughfare, Corporation Lane,
   was officially renamed ACDC Lane in honour of the band (street names in
   the City of Melbourne cannot contain the " /" character). The lane is
   near Swanston Street, the location where, on the back of a truck, the
   band recorded their video for the 1975 hit "It's a Long Way to the Top
   (If You Wanna Rock 'n' Roll)". There is another street, in Leganés,
   Spain, which was named after the band in 2 March 2000, called 'Calle de
   AC/DC'.

Family Jewels box set

   In March, 2005, an official two-disc DVD box-set containing music
   videos, live clips and promotional videos called Family Jewels was
   released. The first disc contains videos from the Bon Scott era like
   the first TV appearance in 1975, "Jailbreak", "Let There Be Rock" and a
   performance on television ten days before Scott died. The second disk
   contains material from the Brian Johnson era such as the classic videos
   for Back in Black.

New album

   AC/DC are currently working on a new studio album: Malcolm Young
   stated: "the band is currently recording and writing material for the
   eagerly anticipated next album.", but no release date has been set. In
   a 2004 interview, Brian Johnson said he was handling lyrics, for the
   first time since the 1988 album, Blow Up Your Video. He also said Angus
   Young has written harder riffs than the ones which appeared on Stiff
   Upper Lip. Brian Johnson, in a 2005 interview, confirmed that the band
   does not know where the album will be recorded and the producer is yet
   unknown, and Malcolm Young stated that this new album's "gotta be
   perfect". There is a possibility that the next release could be a
   double album. Angus Young also mentioned on a recent radio interview
   that the next album and tour will be AC/DC's last due the deteriorating
   quality of Brian Johnson's singing.

Name

   Angus and Malcolm Young claim that they first got the idea for the name
   after seeing the acronym "AC/DC" on the back of a sewing machine owned
   by their sister, Margaret Young. AC/DC is an abbreviation for "
   Alternating Current/ Direct Current," indicating a device can be
   powered by either type of power source. The Young brothers liked the
   way that this name symbolized the band's raw energy and power-driven
   performances so the name stuck.

   In some cultures, "AC/DC" is a slang term implying bisexuality. The
   band have said that they were initially unaware of this and that the
   public brought it to their attention.

   Some religious figures have suggested that the name stood for
   "Anti-Christ/Devil's Children", "After Christ/Devil Comes" or "Anti
   Christ/Death to Christ;" the rumour has long persisted among critics
   who, already disliking the band's image, use it to paint the band as
   Satanists. The band has stated this is not true and has mocked these
   accusations, for example, Malcolm Young once said: "Me mum would kill
   me for that!"

   The name AC/DC is pronounced one letter at a time, although the band is
   nicknamed "Acca Dacca" by its Australian fans. The name has inspired a
   rash of tribute bands, such as BC/DC, from the Canadian province of
   British Columbia; AC/DShe, an all-female group from San Francisco and
   Hayseed Dixie, an Appalachian band specializing in bluegrass covers.

Discography

   Studio albums
   Title                           Release date      Label    U.S. Album Sales
   High Voltage (A)                February 1975     Albert
   T.N.T. (A)                      December 1975     Albert
   High Voltage                    September 28 1976 Atlantic 3,000,000
   Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap (A) September 1976    Albert
   Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap     November 1976     Atlantic 6,000,000
   Let There Be Rock (A)           March 1977        Albert
   Let There Be Rock               June 1977         Atlantic 2,000,000
   Powerage                        May 1978          Atlantic 1,000,000
   Highway To Hell                 July 1979         Atlantic 7,000,000
   Back in Black                   July 1980         Atlantic 21,000,000
   For Those About to Rock         November 1981     Atlantic 4,000,000
   Flick of the Switch             April 1983        Atlantic 1,000,000
   '74 Jailbreak                   October 1984      ATCO     1,000,000
   Fly on the Wall                 June 1985         Atlantic 1,000,000
   Who Made Who                    May 1986          Atlantic 5,000,000
   Blow Up Your Video              January 1988      Epic     2,000,000
   The Razor's Edge                September 1990    Atlantic 5,000,000
   Ballbreaker                     September 1995    Elektra  2,000,000
   Volts                           November 1997     Eastwest
   Stiff Upper Lip                 February 2000     EMI      1,000,000

   Live albums
   Title                           Release date  Label           Producer
   If You Want Blood You've Got It October 1978  Atlantic / ATCO Vanda /
                                                                 Young
   Live                            October 1992  Epic            Bruce Fairbairn
   Live: 2 CD Collector's Edition  October 1992  Epic            Bruce Fairbairn
   Live from the Atlantic Studios  November 1997 Eastwest        George Young
   Let There Be Rock: The Movie    November 1997 Eastwest        Tony Platt

   Videography
     * AC/DC: Let There Be Rock (1980)
     * Fly on the Wall (1985)
     * Who Made Who (1986)
     * AC/DC (Aus.) (1989)
     * Clipped (1991)
     * Live at Donington (1991)
     * For Those About to Rock We Salute You (1993)
     * No Bull (1996)
     * Stiff Upper Lip Live (2001)
     * Live '77 (released only in Japan) (2003)
     * Toronto Rocks (2004)
     * Family Jewels (2005)

Band members

   Current line-up
     * Angus Young — lead guitar
     * Malcolm Young — rhythm guitar, backing vocals
     * Brian Johnson — lead vocals
     * Cliff Williams — bass, backing vocals
     * Phil Rudd — drums

   Original line-up
     * Angus Young — lead guitar
     * Malcolm Young — rhythm guitar, backing vocals
     * Dave Evans — lead vocals
     * Larry Van Kriedt — bass
     * Colin Burgess — drums

   Vital Members
     * Angus Young - lead guitar (1973-present)
     * Malcolm Young - rhythm guitar, backing vocals (1973-present)
     * Bon Scott - lead vocals (1974-1980)
     * Brian Johnson - lead vocals (1980-present)
     * Cliff Williams - Bass, backing vocals (1977-present)
     * Phil Rudd - drums (1975-1983;1994-present)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AC/DC"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
