   #copyright

Accra

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography

   SOS Children is has several projects in Tema, Greater Accra. For more
   information see SOS Children in Tema, Ghana, Africa
                  Accra, Ghana
   Map of Ghana showing the location of Accra.
   Map of Ghana showing the location of Accra.
        Coordinates: 5°33′00″N, 0°12′00″W
   District of Ghana Accra Metropolis District
    Chief Executive  Stanley N. A. Blankson
         Area
         - City      185 km²
        - Metro      2,905,726 km²
      Population
     - City (2005)   1,970,400
        - Urban      1,970,400
        - Metro      2,905,726
                     estimated
       Time zone     CET ( UTC+1)
    - Summer ( DST)  CEST ( UTC+1)

   Accra, population 1,970,400 (2005), is the capital of Ghana. It is
   Ghana's largest city and its administrative, communications, and
   economic centre. The primary economic activities are financial and
   other services, agriculture, fishing, and manufacturing such as
   processed food, lumber and plywood, textiles, clothing, and chemicals.
   Accra is located at 5°30' North, 0°10' West (5.5, -0.1667). It sits
   nears the Greenwich Meridian in the Accra Metropolitan Area, in the
   Greater Accra Region.

History of Accra

   Central Accra
   Enlarge
   Central Accra

   Accra was founded by the Ga people in the 1500s. The word Accra is
   derived from the word Nkran meaning ants; reference to the numerous
   anthills seen in the countryside around Accra. During part of its
   history, Accra served as a centre for trade with the Portuguese, who
   built a fort in the town, followed by the Swedish, Dutch, French,
   British and Danish by the end of the seventeenth century.

   The site of present-day Accra developed into a sizable town around the
   original Ga town as well as British, Danish and Dutch forts and their
   surrounding communities: Jamestown near the British fort, Osu near the
   Danish Christianborg fort (now Osu Castle) and Ussherstown near the
   Dutch Ussher fort. The four areas form the core of the modern city.

   In 1877, at the end of the second Anglo-Asante War, Accra replaced Cape
   Coast as the capital of the British Gold Coast colony. After the
   completion of a railroad to the mining and agricultural interior, Accra
   became the economic centre of Ghana. Large areas were destroyed by
   earthquakes in 1862 and 1939, but the city grew around a seaport (now
   relocated to Tema), and later a brewery, expanding into neighbouring
   towns.
   Independence Arch in Accra
   Enlarge
   Independence Arch in Accra

   The Accra Riots in 1948 launched the Ghanaian campaign for
   independence, which led to the Ghana's independence from the United
   Kingdom and nationhood in 1957.

   Today, Accra is one of the wealthiest and most modern cities in the
   African continent, with a high quality of living by African standards.
   Accra is also known as having one of the continent's most active night
   lives.

Attractions in Accra

   Labadi Beach
   Enlarge
   Labadi Beach

   Accra is home to the National Museum of Ghana, the Ghana Academy of
   Arts and Sciences, the National Archives of Ghana, and Ghana's central
   library. Also of note is Christianborg or Osu Castle -- the seat of
   government, built by the Danes in the 17th century, the National
   Theatre, Accra Centre for National Culture, a lighthouse, the National
   Sports Stadium, the W.E.B. DuBois Memorial Centre for Pan-African
   Culture and several beaches. Near the Parliament of Ghana is the
   Ghana-India Kofi Annan Centre for Excellence in ICT.

   The Kwame Nkrumah Memorial is located in downtown Accra.

Education

   The National Theatre
   Enlarge
   The National Theatre

   On Accra's outskirts are Achimota Secondary School which was founded in
   1924 and opened in 1927, and Presby Boys' Secondary School and some of
   the country's leading secondary schools and, 13km north at Legon, the
   University of Ghana. Abelemkpe is the home of Lincoln Community School,
   Accra Ghana (LCS). LCS is a private, non-profit IB international school
   for students aged 3-18, and was established in 1968. The Defense
   Commission of the Organization of African Unity has its headquarters in
   Accra.

Transportation

   Accra is a major transportation hub, home to the Kotoka International
   Airport and lies on railway lines to Tema, Takoradi and Kumasi. The
   main harbour city, Tema is connected through one of Ghana's highways.

   Public transit in the city is provided by a mix of privately owned
   Mini-buses (known as Tro-Tros), taxis and buses. Tro-Tros are usually
   converted Mini-buses that run a regular, well-known route. They are
   cheap and frequent but often in poor repair and over-crowded. Some
   taxis also run regular routes, which cost more but provide for a more
   comfortable ride. Recently in 2002, the city started introducing
   publicly owned buses.

Accommodation

   La Palm

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accra"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
