   #copyright

Afghan Hound

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mammals

                 Afghan Hound
              Alternative names
   Baluchi Hound
   Sage Baluchi
   Tazi
              Country of origin
   Afghanistan
      Classification and breed standards
     FCI:   Group 10 Section 1 #228     Stds
     AKC:   Hound                       Stds
    ANKC:   Group 4 - (Hounds)          Stds
     CKC:   Group 2 - (Hounds)          Stds
   KC (UK): Hound                       Stds
    NZKC:   Hounds                      Stds
     UKC:   Sighthounds and Pariah Dogs Stds

   The Afghan Hound is a very old sighthound dog breed. Distinguished by
   its thick, fine, silky coat and its tail with a ring curl at the end,
   the breed acquired its unique features in the cold mountains of
   Afghanistan, where it was originally used to hunt wolves, foxes, and
   gazelles.

Appearance

   This Afghan is black and brindle; however, the photo shows it with a
   reddish tinge to the coat, which can occur in a black-coated dog.
   Enlarge
   This Afghan is black and brindle; however, the photo shows it with a
   reddish tinge to the coat, which can occur in a black-coated dog.

   The Afghan Hound is high-stationed, standing 24 to 29 inches (63-74 cm)
   in height and weighing 45 to 60 pounds (20-30 kg). The coat may be any
   colour, but white markings, particularly on the head, are discouraged;
   many individuals have a black facial mask. Some are almost white, but
   particolor hounds (white with islands of red or black) are not
   acceptable and may indicate impure breeding. The long, fine-textured
   coat requires considerable care and grooming. The long topknot and the
   shorter-haired saddle on the back in the mature dog are distinctive
   features of the Afghan Hound coat. The high hipbones and unique small
   ring on the end of the tail are also characteristics of the breed.

Temperament

   The temperament of the typical Afghan Hound can be aloof and dignified,
   but happy and clownish when playing. The breed has a reputation among
   dog trainers of having a relatively low "obedience intelligence" as
   defined by author Stanley Coren. The Afghan Hound has many cat-like
   tendencies and is not slavish in its obedience as are some other
   breeds. The Afghan hound has a leaning towards independence. Owners
   should not be surprised if their Afghan hounds sometimes choose to
   ignore commands. Although seldom used today for hunting in Europe and
   America where they are popular, Afghans are frequent participants in
   lure coursing events and are also popular as show dogs.

Health

   Afghans hounds are a relatively healthy breed; major health issues are
   allergies, and cancer. Sensitivity to anesthesia is an issue the Afghan
   hound shares with the rest of the sighthound group, as sighthounds have
   relatively low levels of body fat.

   Afghan hounds as a whole are a fairly long-lived breed, often living
   13-14 years.

History

   The breed was always thought to date back at least to the pre-Christian
   era, and recent discoveries by researchers studying ancient DNA have
   revealed that the Afghan Hound is in fact one of the most ancient dog
   breeds, dating back for many thousands of years. Its original native
   name, Tazi, betrays its connection to the very similar Tasy breed of
   Russia. The proximity of southern Russia and Afghanistan argue for a
   common origin for both breeds.

   Initially, Afghan people refused to sell their national dog to
   outsiders; the breed was not seen in Europe and America until after the
   turn of the 20th century. AKC and CKC did not recognize the Afghan
   Hound until the 1930s.

   On August 3, 2005, Korean scientist Hwang Woo-Suk announced that his
   team of researchers had become the first team to successfully clone a
   dog. The dog, an Afghan Hound, was named Snuppy. Later that year, a
   pattern of lies and fraud by Hwang Woo-Suk came to light, throwing in
   doubt all his claims. Snuppy, nonetheless, was a genuine clone, and
   thus the first cloned dog in history.

Famous Afghans

     * Rita from Oliver & Company
     * Snuppy (see above)
     * What-a-Mess
     * Brainy Barker from Krypto the Superdog

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Afghan_Hound"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
