   #copyright

African Buffalo

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mammals

                 iAfrican Buffalo
   19th century drawing
   19th century drawing

                             Conservation status

   Conservation dependent (LR/cd)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom:   Animalia
   Phylum:    Chordata
   Subphylum: Vertebrata
   (unranked) Synapsida
   (unranked) Mammaliaformes
   Class:     Mammalia
   Order:     Artiodactyla
   Family:    Bovidae
   Subfamily: Bovinae
   Genus:     Syncerus
              Hodgson, 1847
   Species:   S. caffer

                                Binomial name

   Syncerus caffer
   ( Sparrman, 1779)

                                 Subspecies

   S. c. caffer
   S. c. nanus
   S. c. brachyceros
   S. c. mathewsi

   The African Buffalo or Cape Buffalo (Syncerus caffer) is a bovid from
   the family of the Bovidae. It is up to 1.7 meters high, 3 meters long,
   and can reach a weight of 1000 kilograms. On average, an adult male
   stands about 1.5 m high at the shoulder and weighs 680 kg, while a
   female is 10 - 15 cm shorter and weighs between 500 - 600 kg.
   An African Buffalo Bull.
   Enlarge
   An African Buffalo Bull.

   The Cape Buffalo is not closely related to the Asian Water Buffalo, but
   its ancestry remains unclear. It is a very powerful creature, demanding
   respect from even a pride of lions when paths cross. Other than humans,
   they have few natural predators and are capable of defending themselves
   against (and sometimes killing) lions. Lions do kill and eat buffalo
   occasionally, but it typically takes multiple lions to bring down a
   single adult buffalo; fewer when it is injured or very old. The leopard
   and spotted hyena are a threat only to newborn calves. Crossbreeding
   with domestic cattle has had only limited success, and the African
   Buffalo remains a wild animal.

   Known as one of the " big five" in Africa, the Cape Buffalo can be a
   volatile and formidable beast, goring, trampling and killing several
   people a year. It is reputedly the most dangerous game animal, with the
   possible exception of the hippopotamus.

   Cape Buffalo occur from open savannah to thickly wooded country, and
   wallow when the opportunity presents itself. They are found in
   Ethiopia, Somalia, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Botswana, Mozambique,
   South Africa, Kenya and Tanzania.

   The main herd consists of both sexes and all ages, though bachelor
   groups are also found. A male is recognizable by the thickness of his
   horns, and is called the "Boss." Bulls mature at eight years of age.
   Cows first calve at five years of age, after a gestation period of 11.5
   months. Older bulls forced out of herds are commonly found in bachelor
   groups.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/African_Buffalo"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
