   #copyright

Agamemnon

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Historical figures

   The so-called 'Mask of Agamemnon'. Discovered by Heinrich Schliemann in
   1876 at Mycenae. Whether it represents an individual, and who, remain
   unknown.
   The so-called ' Mask of Agamemnon'. Discovered by Heinrich Schliemann
   in 1876 at Mycenae. Whether it represents an individual, and who,
   remain unknown.

   Agamemnon ( Greek: Ἀγαμέμνων) ("very resolute") is one of the most
   distinguished of the Greek heroes. He is the son of King Atreus of
   Mycenae and Queen Aerope,and brother of Menelaus. Because of the
   antiquity of the sources, it is not clear whether Agamemnon is a
   historical figure.

   In alternative traditions Agamemnon is said to be the son of
   Pleisthenes (son of Atreus) and Aerope, or of Pleisthenes and Cleolla,
   daughter of Dias, making him the grandson, rather than the son, of
   Atreus.

Early life

   Agamemnon's father Atreus was murdered by Aegisthus, who took
   possession of the throne of Mycenae and ruled jointly with his father
   Thyestes. During this period Agamemnon and his brother, Menelaus, took
   refuge with Tyndareus, king of Sparta. There they respectively married
   Tyndareus' daughters Clytemnestra and Helen. Agamemnon and Clytemnestra
   had five children: four daughters, Iphigeneia, Electra, Chrysothemis,
   and Iphianissa and one son, Orestes.

   Menelaus succeeded Tyndareus in Sparta, while Agamemnon, with his
   brother's assistance, drove out Aegisthus and Thyestes to recover his
   father's kingdom. He extended his dominion by conquest and became the
   most powerful prince in Greece.

   Agamemnon's family history, dating back to legendary king Pelops, had
   been marred by pederastic rape, murder, incest, and treachery. The
   Greeks believed this violent past brought misfortune upon the entire
   House of Atreus.

The Trojan War

   The sacrifice of Iphigenia.
   The sacrifice of Iphigenia.

   Agamemnon gathered the reluctant Greek forces to sail for Troy.
   Preparing to depart from Aulis, which was a port in Boeotia,
   Agamemnon's army incurred the wrath of the goddess Artemis. There are
   several reasons throughout myth for such wrath: in Aeschylus' play
   Agamemnon, Artemis is angry for the young men who will die at Troy,
   whereas in Sophocles' Electra, Agamemnon has slain an animal sacred to
   Artemis, and subsequently boasted that he was Artemis' equal in
   hunting. Misfortunes, including a plague and a lack of wind, prevented
   the army from sailing. Finally, the prophet Calchas announced that the
   wrath of the goddess could only be propitiated by the sacrifice of
   Agamemnon's daughter Iphigeneia. Classical dramatizations differ on how
   willing either father or daughter were to this fate, some including
   such trickery as claiming she was to be married to Achilles, but
   Agamemnon did eventually sacrifice Iphigeneia. Her death appeased
   Artemis, and the Greek army set out for Troy. Several alternatives to
   the human sacrifice have been presented in Greek mythology. Other
   sources claim that Agamemnon was prepared to kill his daughter, but
   that Artemis accepted a deer in her place, and whisked her to Taurus in
   Crimea. Hesiod said she became the goddess Hecate.

   Agamemnon was the commander-in-chief of the Greeks during the Trojan
   War. During the fighting, Agamemnon killed Antiphus. Agamemnon's
   teamster, Halaesus, later fought with Aeneas in Italy. The Iliad tells
   the story of the quarrel between Agamemnon and Achilles in the final
   year of the war. Agamemnon took an attractive slave and spoil of war
   Briseis from Achilles. Achilles, the greatest warrior of the age,
   withdrew from battle in revenge and nearly cost the Greek armies the
   war.

   Although not the equal of Achilles in bravery, Agamemnon was a
   dignified representative of kingly authority. As commander-in-chief, he
   summoned the princes to the council and led the army in battle. He took
   the field himself, and performed many heroic deeds until he was wounded
   and forced to withdraw to his tent. His chief fault was his overweening
   haughtiness. An over-exalted opinion of his position led him to insult
   Chryses and Achilles, thereby bringing great disaster upon the Greeks.

   After the capture of Troy, Cassandra, doomed prophetess and daughter of
   Priam, fell to his lot in the distribution of the prizes of war.

Return to Greece

   The return of Agamemnon, from an 1879 illustration from Stories from
   the Greek Tragedians by Alfred Church.
   The return of Agamemnon, from an 1879 illustration from Stories from
   the Greek Tragedians by Alfred Church.

   After a stormy voyage, Agamemnon and Cassandra landed in Argolis or
   were blown off course and landed in Aegisthus' country. Clytemnestra,
   Agamemnon's wife, had taken a lover, Aegisthus, and they invited
   Agamemnon to a banquet at which he was treacherously slain. According
   to the account given by Pindar and the tragedians, Agamemnon was slain
   by his wife alone in a bath, a piece of cloth or a net having first
   been thrown over him to prevent resistance. Clytemnestra also killed
   Cassandra. Her wrath at the sacrifice of Iphigenia, and her jealousy of
   Cassandra, are said to have been the motives of her crime. Aegisthus
   and Clytemnestra then ruled Agamemnon's kingdom for a time, but the
   murder of Agamemnon was eventually avenged by his son Orestes with the
   help of Electra.

Other stories

   Athenaeus tells a story of Argynnus, an eromenos of Agamemnon:
   "Agamemnon loved Argynnus, so the story goes, having seen him swimming
   in the Cephisus river; in which, in fact, he lost his life (for he
   constantly bathed in this river). Agamemnon was struck with great
   grief. He buried him, honored him with a tomb and a shrine, and founded
   there a temple of Aphrodite Argynnis." (The Deipnosophists of Athenaeus
   of Naucratis, Book XIII Concerning Women, p.3) This episode is also
   found in Clement of Alexandria (Protrepticus II.38.2), in Stephen of
   Byzantium (Kopai and Argunnos), and in Propertius, III with minor
   variations.

   The fortunes of Agamemnon have formed the subject of numerous
   tragedies, ancient and modern, the most famous being the Oresteia of
   Aeschylus. In the legends of the Peloponnesus, Agamemnon was regarded
   as the highest type of a powerful monarch, and in Sparta he was
   worshipped under the title of Zeus Agamemnon. His tomb was pointed out
   among the ruins of Mycenae and at Amyclae.

   Another account makes him the son of Pleisthenes (the son or father of
   Atreus), who is said to have been Aerope's first husband.

   In works of art there is considerable resemblance between the
   representations of Zeus, king of the gods, and Agamemnon, king of men.
   He is generally characterized by the sceptre and diadem, the usual
   attributes of kings.

Agamemnon in fiction

   Writers of time travel and historical novels often attempt to show the
   Trojan War "as it really happened", based on the archeological evidence
   of Mycenaean civilization. Such authors frequently use Agamemnon as the
   archetypical Mycenaean king, bringing life to old artifacts by dressing
   a familiar face in them. Of particular interest is S. M. Stirling's
   time-travel trilogy Island in the Sea of Time, Against the Tide of
   Years and On the Oceans of Eternity, where the fate that befalls the
   House of Atreus is every bit as horrific as that traditionally
   portrayed. The horror is arranged by a time-travelling villain who is
   very well aware of the traditional accounts.

   The noble Atreides family of the science fiction series Dune by Frank
   Herbert trace their lineage back to Agamemnon (note that the surname,
   Atreides, is derived from Agamemnon's father's name, Atreus). An
   important Atreides ancestor also adopts the name Agamemnon in the
   series' back-story.

   Agamemnon is also mentioned in William Butler Yeats poem " Leda and the
   Swan".

   Agamemnon makes an appearance in the film Time Bandits, played by Sean
   Connery, although his depiction in the film seems more reminiscent of
   Odysseus. Masks very similar to the famous Mask of Agamemnon are also
   used in the film.

   He also appeared in the 2004 film Troy, played by Scottish actor Brian
   Cox. Troy departs from the traditional accounts in numerous places; in
   the case of Agamemnon, he is portrayed as power-mad, and is killed for
   his rapaciousness during the fall of Troy.

   The phrase "Thus falls of the house of Agamemnon" was used in a
   delirious stupor by Steve Rhodes during an episode of Married with
   Children.

   Agamemnon also appears in the Shakespearean play Troilus and Cressida.

   Agamemnon appears in Microsoft Game Studios' Age of Mythology. His role
   in the game broadly reflects his role in the Trojan War.

   Agamemnon appears as a character in the novels Ilium and Olympos by Dan
   Simmons, in the future replaying of the Trojan War.

   In his book Where Troy Once Stood, Dutch-born writer Iman Wilkens links
   Argos and Agamemnon with the Biblical Gog and Magog.

   The folk band The Mountain Goats has a song titled "Against Agamemnon",
   although direct textual references to Agamemnon himself are rather
   vague.

   Agamemnon was used as the name of the Earth Alliance Omega class
   destroyer, first captained by John Sheridan in Babylon 5, by J M
   Straczynski.

   The name Agamemnon was also used to denote a class of space battleship
   used in the anime Gundam Seed and it's sequel Gundam Seed Destiny

   In Christine Brooke-Rose's novel Amalgamemnon, she uses the world of
   Greek mythology to demonstrate a character oppressed by a male
   dominated society. As she feels confinied by many male conventions, the
   term "amalga" is added to the name, in order to signify an amalgamation
   of oppression.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agamemnon"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
