   #copyright

Ajax (programming)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Computer Programming

   Ajax, shorthand for Asynchronous JavaScript and XML, is a web
   development technique for creating interactive web applications. The
   intent is to make web pages feel more responsive by exchanging small
   amounts of data with the server behind the scenes, so that the entire
   web page does not have to be reloaded each time the user makes a
   change. This is meant to increase the web page's interactivity, speed,
   and usability.

   The Ajax technique uses a combination of:
     * XHTML (or HTML) and CSS, for marking up and styling information.
     * The DOM accessed with a client-side scripting language, especially
       ECMAScript implementations such as JavaScript and JScript, to
       dynamically display and interact with the information presented.
     * The XMLHttpRequest object is used to exchange data asynchronously
       with the web server. In some Ajax frameworks and in certain
       situations, an IFrame object is used instead of the XMLHttpRequest
       object to exchange data with the web server, and in other
       implementations, dynamically added < script> tags may be used.
     * XML is sometimes used as the format for transferring data between
       the server and client, although any format will work, including
       preformatted HTML, plain text, JSON and even EBML. These files may
       be created dynamically by some form of server-side scripting.

   Like DHTML, LAMP and SPA, Ajax is not a technology in itself, but a
   term that refers to the use of a group of technologies.

History

   The first use of the term in public was by Jesse James Garrett in
   February 2005. Garrett thought of the term while in the shower, when he
   realized the need for a shorthand term to represent the suite of
   technologies he was proposing to a client.

   Although the term "Ajax" was coined in 2005, most histories of the
   technologies that enable Ajax start a decade earlier with Microsoft's
   initiatives in developing Remote Scripting. Techniques for the
   asynchronous loading of content on an existing Web page without
   requiring a full reload date back as far as the IFRAME element type
   (introduced in Internet Explorer 3 in 1996) and the LAYER element type
   (introduced in Netscape 4 in 1997, abandoned during early development
   of Mozilla). Both element types had a src attribute that could take any
   external URL, and by loading a page containing JavaScript that
   manipulated the parent page, Ajax-like effects could be attained. This
   set of client-side technologies was usually grouped together under the
   generic term of DHTML. Macromedia's Flash could also, from version 4,
   load XML and CSV files from a remote server without requiring a browser
   refresh.

   Microsoft's Remote Scripting (or MSRS, introduced in 1998) acted as a
   more elegant replacement for these techniques, with data being pulled
   in by a Java applet with which the client side could communicate using
   JavaScript. This technique worked on both Internet Explorer version 4
   and Netscape Navigator version 4 onwards. Microsoft then created the
   XMLHttpRequest object in Internet Explorer version 5 and first took
   advantage of these techniques using XMLHttpRequest in Outlook Web
   Access supplied with the Microsoft Exchange Server 2000 release.

   The Web development community, first collaborating via the
   microsoft.public.scripting.remote newsgroup and later through blog
   aggregation, subsequently developed a range of techniques for remote
   scripting in order to enable consistent results across different
   browsers. In 2002, a user-community modification to Microsoft Remote
   Scripting was made to replace the Java applet with XMLHttpRequest.

   Remote Scripting Frameworks such as ARSCIF surfaced in 2003 not long
   before Microsoft introduced Callbacks in ASP.NET.

   Since XMLHttpRequest is now implemented across the majority of browsers
   in use, alternative techniques are used infrequently. However, they are
   still used where compatibility with older Web sites or legacy
   applications is required.

   In addition, the World Wide Web Consortium has several Recommendations
   that also allow for dynamic communication between a server and user
   agent, though few of them are well supported. These would include:
     * The object element defined in HTML 4 for embedding arbitrary
       content types into documents, (replaces inline frames under XHTML
       1.1)
     * The Document Object Model (DOM) Level 3 Load and Save Specification

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ajax_%28programming%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
