   #copyright

AK-47

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Military History and War

   AK-47
   A "second model" AK-47. This was the first machined receiver variation.
   A Type 2 AK-47, the first machined receiver variation.
   Type Assault rifle
   Place of origin Soviet Union
   Service history
   In service 1949—
   Used by Soviet Union, many others
   Production history
   Designer Mikhail Kalashnikov
   Designed 1947
   Number built Over 100 million
   Variants AK-47, AKS, AKM, AKMS, RPK, AK-74, AK-101, AK-102, AK-103,
   AK-107, AK-108 (See table below for national-production variants)
   Specifications
   Weight 3.8 kg (9.5  lb) empty, 4.3 kg loaded
   Length 870 mm (34¼  in)
   Barrel length 415 mm (16.3 in)
     __________________________________________________________________

   Cartridge 7.62 × 39 mm
   Action Gas-operated, rotating bolt
   Rate of fire 600 rounds/min
   Muzzle velocity 710 m/s (~2,330 ft/s)
   Effective range 300 m (330  yd)
   Feed system 30-round detachable box; compatible w/ RPK 40-round box,
   75-round drum magazine.
   Sights Adjustable iron sights, optional mount required for optical
   sights

   The AK-47 (shortened from Russian: Автомат Калашникова образца 1947
   года, Avtomat Kalashnikova 1947) is a gas-operated assault rifle
   designed by Mikhail Kalashnikov, and produced by Russian manufacturer
   Izhevsk Mechanical Works and used in many Eastern bloc nations during
   the Cold War. It was adopted and standardized in 1947. Compared with
   the auto-loading rifles used in World War II, the AK-47 was generally
   more compact, with a shorter range, a smaller 7.62 × 39 mm cartridge,
   and was capable of selective fire. It was one of the first true assault
   rifles and remains the most widely used and known. The AK-47 and its
   numerous variants and descendants have been produced in greater numbers
   than any other assault rifle and are in production to this day.

History

Design background

   During the Second World War, Germany had developed the concept of the
   assault rifle. This concept was based on the knowledge that most
   military engagements in modern warfare were happening at fairly close
   range with the majority happening within 100 meters (110  yd). The
   power and range of contemporary rifle cartridges was simply overly
   powerful for a vast majority of engagements with small arms. As a
   result, a cartridge and firearm were sought combining the features of a
   submachine gun (high-capacity magazine and fully-automatic fire
   capability) with an intermediate-power cartridge that would be
   effective to a range of 300 meters (330 yd). For the sake of reduced
   manufacturing costs, this was done by shortening the 7.92 × 57 mm
   Mauser cartridge case and substituting a lighter bullet to create the
   7.92 x 33 mm Kurz.

   The resulting Sturmgewehr 44 (StG44) was not the first rifle to use
   these features; it was preceded by earlier Italian Cei-Rigotti and
   Russian Fedorov Avtomat designs. The Germans, however, were the first
   to produce and field a sufficient number of the type to properly
   evaluate its utility. They fielded the weapon in large numbers against
   the Russians towards the end of the war and this experience deeply
   influenced Russian doctrine in the years following the war.

   Mikhail Kalashnikov began imagining his weapon while still in the
   hospital, after being wounded in the battle of Bryansk. He had been
   informed that a new weapon was required for the 7.62 × 41 mm cartridge
   developed by Elisarov and Semin in 1943. Sudayev's PPS43 submachine gun
   was preferred to Kalashnikov's design.

Design concept

   Despite circumstantial evidence, Mikhail Kalashnikov denies that his
   rifle was based on the German assault rifle. It is best described as a
   hybrid of several previous innovations. To support his position, the
   AK-47 owes more to the M1 Garand Rifle than any German design. The
   double locking lugs, unlocking raceway, and trigger mechanism are
   clearly derived from the earlier American design. This is not
   surprising as millions of Garand rifles had operated reliably in combat
   around the globe. Though mechanically similar to the Garand, the AK-47
   borrows its cartridge concept, weapon layout, gas system, and
   construction methods from the StG44. Further, the safety is
   surprisingly similar to the Browning-designed Remington Model 8 rifle.

   The genius in the design of the Kalashnikov rifle is in the
   simplification of those contributing designs and adaptation to mass
   production. The AK-47 can be seen as a fusion of the best that the M1
   Garand offered combined with the best aspects of the StG44 made by the
   best processes available in the Soviet Union at the time. Kalashnikov
   used clearances between parts that were much larger than clearances
   used in standard gun smithing practice, contributing to the non-jamming
   characteristics of the AK-47.


   AK-47

       The operating mechanism of the Kalashnikov family of weapons is
    basically very similar to that of the US M1 and M14 rifles and M1/M2
   carbines. In fact, as is often the case in a successful weapon design,
    there is little new about the individual elements of Kalashnikov’s
  design; the inventor’s accomplishment was in the recombination of known
     elements into a compact, reliable and durable package. — Ed Ezell


   AK-47

Receiver development history

   Type 3 AK-47, with its predecessor, the SKS
   Enlarge
   Type 3 AK-47, with its predecessor, the SKS
   AKS-47 on a Type 4B receiver (top), with a Type 2A
   Enlarge
   AKS-47 on a Type 4B receiver (top), with a Type 2A

   There were many difficulties during the initial phase of production.
   The first production models had stamped sheet metal receivers.
   Difficulties were encountered welding the guide and ejector rails
   causing high rejection rates. Instead of halting production, a heavy
   machined receiver was substituted for the sheet metal receiver. This
   was a more costly process, but the use of machined receivers
   accelerated production as tooling and labor for the earlier
   Mosin-Nagant rifle's machined receiver were easily adapted. Partly
   because of these problems, the Soviets were not able to distribute
   large numbers of the new rifle to soldiers until 1956. During this
   time, production of the interim SKS rifle continued.

   Once manufacturing difficulties had been overcome, a redesigned version
   designated the AKM (M for modernized or upgraded—in Russian: Автомат
   Калашникова Модернизированный) was introduced in 1959. This new model
   used a stamped sheet metal receiver and featured a slanted muzzle brake
   on the end of the barrel to compensate for muzzle rise under recoil. In
   addition, a hammer retarder was added in order to prevent the weapon
   from firing out of battery (without the bolt being fully closed) during
   rapid or automatic fire. This is also sometimes referred to as a
   "cyclic rate reducer", or simply "rate reducer", as it also has the
   effect of reducing the number of rounds fired per minute during
   automatic fire. It was also lighter than the previous model, roughly
   two-thirds of the weight. Both licensed and unlicensed production of
   the Kalashnikov weapons abroad were almost exclusively of the AKM,
   partially due to the much easier production of the stamped receiver.
   This model is the most commonly encountered, having been produced in
   much greater quantities. All rifles based on the Kalashnikov design are
   frequently referred to as AK-47s in the West, although this is only
   correct when applied to rifles based on the original 3 receiver types.
   In most former Eastern Bloc countries, the weapon is known simply as
   the "Kalashnikov". The photo at right illustrates the differences
   between the Type 2 milled receiver and the Type 4 stamped, including
   the use of rivets rather than welds on the stamped receiver, as well as
   the placement of a small dimple above the magazine well for
   stabilization of the magazine.

   In 1978, the Soviet Union began replacing their AK-47 and AKM rifles
   with a newer design, the AK-74. This new rifle and cartridge had only
   started being exported to eastern European nations when the Soviet
   Union collapsed drastically slowing production of this and all other
   small arms.

                          Receiver type Description
   Type 1A/B Original stamped receiver for AK-47. -1B modified for folding
   stock. Namely, a large hole is present on each side to accommodate the
                    hardware for the underfolding stock.

              (this naming convention continues with all types)
                    Type 2A/B Milled from steel forging.
   Type 3A/B "Final" version of the milled receiver, from steel bar stock.
          The most ubiquitous example of the milled-receiver AK-47.
    Type 4A/B Stamped AKM receiver. Overall, the most-used design in the
                    construction of the AK-series rifles.

Features

   The AK-47 is simple, inexpensive to manufacture and easy to clean and
   maintain. Its ruggedness and reliability are legendary. The large gas
   piston, generous clearances between moving parts, and tapered cartridge
   case design allow the gun to endure large amounts of foreign matter and
   fouling without failing to cycle. This reliability comes at the cost of
   accuracy, as the looser tolerances do not allow the precision and
   consistency that are required of more accurate firearms. Reflecting
   Soviet infantry doctrine of its time, the rifle is meant to be part of
   massed infantry fire, not long range engagements.

   The notched rear tangent iron sight is adjustable, each setting
   denoting hundreds of meters. The front sight is a post adjustable for
   elevation in the field. Windage adjustment is done by the armory prior
   to issue. The battle setting places the round within a few centimeters
   above or below the point of aim out to approximately 250 meters
   (275 yd). This " point-blank range" setting allows the shooter to fire
   the gun at any close target without adjusting the sights. Longer
   settings are intended for area suppression. These settings mirror the
   Mosin-Nagant and SKS rifles which the AK-47 replaced. This eased
   transition and simplified training.

   The bore and chamber, as well as the gas piston and the interior of the
   gas cylinder, are generally chromium-plated. This plating dramatically
   increases the life of these parts by resisting corrosion and wear. This
   is particularly important, as most military-production ammunition
   during the 20th century contained corrosive mercuric salts in the
   primers, which mandated frequent and thorough cleaning in order to
   prevent damage. Chrome plating of critical parts is now common on many
   modern military weapons.

Operating cycle

   To fire, the operator inserts a loaded magazine, moves the selector
   lever to the lowest position, pulls back and releases the charging
   handle, and then pulls the trigger. In this setting, the gun fires only
   once (semi-automatic), requiring the trigger to be released and
   depressed again for the next shot. With the selector in the middle
   position (full-automatic), the rifle continues to fire, automatically
   cycling fresh rounds into the chamber, until the magazine is exhausted
   or pressure is released from the trigger. As each bullet travels
   through the barrel, a portion of the gases expanding behind them are
   diverted into the gas tube above the barrel, where they impact the gas
   piston. This in turn is driven backward, pushing the bolt carrier,
   which causes the bolt to move backwards, ejecting the spent round, and
   chambering a new round when the recoil spring pushes it back.

Disassembly

   Dismantling the rifle involves the operator depressing the magazine
   catch and removing the magazine. The charging handle is pulled to the
   rear and the operator inspects the chamber to verify the gun is
   unloaded. The operator presses forward on the retainer button at the
   rear of the receiver cover while simultaneously lifting up on the rear
   of the cover to remove it. He then pushes the spring assembly forward
   and lifts it from its raceway, withdrawing it out of the bolt carrier
   and to the rear. The operator must then pull the carrier assembly all
   the way to the rear, lift it, and then pull it away. He removes the
   bolt by pushing it to the rear of the bolt carrier; rotating the bolt
   so the camming lug clears the raceway on the underside of the bolt
   carrier and then pulls it forward and free. When cleaning, the operator
   will pay special attention to the barrel, bolt face, and gas piston,
   then oil lightly and reassemble.

Ballistics

   The standard AK-47 or AKM fires a 7.62 × 39 mm round with a muzzle
   velocity of 710  metres per second (2,329  ft/s). Muzzle energy is
   1,990  joules (1,467  ft·lbf). Cartridge case length is
   38.6 millimetres (1.5  in), weight is 18.21  grams (281.0 gr).
   Projectile weight is normally 8 grams (123  gr). The AK-47 and AKM,
   with the 7.62 × 39 mm cartridge, have a maximum effective range of
   around 300 meters (330 yd). For comparison, the 7.62 × 54 mm R
   cartridge has a projectile of 9.6–12 grams (148–185 gr), depending on
   the weapon, at a velocity of 818 metres per second (2,683 ft/s) for
   approximately 4,000 joules (2,950 ft·lbf) of energy.

Variants

   East Germany-made MPiKMS-72, folding stock variant of AKM in the hands
   of a U.S. Marine
   Enlarge
   East Germany-made MPiKMS-72, folding stock variant of AKM in the hands
   of a U.S. Marine
   A Romanian soldier aids a U.S. Marine in clearing an RPK, a squad
   automatic weapon variant of the AK-47
   Enlarge
   A Romanian soldier aids a U.S. Marine in clearing an RPK, a squad
   automatic weapon variant of the AK-47

   Kalashnikov variants include:
     * AK-47 1948–51, 7.62 × 39 mm — The very earliest models, with the
       Type 1 stamped sheet metal receiver, are now very rare.
     * AK-47 1952, 7.62 × 39 mm — Has a milled receiver and wooden
       buttstock and handguard. Barrel and chamber are chrome plated to
       resist corrosion. Rifle weight is 4.2 kg.
     * AKS-47 — Featured a downward-folding metal stock similar to that of
       the German MP40, for use in the restricted space in the BMP
       infantry combat vehicle.
     * RPK, 7.62 × 39 mm — Squad automatic rifle version with longer
       barrel and bipod.
     * AKM, 7.62 × 39 mm — A simplified, lighter version of the AK-47;
       Type 4 receiver is made from stamped and riveted sheet metal (see
       schematic above). A slanted muzzle device was added to counter
       climb in automatic fire. Rifle weight is 3.61 kg, due to the
       lighter receiver.
     * AKMS, 7.62 × 39 mm — Folding-stock version of the AKM intended for
       airborne troops. Stock may be either side- or under-folding
     * AKMSU, 7.62 × 39 mm — Folding-stock and shortened version of the
       AKM intended for airborne troops. Stock is under-folding and barrel
       is 35 cm long
     * AK-74 series, 5.45 × 39 mm — See main article for details.
     * AK-101 series
     * AK-103 series
     * AK-107/108 series

   In 1978, the Soviet Union began replacing their AK-47 and AKM rifles
   with a newer design, the AK-74. This new rifle and cartridge had only
   started being exported to eastern European nations when the Soviet
   Union collapsed, drastically slowing production of this and all other
   small arms.

Production outside of Russia

   Polish kbk AK/pmK with Type 3A receiver
   Enlarge
   Polish kbk AK/pmK with Type 3A receiver
   Polish kbk AKS with Type 3B receiver
   Enlarge
   Polish kbk AKS with Type 3B receiver
   Polish kbk Ak PNG60 variant, with grenade launcher and special-purpose
   magazine for grenade launching blank cartridges. Type 3A receiver
   Enlarge
   Polish kbk Ak PNG60 variant, with grenade launcher and special-purpose
   magazine for grenade launching blank cartridges. Type 3A receiver
   Hungarian AMD-65 with 14 inch barrel, side-folding stock and muzzle
   brake
   Enlarge
   Hungarian AMD-65 with 14 inch barrel, side-folding stock and muzzle
   brake

   Military variants only. If no link is provided, the difference is in
   name only, and all features and functions are identical to the Soviet
   equivalent model in parentheses. Summary of information presented in
   Poyer's The AK-47 and AK-74 Kalashnikov Rifles and Their Variations.
   Country Variant(s)
   Albania Unknown.
   Bulgaria AKK (Type 3 AK-47), AKKS (Type 3 with side-folding buttstock)
   AKKMS (AKMS) AKKN-47 (fittings for NPSU night sights)
   AK-47M1 (Type 3 with black polymer furniture)
   AK-47MA1/AR-M1 (same as M1, but in 5.56 mm NATO)
   AKS-47M1 (AKMS in 5.56 mm NATO), AKS-47MA1 (same as AKS-47M1, but
   semi-automatic only)
   AKS-47S (AK-47M1, short version, with East German folding stock, laser
   aiming device)
   AKS-47UF (short version of -M1, Russian folding stock), AR-SF (same as
   -47UF, but 5.56 mm NATO)
   AKS-93SM6 (similar to -47M1, cannot use grenade launcher)
   RKKS, AKT-47 (.22 rimfire training rifle)
   East Germany MPi-K (AK-47), MPi-KS (AKS), MPi-KM (AKM), MPi-KMS72
   (AKMS);
   Egypt AK-47, MISR 7.62 (AKM), Maadi
   Hungary AKM-63, AMD-65, AMD-65M, AMMSZ, AMP, NGM 5.56
   Iraq Tabuk (M70B1, and M70AB2)
   Tabuk sniper rifle (M70B1 with 23.6-inch barrel, optics, different
   stock)
   North Korea Type 58A (Type 3 AK-47), Type 58B (stamped steel folding
   stock), Type 68A (AKM-47) Type 68B (AKMS)
   China Type 56 Rifle (not Carbine), Type 81, Type 87
   Poland kbk AK/pmK (AK-47), kbk AKS (AKS), kbk Ak PNG60, kbk AKM (AKM),
   kbK AKMS), kbk wz. 88 Tantal (AK-74 with special side-folding stock),
   kbk wz. 96 Beryl
   Romania AI (AK-47), AIS (AKS), AIM, AIMS (AKM, AKMS), AIR
   Yugoslavia M70, M70A, M70AB2 M64 (AK-47 with longer barrel), M64A
   (grenade launcher)

   M64B (M70 w/ folding stock)

   Certainly more have been produced elsewhere, but the above list
   represents major producers and variants. An updated AKM design is still
   produced in Russia.

   The basic design of the AK-47 has been used as the basis for other
   successful rifle designs such as the Finnish Valmet 62/76 and Sako Rk
   95 TP, the Israeli Galil, the Indian INSAS and the Yugoslav Zastava M76
   and M77/82 (not to be confused with the Barrett M82) rifles. Several
   bullpup designs have surfaced, although none have been produced in
   quantity. Bullpup conversions are also available commercially. For a
   complete list, see the List of weapons influenced by the Kalashnikov
   design.

Licensing

   Russia has repeatedly claimed that the majority of these manufacturers
   produce AK-47 without a proper license from IZH. The Izhevsk Machine
   Tool Factory acquired a patent in 1999, preventing (in theory) the
   unauthorized manufacture of the Kalashnikov rifle system by anyone.

Legal status

In the United States

   Private ownership of fully-automatic AK-47 rifles is tightly regulated
   by the National Firearms Act (NFA) of 1934. The Gun Control Act of 1968
   ceased importing of foreign-manufactured fully-automatic firearms for
   civilian sales and possession, effectively halting further importation
   of civilian accessible AK-47 rifles. In 1986, an amendment to the
   Firearm Owners Protection Act stopped all future domestic manufacture
   of fully-automatic weapons for civilian use.

   However, machine guns manufactured domestically prior to 1986 and
   imported prior to 1968 may be transferred between civilians in
   accordance with federal and state law. Several Soviet and Chinese
   rifles made it into the U.S. during the mid-1960s, when returning
   Vietnam veterans brought them home after capture from enemy troops.
   Many of these were properly registered during the 1968 NFA amnesty.

   Nevertheless, several states have laws on their books outlawing private
   possession of fully-automatic firearms even with NFA approval. Certain
   semi-automatic AK-47 models were banned by the now-expired Assault
   Weapons Ban of 1994–2004.

In Canada

   In Canada on January 1 1995, a new class of prohibited weapons was
   created (class 12.5) that included the AK-47 and its variants. This
   classification makes the AK-47 and its variants ordinarily illegal for
   purchase, acquisition, or import. Exceptions to this are the Valmet
   Hunter, the Valmet Hunter Auto, and the Valmet M78 rifles which are
   based on the AK-47 action. Individuals in Canada who possessed firearms
   in the 12.5 class prior to January 1 1995 were "grandfathered" into
   this class and thus can continue to acquire and possess the AK-47 and
   its variants.

In Europe

   Much of Western Europe has enacted comprehensive national firearms laws
   which prevent the lawful ownership of AK-47s or variants thereof. The
   United Kingdom, for instance, has outlawed, through the Firearms
   (Amendment) Act 1988, semi-automatic centerfire rifles (See Gun
   politics in the United Kingdom for more complete information). It is
   possible to own AK derivatives in the UK provided they have been
   produced as "Manual Straight Pull" rifles which need to be manually
   cocked after each shot. This involves a modification to the weapon to
   essentially remove the gas system by permanently closing the gas port
   above the barrel (may also involve the removal of the gas piston).

   In Norway it is forbidden for civilians to possess any form of fully
   automatic firearm unless a special permit is issued. Similar laws are
   in force throughout most of Europe. Fully automatic weapons are either
   explicitly or effectively outlawed in almost all of North America and
   Europe, as well as Russia, Japan, and Australia.

In Australia

   In Australia, the purchase of semi-automatic centerfire rifles has been
   effectively banned since 1996 (See Gun politics in Australia for more
   information), and therefore AK-47 rifles, even in semi-automatic form,
   are not allowed. However, as the 1996 laws covered only high-capacity
   magazines, shotguns and rifles, AK-47s in pistol configurations remain
   legal for purchase in Australia.

In Mexico

   In Mexico, its possession is of the exclusive use of the Mexican
   National Army. The federal firearms and explosives law prohibits the
   civilian possession of this category of weapon in its Article 11.
   However, the AK-47, known as cuerno de chivo (Spanish for "goat's
   horn"), is widely used by criminal organizations.

Illicit trade

   Throughout the world, the AK-47 and variants are among the plethora of
   commonly smuggled small arms that are sold to governments, rebels,
   criminals and civilians alike, with little international oversight.
   This trade ensures a ready supply of inexpensive weapons to a number of
   conflicts, including (but certainly not limited to) the Balkans, Iraq,
   Afghanistan, and Somalia. In some countries that are recovering from
   war or that are at war, prices for AKs are very low. In Somalia,
   Rwanda, Mozambique, Congo and Ethiopia, among others, prices are
   between $30–$125.

Cultural influence

   Coat of arms of Mozambique, showing an AK-47.
   Enlarge
   Coat of arms of Mozambique, showing an AK-47.

   During the Cold War, the Soviet Union, China and the United States
   supplied arms and technical knowledge to numerous client-state
   countries and rebel forces to promote their interests. This period saw
   the proliferation, sometimes free of charge, of AK-47s by the Soviet
   Union and China to pro-communist countries and groups such as the
   Nicaraguan Sandinistas and Viet-Cong. The AK-47 design was spread to a
   total of 55 national armies.

   The proliferation of this weapon is reflected by more than just
   numbers. The AK-47 is included in the flag of Mozambique and its coat
   of arms. It is also found in coat of arms of Burkina Faso and the flag
   of Hezbollah. " Kalash", a shortened form of " Kalashnikov", is used as
   a name for boys in some African countries.

   In the U.S., movie makers often arm criminals, gang members and
   terrorist characters with AK-47s (e.g. films like Boyz N The Hood).
   Numerous computer games, video games, and rap songs feature AK-47s. Toy
   makers and the airsoft industry make millions of replica AK-47s.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AK-47"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
