   #copyright

Akkadian Empire

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Ancient History,
Classical History and Mythology

     Ancient Mesopotamia
   Euphrates – Tigris
   Assyriology
       Cities / Empires
   Sumer: Uruk – Ur – Eridu
   Kish – Lagash – Nippur
   Akkadian Empire: Akkad
   Babylon – Isin – Susa
   Assyria: Assur – Nineveh
   Dur-Sharrukin – Nimrud
   Babylonia – Chaldea
   Elam – Amorites
   Hurrians – Mitanni
   Kassites – Urartu
          Chronology
   Kings of Sumer
   Kings of Assyria
   Kings of Babylon
           Language
   Cuneiform script
   Sumerian – Akkadian
   Elamite – Hurrian
          Mythology
   Enûma Elish
   Gilgamesh – Marduk

   The Akkadian Empire usually refers to the Semitic speaking state that
   grew up around the city of Akkad north of Sumer, and reached its
   greatest extent under Sargon of Akkad. Although ascertaining exact
   dates during this period is subject to significant disagreement, the
   Akkadian Empire lasted from circa 2350 BC to 2150 BC—approximately 200
   years.

History

   Rulers with Semitic names had already established themselves at Kish.
   One of them, contemporary with the last Sumerian ruler, Lugal-Zage-Si,
   was Alusarsid (or Urumus) who "subdued Elam and Barahs." But the fame
   of these early establishers of Semitic supremacy was far eclipsed by
   that of Sargon (Sharru-kin), who defeated and captured Lugal-Zage-Si,
   conquering his empire. A lengthy inscription of Sargon's son,
   Manishtushu, was discovered at Susa by J. de Morgan. The date of Sargon
   is placed by modern scholars around 2300 BC (although the later
   "archaeologist king" of Babylonia, Nabonidus, calculated it at 3800
   BC).

   Sargon was the son of La'ibum or Itti-Bel, and one legend related how
   he had been born in concealment and set adrift in an ark of bulrushes
   on the waters of the Euphrates. Here he was rescued and brought up by
   "Akki the husbandman"; but the day arrived at length when his true
   origin became known. Originally a cupbearer to a king of Kish with a
   Semitic name, Ur Zababa, the crown was set upon Sargon's head, and he
   entered upon a career of foreign conquest. Four times he invaded Syria
   and Canaan, and spent three years thoroughly subduing the countries of
   "the west" to unite them with Mesopotamia "into a single empire."

   Images of Sargon were erected on the shores of the Mediterranean in
   token of his victories, and cities and palaces were built at home with
   the spoils of the conquered lands. Elam and the northern part of
   Mesopotamia were also subjugated, and rebellions were put down Sumer
   itself. Contract tablets have been found dated in the years of the
   campaigns against Canaan and Sarlak, king of Gutium nowadays North
   Iraq; and copper is mentioned as being brought from Magan (probably
   modern Oman).

   Sargon's two sons and successors, Rimush and Manishtushu, were not so
   illustrious, and both were assassinated; but his grandson, Naram-Sin,
   followed up the earlier successes by marching into Magan, whose king he
   took captive. He assumed the imperial title of "King Naram-Sin, of the
   four quarters", and, like his grandfather, was addressed as "the god of
   Agade" (Akkad), reminiscent of the divine honours claimed by the
   Pharaohs of Egypt.

Culture

Art

   A bas relief representing Naram-Sin, and bearing a striking resemblance
   to early Egyptian art in many of its features, has been found at
   Diarbekr, in modern Turkey. Babylonian art, however, had already
   attained a high degree of excellence; two cylinder seals of the time of
   Sargon are among the most beautiful specimens of the gem-cutter's art
   ever discovered.

Achievements

   The empire was bound together by roads, along which there was a regular
   postal service. Clay seals that took the place of stamps bear the names
   of Sargon and his son. A cadastral survey seems also to have been
   instituted, and one of the documents relating to it states that a
   certain Uru-Malik, whose name appears to indicate his Canaanite origin,
   was governor of the land of the Amorites, or Amurru as the semi-
   nomadic people of Syria and Canaan were called in Akkadian. It is
   probable that the first collection of astronomical observations and
   terrestrial omens was made for a library established by Sargon.

Collapse

   Naram-Sin recorded the Akkadian's wars against the Armani or Armeni
   people in Ararat. The Armeni is a reference to Armen who was the ruler
   of the Armenian tribe (Armen's followers, the Armenians [Uraštu in
   Akkadian language], were referred to as Armeni or Armens at the time).
   It is also unknown if Sargon, grandfather of Naram-Sin, and
   Manishtushu, father of Naram-Sin, also fought against the Armeni people
   of Ararat during their rule of the Akkadian Empire. It is highly
   probable however considering that Naram-Sin recorded multiple wars with
   the Armeni people of Ararat.

   It is still unknown at this time if the wars with the Armeni people of
   Ararat contributed to the collapse of the Akkadian kingdom. However,
   the Akkadian Empire was already starting to crumble during
   Shar-kali-sharri's reign, the son of Naram-Sin, and by the end of
   Shar-kali-sharri's reign, the Akkadian Empire collapsed outright from
   the invasion of barbarians of the Zagros known as " Gutians".

After the Akkadian Empire

   The fall of the empire established by Sargon seems to have been as
   sudden as its rise, and little is known about the Gutian period. From
   the fall of Akkad until around 2100 BC, there is much that is still
   dark. A relatively well known king from that period is Gudea, king of
   Lagash.

   The period between ca. 2100 BC and 2000 BC is sometimes called the 3rd
   dynasty of Ur or "Sumerian Renaissance", founded by Ur-Nammu
   (originally a general). Though documents again began to be written in
   Sumerian, this dynasty may actually have been Semitic; Sumerian was
   becoming a dead language, much as Latin later would be in Medieval
   Europe. The power of these kings extended to the Mediterranean.

   After the fall of the Ur III dynasty owing to an Elamite invasion in
   2004 BC, Mesopotamia passed under foreign influence. This period is
   called Old Babylonian, and lasted from ca. 2000 BC until 1595 BC.
   During the first centuries of this period, kings and people in high
   position often had Amorite names, and supreme power rested at Isin. The
   city of Babylon was given hegemony over Mesopotamia by king Hammurabi
   1792 BC - 1750 BC(dates highly uncertain).
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Akkadian_Empire"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
