   #copyright

Albania

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; European
Countries

   SOS Children works in Albania. For more information see SOS Children in
   Albania
           Republika e Shqipërisë
   Republic of Albania

   Flag of Albania Coat of arms of Albania
   Flag            Coat of arms
   Anthem: Hymni i Flamurit
   ("Hymn to the Flag")
   Location of Albania
   Capital
   (and largest city) Tirana
                      41°20′N 19°48′E
   Official languages Albanian
   Government         Emerging democracy
    - President       Alfred Moisiu
    - Prime Minister  Sali Berisha
      Independence    From Ottoman Empire
    - Date            November 28, 1912
                     Area
    - Total           28 748 km² ( 139th)
                      11,100 sq mi
    - Water (%)       4.7%
                  Population
    - 2006 estimate   3,581,655 ( 134th)
    - Density         123/km²/km² ( 63)
                      318.6/sq mi
       GDP ( PPP)     2005 estimate
    - Total           $16.9 billion ( 112th)
    - Per capita      $5,405 ( 100th)
      HDI  (2003)     0.780 (medium) ( 72nd)
        Currency      Lek ( ALL)
       Time zone      CET ( UTC+1)
    - Summer ( DST)   CEST ( UTC+2)
      Internet TLD    .al
      Calling code    +355

   The Republic of Albania ( Albanian: Republika e Shqipërisë, IPA
   [ɾɛˈpubliˌka ɛ ˌʃcipəˈɾis]) is a Balkan country in Southeastern Europe.
   It borders Montenegro to the north, Serbia to the northeast, the
   Republic of Macedonia in the east, and Greece in the south. It has a
   coast on the Adriatic Sea to the west and a coast on the Ionian Sea to
   the southwest. Despite having a troubled history, the country has been
   classified as an emerging democracy since the 1990s.

History

   Illyria
   Enlarge
   Illyria

Prehistory

   Many historians believe Albanians to be the direct descendants of
   Illyrians. Some, however, disagree over the origin of the Illyrians.
   Some maintain that the Illyrians descended from the Pelasgians while
   other scholars place them in the later wave of Indo-European invasions.
   Their presence can be traced back to the formulation of their political
   structure in the 7th and 6th centuries BC. Excellent metal craftsmen
   and fierce warriors, the Illyrians formed warlord-based kingdoms that
   fought amongst themselves for most of their history. Only during the
   6th century BC did the Illyrians venture significant raids against
   their immediate neighbours: the kingdom of the Molossians in southern
   Albania, the kingdom of Macedon, and the kingdom of Paionia.

   The lands that are today inhabited by Albanians were first populated in
   the Paleolithic Age (Stone Age), over 100,000 years ago. The first
   zones that were initially settled were those with adequate geographical
   conditions. In Albania, the earliest settlements have been discovered
   in the Gajtan cavern (Shkodra), in Konispol, at mount Dajti, and at
   Xara (Saranda). Primitive peoples lived in secluded groups, mainly in
   dry caves that would also protect from the wind. They used stones and
   bones as their tools. Places such as caverns and terrains close to
   rivers were used to work on stone. In any case, the tools from this age
   were simple and created primarily from stone. Paleolithic peoples fed
   on collected products from plants and hunted wild animals. Because of
   the harsh conditions that they lived in, they had a short lifespan of
   around 21-30 years, with higher youth mortality. The fight against
   harsh living conditions led to strengthened connections among the
   members of each group and in a change of organization of primitive
   peoples. At the end of the Paleolithic Age, the primitives transformed
   into a grouping among bloodlines where the origins were traced to the
   mother. Thus a matriarchal society developed, which became common in
   later periods in the Neolithic age ( New Stone Age). The inhabitation
   of Albanian lands increased in the Neolithic age. People began to
   abandon caverns and settle in open areas. Neolithic people were more
   prone to build their settlements in open fields or next to rivers. A
   large number of such settlements are discovered in Albania, Kosovo,
   Montenegro, and the Republic of Macedonia.

   Aboriginals gradually developed stable settlements and started an
   agricultural economy. They knew how to plant barley, millet, and rice.
   This was associated with the development of matriarchy and this epoch
   saw the beginning of paired marriages.

Aboriginal discoveries

   Among the most prominent inventions during the Paleolithic Age was the
   discovery of fire, which aided ancient inhabitants in cooking food and
   provided warmth. The cooking of food by fire brought qualitative
   changes to the digestive organs of humans. Economic changes and social
   organization of the epoch influenced other technical inventions. Humans
   learned to work with mud and make utensils, which were frequently
   artistically decorated. They also learned to work with fabric and build
   huts made of canes and layered with mud for protection against the
   wind. Tools in the Neolithic epoch were far superior to those of
   earlier times.

   A bonanza of new tools were invented. Spades for working the land and
   hammers were made out of deer horns. Fishing increased and was improved
   with the creation of fishing nets and hooks. Tools for hunting wild
   animals were also invented or refined. The economy was further expanded
   with the taming of wild animals. Although primitive, hunting enabled
   people of this epoch to tame the sheep, goat, horse, and dog. All of
   these circumstances forced the connection of generic groups, improved
   connections with other groups and stimulated exchanges even in far away
   regions. In the Bronze Age, 3000-2100 B.C., new changes came about. The
   stockbreeding and agricultural economies separated, enabling specific
   groups to master either stockbreeding or agriculture. Shepherds were
   more nomadic and began to live again in caves. New settlements were
   founded and people began to build settlements next to rivers, with the
   foundations being in the rivers. Tools were now made from bronze and
   sparked a variety of new techniques. Domesticated animals helped to
   cultivate the land. The stockbreeding economy gave an advantage to men
   and the matriarchal system began to weaken. This epoch produced the
   patriarchal system, which was further strengthened in the Iron age.

Pelasgians

   The Bronze Age is characterized with shifting demographics.
   Stockbreeding people came from the east around the mid 3000s B.C. to
   the early 2000s B.C.. They mixed with the indigenous peoples and thus
   created the Indo-European peoples of the Balkans. This population is
   believed to be the ancient Pelasgians, which have been mentioned
   frequently by ancient writers such as Homer, Herodotus, and Thucydides.
   The Pelasgians are known as the most ancient inhabitants of the Balkan
   Peninsula, living before Illyrian or Greek times. From their first
   appearance in the region, the Pelasgians adopted a matriarchal system.
   Several different opinions arise when their ethnicity is analyzed. From
   the 17th century, specifically from the Albanian Rilindja (Rebirth),
   the theory that the Pelasgian language was connected with Albanian was
   dominant among Albanian and foreign researchers. The most active
   supporter of this theory was Austrian linguist Hahn.

   The differentiation of populations by ethnicity began during the Bronze
   Age. Herodotus, an ancient Greek historian in the 5th century B.C.,
   writes about the Pelasgians that continued to live in Greece. According
   to him, the language of the Pelasgians was different from Greek. They
   dealt with agriculture and the sea and were excellent builders. The
   Pelasgians built the wall around the Acropolis of Athens and were
   rewarded with lands in Attica by the Athenians. These worthless lands
   were turned into excellent agricultural resources by the Pelasgians.

Illyrians

   The Illyrians created and developed their culture, language and
   anthropological features in the western part of the Balkans, where
   ancient writers mention them in their works. The regions that the
   Illyrians inhabited are considerably expansive. They include the entire
   western peninsula, north to central Europe, south to the Ambracian Gulf
   (Preveza, Greece), and east around the Lyhind Lake ( Ohrid Lake). Other
   Illyrian tribes also migrated and developed in Italy. Among them were
   the Messapii and Iapyges. The name 'Illyria' is mentioned in works
   since the 5th century B.C. while some tribe names are mentioned as
   early as the 12th century B.C. by Homer. The ethnic formation of the
   Illyrians, however, is much older.

   The beginning of Illyrian origins in by the 15th century B.C., from the
   mid-Bronze Age, when Illyrian ethnic features began to form. By the
   Iron Age, the Illyrians were fully distinct and had inherited their
   developing anthropological features and language from the Neolithic and
   Bronze ages. The old theory that the Illyrians came from Central Europe
   during the 7th-9th centuries has been disproved and disbanded by
   studies performed following World War II. The fact that graves with
   urns, characteristic of Central Europe, are not found in Illyrian
   settlements severely damage the theory. Central European influence on
   the Illyrians is a result of cultural exchanges and movement of
   artisans.

Roman and Byzantine rule

   After being conquered by the Roman Empire, Illyria was reorganized as a
   Roman province. Illyricum was later divided into the provinces of
   Dalmatia and Pannonia, the lands comprising modern-day Albania mostly
   being included in the former. After the fall of the Western Roman
   Empire, the Byzantine Empire governed the region. It was also ruled by
   the Bulgarian and the Serbian Empire at various points in the Middle
   Ages.

Ottoman rule

   In the Middle Ages, the name Albania (see Origin and history of the
   name Albania) began to be increasingly applied to the region now
   comprising the nation of Albania. From 1443 to 1468 Gjergj Kastrioti
   Skanderbeg led a successful resistance against the invading Ottomans.
   After the death of Skanderbeg, resistance continued until 1478,
   although with only moderate success. The loyalties and alliances
   created and nurtured by Skanderbeg faltered and fell apart, and the
   Ottomans conquered the territory of Albania shortly after the fall of
   Kruje's castle. Albania then became part of the Ottoman Empire.
   Following this, many Albanians fled to neighboring Italy, mostly to
   Calabria and Sicily. The majority of the Albanian population that
   remained converted to Islam. They would remain a part of the Ottoman
   Empire until 1912.
   Statue of Gjergj Kastrioti Skanderbeg. Skanderbeg is considered the
   national hero of Albania.
   Enlarge
   Statue of Gjergj Kastrioti Skanderbeg. Skanderbeg is considered the
   national hero of Albania.

Effects of the Balkan Wars

   After the Second Balkan War, the Ottomans were removed from Albania and
   there was a possibility of some of the lands being absorbed by Serbia
   and the southern tip by Greece. This decision angered the Italians, who
   did not want Serbia to have an extended coastline, and it also angered
   the Austro-Hungarians, who did not want a powerful Serbia on their
   southern border. Despite Serbian, Montenegrin, and Greek occupation
   forces on the ground, and under immense pressure from Austria-Hungary,
   it was decided that the country should not be divided but instead
   consolidated into the Principality of Albania. From 1928, the country
   was ruled by Ahmet Zogu, who renamed himself King Zog I.

World War II and Enver Hoxha rule

   Enver Hoxha
   Enlarge
   Enver Hoxha

   Italy invaded Albania on 7 April 1939, meeting little resistance, and
   took control of the country. Albanian communists and nationalists
   actively fought a partisan war against the Italian and German invasions
   in World War II. The socialists (most often called communists) took
   over after World War II. In November 1944 the communists gained control
   of the government under the leader of the resistance, Enver Hoxha. The
   Communist Party was created on November 8, 1941 with the help of
   Bolshevik Communist Parties.

   For the many decades under his totalitarian domination, Hoxha created
   and destroyed relationships with Yugoslavia, the Soviet Union, and
   China. Towards the end of the Hoxha era, Albania was isolated, first
   from the capitalist West (Western Europe, North America and
   Australasia) and later even from the communist East.

The fall of communism, and democratic Albania

   In 1985, Hoxha died and Ramiz Alia took his place. Initially, Alia
   tried hard to follow in Hoxha's footsteps, but in Eastern Europe
   changes had already started: Mikhail Gorbachev had appeared in the
   Soviet Union with new policies ( glasnost and perestroika). The
   Albanian totalitarian regime was under pressure from the United States,
   Europe, and the anger and despair of its own people. After Nicolae
   Ceauşescu, the communist leader of Romania, was executed in a
   revolution in 1989, Alia signed the United Nations Helsinki Agreement,
   which had already been signed by many other countries in 1975, that
   respected some human rights. He also allowed pluralism, and even though
   his party won the election of 1991, it was clear that change would not
   be stopped. In 1992 general elections were held again and won by the
   new Democratic Party with 62% of the votes. Alia resigned and Sali
   Berisha was the first post-communist president elected.

   In the general elections of June 1996 the Democratic Party tried to win
   an absolute majority and manipulated the results , winning over 85% of
   parliamentary seats. In 1997 an epidemic of pyramid schemes sent
   shockwaves through the entire country's economy, which resulted in
   widespread riots. Police stations and military bases were looted of
   millions of Kalashnikovs and other weapons. Anarchy prevailed, and
   militia and even less-organized armed citizens controlled many cities.
   Even American military advisors left the country for their own safety.
   The government of Aleksander Meksi resigned and a government of
   national unity was built. In response to the anarchy, the Socialist
   Party won the early elections of 1997 and Berisha resigned the
   Presidency.

   However, stability was far from being restored in the years after the
   1997 riots. The power feuds raging inside the Socialist Party led to a
   series of short-lived Socialist governments. The country was flooded
   with refugees from neighboring Kosovo in 1998 and 1999 during the
   Kosovo War. In June 2002, a compromise candidate, Alfred Moisiu, a
   former general, was elected to succeed President Rexhep Meidani.
   Parliamentary elections in July 2005 brought Sali Berisha, as leader of
   the Democratic Party, back to power, mostly owing to Socialist
   infighting and a series of corruption scandals plaguing the government
   of Fatos Nano.

   The Euro-Atlantic integration of Albania has been the ultimate goal of
   the post-communist governments. Albania's EU membership bid, along with
   the rest of the Western Balkans, has been set as a priority by the
   European Commission. On 2006 Albania signed a Stabilization and
   Association Agreement with the EU, thus completing the first major step
   towards joining the bloc. Albania, along with Croatia and Macedonia, is
   also expected to receive a NATO membership invitation within 2008.

   The workforce of Albania has continued to migrate to Greece, Italy,
   Germany and other parts of Europe, and North America. However, the
   migration flux is slowly decreasing, as more and more opportunities are
   emerging in Albania itself.

Geography

   Albania's Adriatic coastline
   Enlarge
   Albania's Adriatic coastline

   Albania consists of mostly hilly and mountainous terrain, with the
   highest mountain, Korab in the district of Dibra, reaching up to 2,753
   metres (9,032  ft). The country mostly has a continental climate with
   cold winters and hot summers. Besides the capital city of Tirana, which
   has 800,000 inhabitants, the principal cities are Durrës, Elbasan,
   Shkodër, Gjirokastër, Vlorë, Korçë and Kukës. In Albanian grammar, a
   word can have indefinite and definite forms, and this also applies to
   city names: both Tiranë and Tirana, Shkodër and Shkodra are used.

Demographics

   Unusual among Balkan nations, indeed anywhere in the world, Albania is
   a nearly homogeneous country with only small minorities. Most of the
   population, roughly 95%, is ethnically Albanian. Many ethnic Albanians
   also live in the bordering countries of Serbia, Montenegro, and the
   Republic of Macedonia. These amount to over 2,000,000; of that, about
   1,800,000 reside in Kosovo), 60,000 in Montenegro, and roughly 500,000
   live in the Republic of Macedonia (see Demographics of the Republic of
   Macedonia). Since 1991, large numbers of Albanians have emigrated to
   Greece, Italy, Germany, Switzerland and other European countries.

   The dominant language is Albanian. Many Albanians are also fluent in
   English, Greek and Italian. Albanians are mostly non-denominational
   believers. During the communist era religion was prohibited. Since that
   time Albania has been proclaimed as the only officially atheist country
   in the world, claiming the religion to be Albanianism. The most
   widely-practiced religions are Islam (70%), Albanian Orthodoxy (20%),
   Catholicism (10%), the percentages are estimates; there are no
   available current statistics on religious affiliation. Though small,
   other main religions of the world also have some representation in
   Albania. Religious fanaticism has never been a problem, with people
   from different religious groups living in peace and even
   inter-marrying. Intermarriage across religions is very common, and an
   immensely strong sense of Albanian identity has tended to bind
   Albanians of all religious practices together.

Economy

   A poor country by Western European standards, Albania is making the
   difficult transition to a more open-market economy. The collapse of
   communism in Albania came later, was more chaotic than in other east
   European countries, and was marked by a mass exodus of refugees to
   Italy and Greece in 1991 and 1992. Attempts at reform began in earnest
   in early 1992 after real GDP fell by more than 50% from its peak in
   1989.

   The democratically elected government that assumed office in April 1992
   launched an ambitious economic reform program to halt economic
   deterioration and put the country on the path toward a market economy.
   Key elements included price and exchange system liberalization, fiscal
   consolidation, monetary restraint, and a firm income policy. These were
   complemented by a comprehensive package of structural reforms,
   including privatization, enterprise, and financial sector reform, and
   creation of the legal framework for a market economy and private sector
   activity. As a result, GDP per capita expanded by a remarkable 85% in
   the nineties. Most prices were liberalized and are now at or near
   international levels. Most agriculture, state housing, and small
   industry were privatized. Progress continued in the privatization of
   transport, services, and small and medium-sized enterprises. In 1995,
   the government began privatizing large state enterprises.

   Despite many institutional and legislative problems, Tirana is
   committed to joining the EU. In June (July) 2006, the country signed a
   Stabilisation and Association Agreement as a first step toward joining
   the European Union. EU ministers urged Albania to push ahead with
   reforms, focusing on press freedom, property rights, institution
   building, respect for ethnic minorities and observing international
   standards in municipal elections.

   Albania is one of the poorest European states, with a GDP per capita
   half that of Bulgaria and almost one tenth that of the United Kingdom.
   It is poorly linked by road and rail to its neighbours and between its
   own cities. In Albania, half of the economically active population is
   engaged in agriculture and a fifth works abroad.

   Albania's coastline on the Ionian Sea, especially near the Greek
   tourist island of Corfu, is becoming increasingly popular with tourists
   due to its relatively unspoiled nature and its beaches. The tourism
   industry is still in its infancy but is growing rapidly.

Neighbouring countries

   Flag of Montenegro  Montenegro Flag of Serbia  Serbia
   Flag of Italy  Italy  Image:Template CanadianCityGeoLocation West.png
   Adriatic Sea North Republic of Macedonia  Republic of Macedonia
   West    Flag of Albania  Albania     East
   South
   Ionian Sea
   Mediterranean Sea Flag of Greece  Greece

   Countries of Europe

   Albania · Andorra · Armenia^1 · Austria · Azerbaijan^2 · Belarus ·
   Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus^1 ·
   Czech Republic · Denmark · Estonia · Finland · France · Georgia^2 ·
   Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy · Kazakhstan^2 ·
   Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Republic of Macedonia
   · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands · Norway · Poland
   · Portugal · Romania · Russia^2 · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia ·
   Slovenia · Spain · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey^2 · Ukraine · United
   Kingdom · Vatican City

   (1) Entirely in Asia but having socio-political connections with
   Europe. (2) Has significant territory in Asia.
   Countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea

   Albania • Algeria • Bosnia and Herzegovina • Croatia • Cyprus • Egypt •
   France • Greece • Israel • Italy • Lebanon • Libya • Malta • Monaco •
   Montenegro • Morocco • Slovenia • Spain • Syria • Tunisia • Turkey

   For dependent and other territories, see Dependent territory and List
   of unrecognized countries.
   Countries on the Adriatic Sea

   Flag of Albania  Albania • Flag of Bosnia and Herzegovina  Bosnia and
   Herzegovina • Flag of Croatia  Croatia • Flag of Italy  Italy • Flag of
   Montenegro  Montenegro • Flag of Slovenia  Slovenia
   Black Sea Economic Cooperation

   Albania • Armenia • Azerbaijan • Bulgaria • Georgia • Greece • Moldova
   • Romania • Russia • Serbia • Turkey • Ukraine
   Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC)
   Flag of the OIC

   Afghanistan • Albania • Algeria • Azerbaijan • Bahrain • Bangladesh •
   Benin • Burkina Faso • Brunei • Cameroon • Chad • Comoros •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Djibouti • Egypt • Gabon • Gambia • Guinea •
   Guinea-Bissau • Guyana • Indonesia • Iran • Iraq • Jordan • Kuwait •
   Kazakhstan • Kyrgyzstan • Lebanon • Libya • Maldives • Malaysia •
   Mali • Mauritania • Morocco • Mozambique • Niger • Nigeria • Oman •
   Pakistan • State of Palestine • Qatar • Saudi Arabia • Senegal •
   Sierra Leone • Somalia • Sudan • Surinam • Syria • Tajikistan •
   Turkey • Tunisia • Togo • Turkmenistan • Uganda • Uzbekistan •
   United Arab Emirates • Yemen

   Observer countries: Bosnia and Herzegovina • Central African Republic •
   Russia • Thailand • Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus

   Observer Muslim organizations and communities:
   Moro National Liberation Front

   Observer international organizations:
   Economic Cooperation Organization • Organisation of African Unity •
   League of Arab States • Non-Aligned Movement • United Nations
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albania"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
