   #copyright

Albrecht Rodenbach

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Writers and critics

   Albrecht Rodenbach statute in Roeselare, Belgium
   Enlarge

              Albrecht Rodenbach statute in Roeselare, Belgium

   Albrecht Rodenbach (* 27 October 1856 in Roeselare, Belgium; † 23 June
   1880 in Roeselare) was a Flemish poet, and a leader in the revival of
   Flemish literature that occurred in the late 19th Century.

   Rodenbach was born into a bourgeois family, the eldest of 10 children
   and cousin to the novelist Georges Rodenbach. Albrecht Rodenbach’s
   father was Julius Rodenbach (1824-1915) from the Rhineland, and his
   mother was Silvia de la Houttre (1834-1899). Although his mother was a
   Walloon from Doornik, she had adopted the Dutch spoken in Roeselare.

   Rodenbach attended the small catholic seminary in Roeselare where he
   was exposed to the ideas of the Flemish movement by Hugo Verriest and
   others. Rodenbach was also influenced at this time by Guido Gezelle. In
   the 1874-1875 school year, this led to a conflict between the Flemish
   students and the school’s francophile director. At the annual songfest
   the students traditionally sang French songs, Rodenbach led the protest
   and the predominately Dutch speaking students sang a protest song in
   Dutch. This protest led to similar protests all over Belgium. Despite
   this and other activist activities, Rodenbach graduated with a first in
   rhetoric in 1876.

   At the University of Leuven he met the poet Pol de Mont who was a year
   older. Together they sought to promote a Flemish artistic revival and
   equal rights for Flemish students as a student movement, creating the
   “Algemene Vlaamse Studentenbond” (All Flemish Student Association) in
   1876. Among their objectives were to have classes in Dutch and to have
   classes include Flemish culture. The association’s illustrated magazine
   Het Pennoen (The Pennant) published Rodenbach’s essays anonymously.
   Rodenbach maintained his contacts in Roeselare through a committee of
   correspondence. Their ideology was a mixture of the philosophy Guido
   Gezelle, with the romantic nationalism of Hendrik Conscience, and the
   righteousness of true belief. Additionally Rodenbach made contacts with
   the Flemish liberals, poet Jan van Beers and author Max Rooses.

   In 1876 Rodenbach published some essays under the pseudonym “Harold”.
   His book Eerste Gedichten (First Poems) was published in 1878. The rest
   of his work, including his verse play Gudrun, a dramatized epic of the
   Vikings, was not published until after his death.

   Rodenbach died before his 24th birthday, and almost immediately became
   the pre-eminent symbol of the Flemish student movement. On Rodenbach’s
   death, Pol de Mont took over the leadership of the “Algemene Vlaamse
   Studentenbond”.

   Rodenbach was known at the time of his death for his songs, poems and
   tonal-works which have remained inspiring symbols for the Flemish
   movement. He was the inspiration for Hendrik Conscience’s novel Kerels
   van Vlaanderen. Flandria Film made a film about him in 1930 entitled
   Albrecht Rodenbach and directed by Clemens De Landtsheer.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albrecht_Rodenbach"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
