   #copyright

All your base are belong to us

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Websites and the Internet

   "All your base are belong to us" (often shortened to "All Your Base" or
   simply AYB) is an " Engrish" phrase that sparked an Internet phenomenon
   in 2001 and 2002. The text is taken from the opening cut scene of the
   English version of the 1989 Japanese video game Zero Wing by Toaplan.
   Its brief but intense popularity derived in part from its poor
   translation into English and partly from its near-accidental adoption
   by a core group of Internet humorists. While the wildfire has died
   down, "All Your Base" is still a well-known reference among gamers and
   programmers.

Transcripts and translations

Transcript

   The cut scene transcript goes as follows:

          Narrator: In A.D. 2101, war was beginning.

          Captain: What happen ?
          Mechanic: Somebody set up us the bomb.

                (spoken in the Flash animation as Someone set up us the
                bomb)

          Operator: We get signal.
          Captain: What !
          Operator: Main screen turn on.
          Captain: It's you !!
          CATS: How are you gentlemen !!
          CATS: All your base are belong to us.
          CATS: You are on the way to destruction.
          Captain: What you say !!
          CATS: You have no chance to survive make your time.
          CATS: Ha Ha Ha Ha ....

                (spoken in the Flash animation as Ha Ha Ha)

          Operator: Captain !! *
          Captain: Take off every 'Zig' !!
          Captain: You know what you doing.
          Captain: Move 'Zig'.
          Captain: For great justice.

          * This line and those following it are not in some animated
          GIF/Flash versions seen on the Internet. They may also be
          included within the song lyrics of the animated Flash movie.

Original Japanese text

   The bluntness of the famous mistranslation is in stark contrast to
   CATS's cool, caustic irony in the original text. The difference is
   especially vivid in the line corresponding to "All your base are belong
   to us." In the original line, CATS uses a form of Japanese grammar that
   is rude to the listeners but respectful towards the Federation army.
   Since the Federation army was presumably an ally of the Captain, this
   usage is particularly offensive but might be sarcastic. It suggests
   that the Federation army was treacherously co-opted into betraying the
   bases.

   It also appears from the original text that CATS may be the name of an
   organization, not just of the particular cyborg villain appearing on
   the screen (as is the popular interpretation among English speakers.)

   Please note: You may need to have Japanese character sets installed on
   your computer for proper display.

          西暦２１０１年
          戦いは始まった。

          艦長：一体どうしたと言うんだ！
          機関士：何者かによって、爆発物が仕掛けられたようです。
          通信士：艦長！通信が入りました！
          艦長：なにっ！
          通信士：メインスクリーンにビジョンが来ます。
          艦長：おっお前は！
          ＣＡＴＳ：おいそがしそうだね、諸君。
          ＣＡＴＳ：連邦政府軍のご協力により、君達の基地は、全てＣＡＴＳがいただいた。
          ＣＡＴＳ：君達の艦も、そろそろ終わりだろう。
          艦長：ばっばかなっ・・・！
          ＣＡＴＳ：君達のご協力には感謝する。
          ＣＡＴＳ：せいぜい残り少ない命を、大切にしたまえ・・・・。
          ＣＡＴＳ：ハッハッハッハッハッ・・・
          通信士：艦長・・・。
          艦長：ＺＩＧ全機に発進命令！！
          艦長：もう彼らに託すしかない・・。
          艦長：我々の未来に希望を・・・
          艦長：たのむぞ。ＺＩＧ！！

Literal translation

          AD 2101
          War began.

          (Explosion goes off)
          Captain: What on earth is wrong, you say?!
          Engineer: It seems that someone has laid down explosives.
          Communication operator: Captain! A signal has come in!
          Captain: What!?
          Communication operator: A vision comes on the main screen.
          Captain: Y-You!
          CATS: You seem busy, gentlemen.
          CATS: In cooperation with the Federal Government forces, CATS
          has taken over every last one of your bases.
          CATS: I guess it will soon be the end of your ship as well, huh.
          Captain: Y-You fool! ["How could you..."]...!
          CATS: Thank you for your cooperation.
          CATS: Take care in these few remaining moments of your life.
          CATS: Ha Ha Ha Ha Ha...
          Communication operator: Captain....
          Captain: All ZIG aircraft, take off!!
          Captain: We cannot but trust in them...
          Captain: Hope for our future...
          Captain: is in your hands. ZIG!!

Alternative "free text" translation

   The following is a "free text" translation of the original Japanese. It
   is not intended to translate the exact wording of the original, but
   rather an attempt to capture the spirit and tone which the author
   intended.

          A.D. 2101—The war has begun.

          Captain: What was that?!
          Chief Engineer: Somebody set off a bomb!
          Operator: Captain! We have an incoming transmission!
          Captain: What? Who?
          Operator: Activating Holoviewer...
          Captain: You! You're...
          CATS (with sarcasm): You seem to be preoccupied, gentlemen.
          CATS: With the kind cooperation of the Federation forces, we
          [CATS] are now in control of Earth! (some suggest the intent was
          that the entire empire was taken over)
          CATS: Your ship, too, will soon meet its end.
          Captain: What do you mean?
          CATS: We thank you for your kind cooperation.
          CATS: Make the most of these last moments of your lives.
          CATS: Ha ha ha ha ha...
          Operator: Captain...
          Captain: Give the launch order to all ZIG fighters!
          Operator: Captain! Do you know what you are doing?
          Captain: Yes, we can only depend on them now.
          Captain: Our hope for the future...
          Captain: It's in your hands, ZIG fighters!

Arcade ending

   Though the arcade version of Zero Wing did not have the famous
   "Engrish" introduction, it did provide more unintentional comedy upon
   completion of the game:

          Congratulation !!
          A.D.2111
          All bases of CATS were
          destroyed.
          It seems to be peaceful.
          but it is incorrect.
          CATS is still alive.
          ZIG-01 must fight
          against CATS again.
          and down with them
          completely ! Good luck.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/All_your_base_are_belong_to_us"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
