   #copyright

Alliterative verse

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Poetry & Opera

   The Old English epic poem Beowulf is written in alliterative verse.
   Enlarge
   The Old English epic poem Beowulf is written in alliterative verse.

   In prosody, alliterative verse is a form of verse that uses
   alliteration as the principal structuring device to unify lines of
   poetry, as opposed to other devices such as rhyme.

   The most intensively studied traditions of alliterative verse are those
   found in the oldest literature of many Germanic languages. Alliterative
   verse, in various forms, is found widely in the literary traditions of
   the early Germanic languages. The Old English epic Beowulf, as well as
   most other Old English poetry, the Old High German Muspilli, the Old
   Saxon Heliand, and the Old Norse Poetic Edda all use alliterative
   verse.

   Alliterative verse can be found in many other languages as well,
   although rarely with the systematic rigor of Germanic forms. The
   Finnish Kalevala and the Estonian Kalevipoeg both use alliterative
   forms derived from folk tradition. Traditional Turkic verse, for
   example that of the Uyghur, is also alliterative.

Common Germanic origins and features

   The poetic forms found in the various Germanic languages are not
   identical, but there is sufficient similarity to make it clear that
   they are closely related traditions, stemming from a common Germanic
   source. Our knowledge about that common tradition, however, is based
   almost entirely on inference from surviving poetry.

   One statement we have about the nature of alliterative verse from a
   practicing alliterative poet is that of Snorri Sturluson in the Prose
   Edda. He describes metrical patterns and poetic devices used by skaldic
   poets around the year 1200. Snorri's description has served as the
   starting point for scholars to reconstruct alliterative meters beyond
   those of Old Norse. There have been many different metrical theories
   proposed, all of them attended with controversy. Looked at broadly,
   however, certain basic features are common from the earliest to the
   latest poetry.

   Alliterative verse has been found in some of the earliest monuments of
   Germanic literature. The Golden horns of Gallehus, discovered in
   Denmark and likely dating to the fourth century, bears this Runic
   inscription in Proto-Norse:
x    / x x  x   /  x x      /  x  / x x
ek hlewagastir holtijar || horna tawidô

(I, Hlewagastir son of Holti, made the horn.)

   This inscription contains four strongly stressed syllables, the first
   three of which alliterate on /h/, essentially the same pattern found in
   much latter verse.

   Originally all alliterative poetry was composed and transmitted orally,
   and much has been lost through time since it went unrecorded. The
   degree to which writing may have altered this oral artform remains much
   in dispute. Nevertheless, there is a broad consensus among scholars
   that the written verse retains many (and some would argue almost all)
   of the features of the spoken language.

   Alliteration fits naturally with the prosodic patterns of Germanic
   languages. Alliteration essentially involves matching the left edges of
   stressed syllables. Early Germanic languages share a left-prominent
   prosodic pattern. In other words, stress falls on the root syllable of
   a word. This is normally the initial syllable, except where the root is
   preceded by an unstressed prefix (as in past participles, for example).

   The core metrical features of traditional Germanic alliterative verse
   are as follows:
     * A long-line is divided into two half-lines. Half-lines are also
       known as verses or hemistichs; the first is called the a-verse (or
       on-verse), the second the b-verse (or off-verse).
     * A heavy pause, or cæsura, separates the verses.
     * Each verse usually has two strongly stressed syllables, or "lifts".
     * The first lift in the b-verse must alliterate with either or both
       lifts in the a-verse.
     * The second lift in the b-verse does not alliterate with the first
       lifts.

   The patterns of unstressed syllables vary significantly in the
   alliterative traditions of different Germanic languages. The rules for
   these patterns remain controversial and imperfectly understood.

   The need to find an appropriate alliterating word gave certain other
   distinctive features to alliterative verse as well. Alliterative poets
   drew on a specialized vocabulary of poetic synonyms rarely used in
   prose texts and used standard images and metaphors called kennings.

Old English poetic forms

   Old English poetry appears to be based upon one system of verse
   construction, a system which remained remarkably consistent for
   centuries, although some patterns of classical Old English verse begin
   to break down at the end of the Old English period.

   The most widely used system of classification is based on that
   developed by Eduard Sievers. It should be emphasized that Sievers'
   system is fundamentally a method of categorization rather than a full
   theory of meter. It does not, in other words, purport to describe the
   system the scops actually used to compose their verse, nor does it
   explain why certain patterns are favored or avoided. Sievers divided
   verses into five basic types, labeled A-E. The system is founded upon
   accent, alliteration, the quantity of vowels, and patterns of syllabic
   accentuation.

Accent

   A line of poetry in Old English consists of two half-lines or verses,
   distichs, with a pause or caesura in the middle of the line. Each
   half-line has two accented syllables. The following example from the
   poem Battle of Maldon, spoken by the warrior Byrhtnoth, shows this:

          Hige sceal þe heardra, || heorte þe cenre,
          mod sceal þe mare, || þe ure mægen lytlað

          ("Courage must be the greater, heart the bolder, spirit the
          greater, the more our strength is diminished.")

Alliteration

   Alliteration is the principal binding agent of Old English poetry. Two
   syllables alliterate when they begin with the same sound; all vowels
   alliterate together, but the consonant clusters st-, sp- and sc- are
   treated as separate sounds (so st- does not alliterate with s- or sp-).
   On the other hand, in Old English unpalatized c (pronounced /k/)
   alliterated with palatized c (pronounced /ch/), and unpalatized g
   (pronounced /g/) likewise alliterated with palatized g (pronounced
   /y/). (This is because the poetic form was inherited from a time before
   /k/ and /g/ had split into palatized and unpalatized variants.)

   The first stressed syllable of the off-verse, or second half-line,
   usually alliterates with one or both of the stressed syllables of the
   on-verse, or first half-line. The second stressed syllable of the
   off-verse does not usually alliterate with the others.

Survivals

   Just as rhyme was seen in some Anglo-Saxon poems (e.g. The Rhyming
   Poem, and, to some degree, The Proverbs of Alfred), the use of
   alliterative verse continued into Middle English. Layamon's Brut,
   written in about 1215, uses a loose alliterative scheme. The Pearl Poet
   uses one of the most sophisticated alliterative schemes extant in
   Pearl, Cleanness, and Sir Gawain and the Green Knight. Even later,
   William Langland's Piers Plowman is a major work in English that is
   written in alliterative verse; it was written between 1360 and 1399.
   Though a thousand years have passed between this work and the Golden
   Horn of Gallehus, the poetic form remains much the same:

          A feir feld full of folk || fond I þer bitwene,
          Of alle maner of men, || þe mene and þe riche,
          Worchinge and wandringe || as þe world askeþ.

          Among them I found a fair field full of people
          All manner of men, the poor and the rich
          Working and wandering as the world requires.

   Alliteration was sometimes used together with rhyme in Middle English
   work, as in Pearl. In general, Middle English poets were somewhat loose
   about the number of stresses; in Sir Gawain, for instance, there are
   many lines with additional alliterating stresses (e.g. l.2, "the borgh
   brittened and brent to brondez and askez"), and the medial pause is not
   always strictly maintained.

   After the fifteenth century, alliterative verse became fairly uncommon,
   although some alliterative poems, such as Pierce the Ploughman's Crede
   (ca. 1400) and William Dunbar's superb Tretis of the Tua Marriit Women
   and the Wedo (ca. 1500) were written in the form in the 15th century.
   However, by 1600, the four-beat alliterative line had completely
   vanished, at least from the written tradition.

   Alliterative verse is occasionally written by modern authors. J. R. R.
   Tolkien composed several poems about Middle-earth in Old English
   alliterative verse; these poems were found among his papers and
   published posthumously. W. H. Auden also wrote a number of his poems,
   including The Age of Anxiety, in alliterative verse, modified only
   slightly to fit the phonetic patterns of modern English. The noun-laden
   style of the headlines makes the style of alliterative verse
   particularly apt for Auden's poem:

          Now the news. Night raids on
          Five cities. Fires started.
          Pressure applied by pincer movement
          In threatening thrust. Third Division
          Enlarges beachhead. Lucky charm
          Saves sniper. Sabotage hinted
          In steel-mill stoppage. . . .

   Other poets who have experimented with modern alliterative English
   verse include Ezra Pound, and Richard Wilbur, whose Junk opens with the
   lines:

          An axe angles

                            from my neighbour's ashcan;

          It is hell's handiwork,

                            the wood not hickory.

          The flow of the grain

                            not faithfully followed.

          The shivered shaft

                            rises from a shellheap

          Of plastic playthings,

                            paper plates.

   Many translations of Beowulf use alliterative techniques. Among recent
   ones that of Seamus Heaney loosely follows the rules of modern
   alliterative verse while the translation of Alan Sullivan and Timothy
   Murphy follows those rules more closely.

Old Norse poetic forms

   The inherited form of alliterative verse was modified somewhat in Old
   Norse poetry. In Old Norse, as a result of phonetic changes from the
   original common Germanic language, many unstressed syllables were lost.
   This lent Old Norse verse a characteristic terseness; the lifts tended
   to be crowded together at the expense of the weak syllables. In some
   lines, the weak syllables have been entirely suppressed. From the
   Hávamál:

          Deyr fé || deyja frændr

          ("Cattle die; friends die. . .")

   The various names of the Old Norse verse forms are given in the Prose
   Edda by Snorri Sturluson. The Háttatal, or "list of verse forms",
   contains the names and characteristics of each of the fixed forms of
   Norse poetry.

Fornyrðislag

   A verse form close to that of Beowulf existed in runestones and in the
   Old Norse Eddas; in Norse, it was called fornyrðislag, which means
   "past-words-made" or "way of ancient words". The Norse poets tended to
   break up their verses into stanzas of from two to eight lines (or
   more), rather than writing continuous verse after the Old English
   model. The loss of unstressed syllables made these verses seem denser
   and more emphatic. The Norse poets, unlike the Old English poets,
   tended to make each line a complete syntactic unit, avoiding enjambment
   where a thought begun on one line continues through the following
   lines; only seldom do they begin a new sentence in the second
   half-line. This example is from the Waking of Angantyr:

          Vaki, Angantýr! || vekr þik Hervǫr,
          eingadóttir || ykkr Tófu!
          Selðu ór haugi || hvassan mæki
          þann's Svafrlama || slógu dvergar.

          (Awaken, Angantyr! It is Hervor who awakens you, your only
          daughter by Tófa! Yield up from your grave the mighty sword that
          the dwarves forged for Svafrlami.")

   Fornyrðislag has two lifts per half line, with two or three (sometimes
   one) unstressed syllables. At least two lifts, usually three,
   alliterate, always including the main stave (the first lift of the
   second half-line).

   Fornyrðislag had a variant form called málaháttr ("speech meter"),
   which adds an unstressed syllable to each half-line, making six to
   eight (sometimes up to ten) unstressed syllables per line.

Ljóðaháttr

   Change in form came with the development of ljóðaháttr, which means
   "song" or " ballad metre", a stanzaic verse form that created four line
   stanzas. The odd numbered lines were almost standard lines of
   alliterative verse with four lifts and two or three alliterations, with
   cæsura; the even numbered lines had three lifts and two alliterations,
   and no cæsura. This example is from Freyr's lament in Skírnismál:

          Lǫng es nótt, || lǫng es ǫnnur,

                hvé mega ek þreyja þrjár?

          Opt mér mánaðr || minni þótti

                en sjá halfa hýnótt.

          (Long is one night, long is the next; how can I bear three? A
          month has often seemed less to me than this half "hýnótt" (word
          of unclear meaning)).

   A number of variants occurred in ljóðaháttr, including galdraháttr or
   kviðuháttr ("incantation meter"), which adds a fifth short (three-lift)
   line to the end of the stanza; in this form, usually the fifth line
   echoes the fourth one.

Dróttkvætt

   Box of copper from Sigtuna with a dróttkvætt verse written with the
   runic alphabet
   Enlarge
   Box of copper from Sigtuna with a dróttkvætt verse written with the
   runic alphabet

   These verse forms were elaborated even more into the skaldic poetic
   form called the dróttkvætt, meaning " lordly verse", which added
   internal rhymes and other forms of assonance that go well beyond the
   requirements of Germanic alliterative verse. The dróttkvætt stanza had
   eight lines, each having three lifts. In addition to two or three
   alliterations, the odd numbered lines had partial rhyme of consonants
   (which was called skothending) with dissimilar vowels, not necessarily
   at the beginning of the word; the even lines contained internal rhyme
   (aðalhending) in the syllables, not necessarily at the end of the word.
   The form was subject to further restrictions: each half-line must have
   exactly six syllables, and each line must always end in a trochee.

   The requirements of this verse form were so demanding that occasionally
   the text of the poems had to run parallel, with one thread of syntax
   running through the on-side of the half-lines, and another running
   through the off-side. According to the Fagrskinna collection of sagas,
   King Harald III of Norway uttered these lines of dróttkvætt at the
   Battle of Stamford Bridge; the internal assonances and the alliteration
   are bolded:

          Krjúpum vér fyr vápna,
          (valteigs), brǫkun eigi,
          (svá bauð Hildr), at hjaldri,
          (haldorð), í bug skjaldar.
          (Hátt bað mik), þar's mœttusk,
          (menskorð bera forðum),
          hlakkar íss ok hausar,
          (hjalmstall í gný malma).

          (In battle, we do not creep behind a shield before the din of
          weapons [so said the goddess of hawk-land {a valkyrja} true of
          words.] She who wore the necklace bade me to bear my head high
          in battle, when the battle-ice [a gleaming sword] seeks to
          shatter skulls.)

   The bracketed words in the poem ("so said the goddess of hawk-land,
   true of words") are syntactically separate, but interspersed within the
   text of the rest of the verse. The elaborate kennings manifested here
   are also practically necessary in this complex and demanding form, as
   much to solve metrical difficulties as for the sake of vivid imagery.
   Intriguingly, the saga claims that Harald improvised these lines after
   he gave a lesser performance (in fornyrðislag); Harald judged that
   verse bad, and then offered this one in the more demanding form. While
   the exchange may be fictionalized, the scene illustrates the regard in
   which the form was held.

   Most dróttkvætt poems that survive appear in one or another of the
   Norse Sagas; several of the sagas are biographies of skaldic poets.

Hrynhenda

   Hrynhenda is a later development of dróttkvætt with eight syllables per
   line instead of six, but with the same rules for rhyme and
   alliteration. It is first attested around 985 in the so-called
   Hafgerðingadrápa of which four lines survive (alliterants and rhymes
   bolded):

          Mínar biðk at munka reyni
          meinalausan farar beina;
          heiðis haldi hárar foldar
          hallar dróttinn of mér stalli.

          I ask the tester of monks (God) for a safe journey; the lord of
          the palace of the high ground (God — here we have a kenning in
          four parts) keep the seat of the falcon (hand) over me.

   The author was said to be a Christian from the Hebrides, who composed
   the poem asking God to keep him safe at sea. (Note: The third line is,
   in fact, over-alliterated. There should be exactly two alliterants in
   the odd-numbered lines.) The metre gained some popularity in courtly
   poetry, as the rhythm may sound more majestic than dróttkvætt.

   Alliterative poetry is still practiced in Iceland in an unbroken
   tradition since the settlement.

German forms

   Old High German and Old Saxon alliterative verse is problematic.

   The two Old Saxon alliterative poems, the fragmentary Heliand and the
   even more fragmentary Genesis are both Christian poems, created as
   written works of Biblical content based on Latin sources, and not
   derived from oral tradition. It is therefore impossible to say whether
   the characteristic features of the alliterative technique in these
   poems genuinely represent the unrecorded oral tradition or the style of
   an individual author more at home with written literature.

   The Old High German corpus of alliterative verse is tiny. Less than 200
   lines survive, in four works: the Hildebrandslied, Muspilli, the
   Merseburg Charms and the Wessobrunn Prayer. All four are preserved in
   forms that are clearly to some extent corrupt, suggesting that the
   scribes may themselves not have been entirely familiar with the poetic
   tradition.

   However, both German traditions show one common feature which much less
   common elsewhere: a proliferation of unaccented syllables. Generally
   these are parts of speech which would naturally be unstressed -
   pronouns, prepositions, articles, modal auxiliaries - but in the Old
   Saxon works there also adjectives and lexical verbs. The unaccented
   syllables typically occur before the first stress in the half-line, and
   most often in the b-verse.

   The Hildbrandslied, lines 4-5:

          Garutun se iro guðhamun, gurtun sih iro suert ana,
          helidos, ubar hringa, do sie to dero hiltiu ritun.

                They prepared their fighting outfits, girded their swords
                on,
                the heroes, over ringmail when they to that fight rode.

   The Heliand, line 3062:

          Sâlig bist thu Sîmon, quað he, sunu Ionases; ni mahtes thu that
          selbo gehuggean

                Blessed are you Simon, he said, son of Jonah; for you did
                not see that yourself (Matthew 16, 17)

   This leads to a less dense style, no doubt closer to everyday language,
   which has been interpreted both as a sign of decadent technique from
   ill-tutored poets and as an artistic innovation giving scope for
   additional poetic effects. Either way, it signifies a break with the
   strict Sievers typology.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alliterative_verse"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
