   #copyright

Almaty

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Asia

   Map showing Almaty's location in Kazakhstan
   Enlarge
   Map showing Almaty's location in Kazakhstan
   Almaty
   Enlarge
   Almaty
   Orthodox church
   Enlarge
   Orthodox church
   Mosque
   Enlarge
   Mosque

   Almaty (Алматы; formerly known as Alma-Ata, also Vernyj, Vyernyi
   (Верный) in Imperial Russia) is the largest city in Kazakhstan, with a
   population of 1,185,900 ( 2004) (8% of the population of Kazakhstan)
   citizens.

   The name "Almaty" means "appled" (the place with apples), the older
   version of its name, Alma-Ata, literally means "father-apple". In the
   surrounding region, unrivalled genetic diversity among the alma, the
   wild apples, implies that south-east Kazakhstan is where the
   domesticated apple is native.

   A troop of Siberian Cossacks from Omsk founded the fort Zailiysky in
   1854 at the foot of the Tian Shan mountain range, and renamed it one
   year later to Vernyj, a name that remained until 1921. In 1921, the
   name Alma-Ata ("father-apple") was created by the Bolsheviks. In a
   devastating earthquake in 1911, almost the only large building that
   remained standing was the Russian Orthodox cathedral. In the 1920s,
   after the completion of the Turkestan-Siberia Railway, Alma-Ata, as it
   was then known, became a major stopping point along the track. In 1929,
   Almaty became the capital of the Kazakh SSR.

   In late 1991, Almaty became the capital of the Republic of Kazakhstan,
   a designation it kept until 1998, when the capital was moved to Astana.
   Almaty, however, remains the largest city in Kazakhstan and the
   country's major commercial centre. In 2005, the city launched an
   Olympic application to host the XXII Olympic Winter Games in the year
   2014, which failed, as the IOC did not select the city as a candidate.
   The world's largest apple is also located in Almaty.

   A short bus ride into the Tian Shan Mountains brings one to Medeo, a
   popular tourist destination, with several hotels and an Olympic-size
   skating rink.

   On 21 December 1991, the Charter that ended the Soviet Union creating
   the Commonwealth of Independent States was signed there.

Universities of Almaty

     * Kazakh-British Technical University
     * Kazakh State University (KazGU)
     * Kazakh Economic University (KazEU)
     * International Academy of Business (IAB)
     * University of International Business(UIB)
     * Kimep (Kazakhstan Institute of Management, Economics, and Strategic
       Research)
     * Kazakh-American University (KAU)
     * Kazakh Academy of Sciences

Sister cities

     * Turkey Istanbul, Turkey
     * France Rennes, France
     * United States Tucson, Arizona, USA

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Almaty"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
