   #copyright

Alpaca

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mammals

                     iAlpaca

                             Conservation status

   Domesticated
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Mammalia
   Order:   Artiodactyla
   Family:  Camelidae
   Genus:   Vicugna
   Species: V. pacos

                                Binomial name

   Vicugna pacos
   (Linnaeus, 1758)

   The Alpaca (Vicugna pacos) is a domesticated breed of South American
   camel-like ungulates, derived from the wild vicuña. It resembles a
   sheep in appearance, but is larger and has a long erect neck.

   Alpacas are kept in herds that graze on the level heights of the Andes
   of southern Peru, northern Bolivia, and northern Chile at an altitude
   of 3500 to 5000 meters above sea-level, throughout the year. Alpacas
   are considerably smaller than llamas and unlike them are not used as
   beasts of burden but are valued only for their fibre (wool), used for
   making blankets and ponchos in South America, and sweaters, blankets,
   socks and coats in other parts of the world. The fibre comes in more
   than 22 natural colours.

   In the textile industry, "alpaca" primarily refers to the hair of
   Peruvian alpaca, but more broadly it refers to a style of fabric
   originally made from alpaca hair but now often made from similar
   fibers, such as mohair, Icelandic sheep wool, or even high-quality
   English wool. In trade, distinctions are made between alpacas and the
   several styles of mohair and lustre. However, as far as the general
   purchaser is concerned, little or no distinction is made.

Background

   Alpacas have been domesticated for thousands of years. There are no
   wild alpacas; they were bred down in domesticated form from the vicuña,
   which is also native to South America. They are closely related to
   llamas, which are descended from the guanaco. These four species of
   animals are collectively called camelids.

   Of the four, the alpaca and the vicuña are the most valuable
   fiber-bearing animals: the alpaca because of the quality and quantity
   of its fiber, and the vicuña because of the softness, fineness and
   quality of its coat. Alpacas cannot carry pack loads like their llama
   cousins; they were bred exclusively for their fibre and meat.

   Alpacas and llamas can (and do) successfully cross-breed. The resulting
   offspring are called huarizo, and have little "real purpose," but often
   have gentle temperaments and are suitable for pets.

   There are two types of alpaca – Huacaya (with dense, crimpy sheep-like
   fiber) and Suri (with silky dreadlocks). Suri fiber is often preferred
   by spinners, because it is long and has a silky luster. Suris are much
   rarer than Huacayas, and are estimated to make up between 6 and 10% of
   the alpaca population. However, since its import into the United States
   through Bill Barnett, the Suri is growing substantially in number and
   colour diversity. The Suri is thought to be rarer possibly because it
   is less hardy in the harsh South American mountain climates, as its
   fleece offers less insulation against the cold. The Suri fleece parts
   along the spine, exposing the animal to the cold, unlike the Huacaya
   fleece which provides excellent cover over the backbone. Hoffman ( page
   279) states that the word suri comes from the rhea, a flightless
   ostrich-like bird from Patagonia. The fact that the name is shared with
   that of the bird supports the belief that suris developed in the
   lowlands and were forced to live in higher areas by the actions of the
   Spanish invaders. However there is little evidence of any sort on this
   topic, so suri origins can only be the subject of speculation.

   Alpaca fleece is a luxurious fibre, similar to sheep’s wool in some
   respects, but lighter in weight, silkier to the touch, warmer, not
   prickly and bears no lanolin, making it nearly hypoallergenic. A big
   trade of alpaca fleece exists in the countries where alpacas live, from
   very simple and not so expensive garments made by the aboriginal
   communities, to sophisticated, industrially made and expensive
   products. In the United States, groups of smaller alpaca breeders have
   banded together to create "fibre co-ops," to make the manufacture of
   alpaca fibre products much cheaper.

   White is the predominant colour of alpacas, both Suri and Huacaya. This
   is because South American selective breeding has favoured white — bulk
   white fleece is easier to market and can be dyed any colour. However,
   alpacas come in more than 22 natural colour shades, from a true-blue
   black through browns-and-fawns to white, and there are silver-greys and
   rose-greys as well. In South America, the preference is for white, and
   white animals generally have better fleece than darker-colored animals.
   However, in the United States, more and more people desire darker
   fiber, especially blacks and greys. Thus, breeders have been diligently
   working on breeding dark animals with exceptional fibre, and much
   progress has been made in these areas over the last 5-7 years.

   Traditionally, alpaca meat has been eaten fresh, fried or in stews, by
   Andean inhabitants. There is a resurgent interest in alpaca meat in
   countries like Peru, where it is relatively easy to find it at upscale
   restaurants.

Behaviour

   Alpaca
   Enlarge
   Alpaca

   Alpacas are social herd animals and should always be kept with others
   of their kind, or at the very least with other herd animals. They are
   gentle, elegant, inquisitive, intelligent and observant. As they are a
   prey animal, they are cautious and nervous if they feel threatened.
   They like having their own space and do not like an unfamiliar alpaca
   or human getting close, especially from behind. They warn the intruder
   away by making sharp, noisy inhalations, putting back their ears,
   twisting their heads and necks backwards toward the perceived threat,
   screaming, threatening to spit, and eventually may spit and kick. Due
   to the soft pads on their feet, the kicks are not as dangerous as those
   of hoofed animals.

Spitting

   Not all alpacas spit, but all are capable. "Spit" is somewhat
   euphemistic. While occasionally the projectile contains only air and a
   little saliva, the alpaca often bring up and project regurgitated
   stomach contents.

   Spitting is mostly reserved for other alpacas, not for humans, but
   sometimes a human gets in the line of fire. If an alpaca is extremely
   displeased at a human, that person may well become covered in smelly,
   green goo. The smell is so foul that many people who work with alpacas
   would much rather come into contact with alpaca feces than with alpaca
   spit.

   For alpacas, spitting results in what is called "sour mouth." Sour
   mouth is characterized by a loose-hanging lower lip and a gaping mouth.
   This is caused by the stomach acids and unpleasant taste of the
   contents as they pass out of the mouth.

   Some alpacas will spit when looked at, others will never spit — their
   personalities are all so individualized that there is no hard and fast
   rule about them in terms of social behaviour.

Physical contact

   Alpacas at a farm
   Enlarge
   Alpacas at a farm

   Alpacas generally do not like their heads being touched. Once they know
   their owners and feel confident around them, they may allow their backs
   and necks to be touched. They do not like being grabbed, especially by
   boisterous children. This is probably because when alpacas are caught
   up for medical or otherwise unpleasant procedures, people generally
   grab their necks and hold them by the neck and head. Once socialized
   well, most alpacas tolerate being stroked or petted anywhere on their
   bodies, although many do not like their feet and lower legs handled. If
   an owner needs to catch an alpaca, the neck offers a good handle —
   holding the neck firmly between the arms is the best way to restrain
   the animal.

Hygiene

   To help alpacas control their internal parasites they have a communal
   dung pile, which they do not graze. Generally, males have much tidier
   dung piles than females who tend to stand in a line and all go at once.
   One female approaches the dung pile and begins to urinate and/or
   defecate, and the rest of the herd often follows.

   Because of their preference to using a dung pile, some alpacas have
   been successfully house-trained. Difficult though it may be to conceive
   of having a large animal such as a full-grown alpaca around the
   household, many owners so love their animals that they wish to be in
   their presence as much as possible. If acclimated to dogs and cats,
   alpacas can accept them as members of the herd, and interact with
   nearly all species which do not pose a threat, from birds and
   butterflies to horses and humans.

Sounds

   Sketch of an alpaca
   Enlarge
   Sketch of an alpaca

   Individuals vary, but Alpacas generally make a humming sound. Hums are
   often comfort noises, letting the other alpacas know they are present
   and content. However, humming can take on many inflections and
   meanings, from a high-pitched, almost desperate, squealing, "MMMM!" or
   frantic question, "mmMMM!" when a mother is separated from her
   offspring (called a "cria,") to a questioning "Mmm?" when they are
   curious.

   Alpacas also make other sounds as well as humming. In danger, they make
   a high-pitched, shrieking whine. Some breeds are known to make a "wark"
   noise when excited, and they stand proud with their tails sticking out
   and their ears in a very alert position. Strange dogs — and even cats —
   can trigger this reaction. To signal friendly and/or submissive
   behaviour, alpacas "cluck," a sound possibly generated by suction on
   the soft palate, or possibly somehow in the nasal cavity. This is often
   accompanied by a flipping up of the tail over the back.

   When males fight they also scream, a warbling bird-like cry, presumably
   intended to terrify the opponent. Fighting is to determine dominance,
   and therefore the right to mate the females in the herd, and it is
   triggered by testosterone. This is why males are often kept in separate
   paddocks — when two dominant males get together violent fights often
   occur. When males must be pastured together, it is wise to trim down
   the large fang-like teeth used in fights, called "fighting teeth".

Reproduction

   A male in the act of mating, or hoping for a chance to mate, "orgles."
   This orgling helps to put the female in the mood, and it is believed to
   also help her to ovulate after mating.

   Females have no estrus cycle — they are "induced ovulators," which
   means that the act of mating and the presence of semen causes them to
   ovulate. Occasionally, females conceive after just one breeding (which
   can last anywhere from 5 minutes to well over an hour; the males are
   "dribble ejaculators,") but occasionally do have troubles conceiving.
   Artificial insemination is prohibitively expensive and there are
   complications with the process in camelid species.

   A male is usually ready to mate for the first time at a year of age,
   but a female alpaca is not fully mature (physically and mentally) until
   she reaches approximately 16-18 months, and it is not advisable to
   breed a female earlier.

   The male's penis is attached to the inside of his body, and generally
   does not detach until at least two years of age. The penis is a very
   long, thin, prehensile organ that is, oddly enough, perfectly designed
   for the task of finding the vaginal opening despite a fluffy tail,
   penetrating the hymen (if present,) navigating the vaginal canal and
   entering the cervical opening, where deposit of the semen occurs.

   Pregnancies last 11 to 11.5 months and the young are called crias.
   After a female gives birth, she is generally receptive to breeding
   again after approximately 15 days. Crias may be weaned through human
   intervention at approximately 6 months and 60 pounds. However, many
   breeders prefer to allow the female to decide when to wean her
   offspring.

   It is believed that alpacas generally live for more than 20 years.
   Conditions and nutrition are better in the USA, Australia, New Zealand
   and Europe than in South America, so animals live longer and are
   healthier. One of the oldest alpacas in New Zealand (fondly called
   Vomiting Violet) died at the end of 2005 at the old age of 29.

History of the scientific name

   In the 18th and 19th centuries, the four South American camelid species
   were assigned scientific names. At that time, the alpaca was assumed to
   be descended from the llama, ignoring similarities in size, fleece and
   dentition between the alpaca and the vicuña. Classification was
   complicated by the fact that all four species of South American camelid
   can interbreed and produce fertile offspring. It was not until the
   advent of DNA technology that a more accurate classification was
   possible.

   In 2001, the alpaca genus classification changed from Lama pacos to
   Vicugna pacos following the presentation of a paper on work by Dr Jane
   Wheeler et al on alpaca DNA to the Royal Society showing that the
   alpaca is descended from the vicuña, not the guanaco.

   The relationship between alpacas and vicuñas was disputed for many
   years, but Wheeler's DNA work proved it. However many academic sites
   have not caught up with this, so it is something well known to alpaca
   breeders who have read Dr Hoffman's book, and to Royal Society members
   who have access to the current classification data, but not more widely
   known.

Fibre

   Alpaca
   Enlarge
   Alpaca

   Alpaca fiber is warmer than sheep's wool and lighter in weight. It is
   soft and luxurious and lacks the "prickle" factor. However, as with all
   fleece-producing animals, quality varies from animal to animal, and
   some alpaca produce fiber which is less than ideal. Fiber and
   conformation are the two most important factors in determining an
   alpaca's value. Animals from the Peruvian Accoyo line often have the
   best fiber characteristics. The Accoyo estancia of Peru practiced "line
   breeding" (breeding granddaughters to their grandfathers and so forth,
   much like dog breeders do,) and they managed to create exceptional
   fibre. Most Accoyo animals (both Suri and Huacaya) are white, although
   with diversification, there are some darker Accoyo animals.

   Alpaca have been bred in South America for thousands of years (vicuñas
   were first domesticated and bred into alpacas by the ancient Andean
   tribes of Peru, but also appeared in Chile and Bolivia,) but in recent
   years have been exported to other countries. In countries such as the
   USA, Australia and New Zealand breeders shear their animals annually,
   weigh the fleeces and test them for fineness. With the resulting
   knowledge they are able to breed heavier-fleeced animals with finer
   fibre. Fleece weights vary, with the top stud males reaching annual
   shear weights up to 6kg.

   In physical structure, alpaca fibre is somewhat akin to (human?) hair,
   being very glossy, but its softness and fineness enable the spinner to
   produce satisfactory yarn with comparative ease. Alpaca fibre can even
   be spun into yarn with one's fingers.

Alpaca fibre industry

History

   The Amerindians of Peru, a country in South America, used this fibre in
   the manufacture of many styles of fabrics for thousands of years before
   its introduction into Europe as a commercial product. The alpaca was a
   crucial component of ancient life in the Andes, as it provided not only
   warm clothing but also meat. Many rituals revolved around the alpaca,
   perhaps most notably the method of killing it: An alpaca was restrained
   by one or more people, and a specially-trained person plunged his bare
   hand into the chest cavity of the animal, ripping out its heart. Today,
   this ritual is viewed by most as barbaric, but there are still some
   tribes in the Andes which practice it.

   The first European importations of alpaca fibre were into Spain. Spain
   transferred the fibre to Germany and France. Apparently alpaca yarn was
   spun in England for the first time about the year 1808 but the fibre
   was condemned as an unworkable material. In 1830 Benjamin Outram, of
   Greetland, near Halifax, appears to have reattempted spinning it, and
   again it was condemned. These two attempts failed due to the style of
   fabric into which the yarn was woven — a species of camlet. It was not
   until the introduction of cotton warps into Bradford trade about 1836
   that the true qualities of alpaca could be developed in the fabric. It
   is not known where the cotton warp and mohair or alpaca weft
   plain-cloth came from, but it was this simple and ingenious structure
   which enabled Titus Salt, then a young Bradford manufacturer, to use
   alpaca successfully. Bradford is still the great spinning and
   manufacturing centre for alpaca. Large quantities of yarns and cloths
   are exported annually to the European continent and the US, although
   the quantities vary with the fashions in vogue. The typical
   "alpaca-fabric" is a very characteristic " dress-fabric."
   A pair of alpacas near an Inca burial site in Peru
   Enlarge
   A pair of alpacas near an Inca burial site in Peru

   Due to the successful manufacture of various alpaca cloths by Sir Titus
   Salt and other Bradford manufacturers, a great demand for alpaca wool
   arose, which could not be met by the native product. Apparently, the
   number of alpacas available never increase appreciably. Unsuccessful
   attempts were made to acclimatize alpaca in England, on the European
   continent and in Australia, and even to cross English breeds of sheep
   with alpaca. But there is a cross between alpaca and llama — a true
   hybrid in every sense — producing a material placed upon the Liverpool
   market under the name "Huarizo". Crosses between the alpaca and vicuña
   have not proved satisfactory. Current attempts to cross these two
   breeds are underway at farms in the US. According to the Alpaca Owners
   and Breeders Association, alpacas are now being bred in the US, Canada,
   Australia, New Zealand, UK, and numerous other places.

   In recent years, interest in alpaca fibre clothing has surged, perhaps
   partly because alpaca ranching has a reasonably low impact on the
   environment. Outdoor sports enthusiasts recognize that its lighter
   weight and better warmth provides them more comfort in colder weather,
   so outfitters such as R.E.I. and others are beginning to stock more
   alpaca products. Occasionally, alpaca fibre is woven together with
   merino wool to attain even more softness and durability.

   The preparing, combing, spinning, weaving and finishing process of
   alpaca and mohair are similar to that of wool.

   Farmers commonly quote the alpaca with the phrase 'love is in the
   fleece', which describes their love for the animal.

Prices

   The price for alpacas can range from US$100 to US$1,060,000, depending
   on breeding history, sex, and colour. It is possible to raise up to 10
   alpacas on one acre (4,047 m²) as they have a designated area for waste
   products and keep their eating area away from their waste area to avoid
   diseases. But this ratio differs from country to country and is highly
   dependent on the quality of pasture available (in Australia it is
   generally only possible to run one to three animals per acre). Fibre
   quality is the primary variant in the price achieved for alpaca wool,
   in Australia it is common to classify the fibre by the thickness of the
   individual hairs and by the amount of vegetable matter contained in the
   supplied shearings.

US speculative bubble

   A research paper on this topic published by the Agricultural Issues
   Centre of the University of California in 2005 examined the US alpaca
   industry and concluded: current prices for alpaca stock are not
   supportable by market fundamentals and that the industry represents the
   latest in the rich history of speculative bubbles.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alpaca"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
