   #copyright

Amber

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mineralogy

   Amber pendants. The oval pendant is 52 by 32 mm (2 by 1.3 inches).
   Enlarge
   Amber pendants. The oval pendant is 52 by 32 mm (2 by 1.3 inches).

   Amber is a fossil resin much used for the manufacture of ornamental
   objects. Although not mineralized it is sometimes considered and used
   as a gemstone. Most of the world's amber is in the range of 30–90
   million years old. Semi-fossilized resin or sub-fossil amber is called
   copal.

History

   The English name comes from the Arabic عنبر, ʻanbar, probably through
   Spanish , but this word referred originally to ambergris, which is an
   animal substance quite distinct from yellow amber. True amber has
   sometimes been called kahroba, a word of Persian derivation signifying
   "that which attracts straw", in allusion to the power which amber
   possesses of acquiring an electric charge by friction. This property,
   first recorded by Thales of Miletus, suggested the word "electricity",
   from the Greek, elektron, a name applied, however, not only to amber
   but also to an alloy of gold and silver. By Latin writers amber is
   variously called electrum, sucinum (succinum), and glaesum or glesum.
   The Old Hebrew חשמל hashmal seems to have meant amber, although Modern
   Hebrew uses Arabic-inspired ענבר `inbar while חשמל hashmal means
   electricity.

   The German word is Bernstein ("burn stone"), which comes from the
   Middle Low German bernen which means burning, this word is a cognate to
   Dutch barnsteen. This is likely related to the fact that amber can,
   indeed, burn. The Polish bursztyn was derived from the German word
   (like burmistrz or rotmistrz).

   Amber, which has no primitive uses, has been found at Neolithic sites
   far from its source on the shores of the Baltic sea, mute witness, like
   obsidian, to long-distance trade routes established before the Bronze
   Age. There is strong evidence for the theory that the Baltic coasts
   during the advanced civilization of the Nordic Bronze Age was the
   source of most amber in Europe, for example the amber jewelry found in
   graves from Mycenaean Greece has been found to originate from the
   Baltic Sea, specifically from the Samland area. Amber was mentioned by
   Homer, Hesiod ( Theogony 337f.) Aristotle, Plato and others. Pliny the
   Elder complains that a small statue of amber costs more than a healthy
   slave. Tacitus in his Germania talks about the Aesti people as the only
   ones to gather amber from the Baltic Sea and who call it glaes (the -um
   ending is the latinised version).

   Since the 13th century craftsmen Paternostermacher also called
   Bernsteindreher guilds are recorded in the Hanseatic cities, such as
   Lübeck, Danzig ( Gdańsk), Elbing ( Elbląg) and Stolp ( Słupsk). Daniel
   Barholz, the city notary of Elbing, recorded in 1646, that the city
   council has in its employment Bernsteindreher (translation: amber
   turners).

   During the 15th century, the Teutonic Knights controlled the production
   of amber in Europe, forbidding its unauthorised collection from beaches
   on the Baltic coastline under their jurisdiction, and punishing
   breakers of this ordinance with death. The Teutonic Order transported
   amber from Prussian Samland ( Sambia) coast to the other cities, to be
   worked on by these special craftsmen.

   The Paternostermacher (translation: Lord's Prayer (bead) makers) were
   represented in Paternostermacherämter (Guild Halls). These craftsmen
   also created the legendary Bernsteinzimmer (Amber Room) which was
   donated to Russian Tsar Peter the Great in 1716.

   One can still go all along the Baltic Sea coastline of Germany (and
   since 1919 also Poland) and fish for amber with a net, the way it used
   to be fished for many centuries. In the Deutsches Bernstein Museum
   (German Amber Museum) at Ribnitz-Damgarten one can watch the
   Bernsteindreher at work, as well as try doing some of the polishing.

Composition

   Amber is heterogeneous in composition, but consists of several resinous
   bodies more or less soluble in alcohol, ether and chloroform,
   associated with an insoluble bituminous substance. Amber is a
   macromolecule by free radical polymerization of several precursors in
   the labdane family, communic acid, cummunol and biformene . Labdanes
   are tetrameric terpenes (C[20]H[32]) and trienes which means that the
   organic skeleton has three alkene groups available for polymerization.
   As amber matures over the years, more polymerization will take place as
   well as isomerization reactions, crosslinking and cyclization. The
   average composition of amber leads to the general formula C[10]H[16]O.

   Heating amber will soften it and eventually it will burn, which is why
   the German word for amber is bernstein. Heated rather below 200°C,
   amber suffers decomposition, yielding an "oil of amber", and leaving a
   black residue which is known as "amber colophony", or "amber pitch";
   when dissolved in oil of turpentine or in linseed oil this forms "amber
   varnish" or "amber lac".

   True amber yields on dry distillation succinic acid, the proportion
   varying from about 3 to 8%, and being greatest in the pale opaque or
   bony varieties. The aromatic and irritating fumes emitted by burning
   amber are mainly due to this acid. True Baltic amber is distinguished
   by its yield of succinic acid, for many of the other fossil resins
   which are often termed amber contain either none of it, or only a very
   small proportion; hence the name succinite proposed by Professor James
   Dwight Dana, and now commonly used in scientific writings as a specific
   term for the real Prussian amber. Succinite has a hardness between 2
   and 3, which is rather greater than that of many other fossil resins.
   Its specific gravity varies from 1.05 to 1.10. An effective tool for
   Amber analysis is IR spectroscopy. It enables the distinction between
   baltic amber and non-Baltic varieties because of a specific carbonyl
   absorption and it can also detect the relative age of an amber sample.

Amber in Geology

   The Baltic amber or succinite (historically documented as Prussian
   amber) is found as irregular nodules in a marine glauconitic sand,
   known as blue earth, occurring in the Lower Oligocene strata of Sambia
   in Kaliningrad Oblast, where it is now systematically mined . It
   appears, however, to have been partly derived from yet earlier Tertiary
   deposits (Eocene); and it occurs also as a derivative mineral in later
   formations, such as the drift. Relics of an abundant flora occur as
   inclusions trapped within the amber while the resin was yet fresh,
   suggesting relations with the flora of Eastern Asia and the southern
   part of North America. Heinrich Göppert named the common amber-yielding
   pine of the Baltic forests Pinites succiniter, but as the wood,
   according to some authorities, does not seem to differ from that of the
   existing genus it has been also called Pinius succinifera. It is
   improbable, however, that the production of amber was limited to a
   single species; and indeed a large number of conifers belonging to
   different genera are represented in the amber-flora.

Amber inclusions

   An insect trapped in amber. The amber piece is 10 mm (0.4 inches) long.
   In the enlarged picture, the insect's antennae are easily seen.
   Enlarge
   An insect trapped in amber. The amber piece is 10 mm (0.4 inches) long.
   In the enlarged picture, the insect's antennae are easily seen.

   The resin contains, in addition to the beautifully preserved
   plant-structures, numerous remains of insects, spiders, annelids,
   crustaceans and other small organisms which became enveloped while the
   exudation was fluid. In most cases the organic structure has
   disappeared, leaving only a cavity, with perhaps a trace of chitin.
   Even hair and feathers have occasionally been represented among the
   enclosures. Fragments of wood frequently occur, with the tissues
   well-preserved by impregnation with the resin; while leaves, flowers
   and fruits are occasionally found in marvelous perfection. Sometimes
   the amber retains the form of drops and stalactites, just as it exuded
   from the ducts and receptacles of the injured trees. The abnormal
   development of resin has been called succinosis. Impurities are quite
   often present, especially when the resin dropped on to the ground, so
   that the material may be useless except for varnish-making, whence the
   impure amber is called firniss. Enclosures of pyrites may give a bluish
   colour to amber. The so-called black amber is only a kind of jet. Bony
   amber owes its cloudy opacity to minute bubbles in the interior of the
   resin. In the Dominican Republic exists a type of amber known as the
   blue amber.

Locations and utilization

   Although amber is found along the shores of a large part of the Baltic
   Sea and the North Sea, the great amber-producing country is the
   promontory of Sambia, now part of Russia. Pieces of amber torn from the
   sea-floor are cast up by the waves, and collected at ebb-tide.
   Sometimes the searchers wade into the sea, furnished with nets at the
   end of long poles, by means of which they drag in the sea-weed
   containing entangled masses of amber; or they dredge from boats in
   shallow water and rake up amber from between the boulders. Divers have
   been employed to collect amber from the deeper waters. Systematic
   dredging on a large scale was at one time carried on in the Curonian
   Lagoon by Messrs Stantien and Becker, the great amber merchants of
   Königsberg. At the present time extensive mining operations are
   conducted in quest of amber. The pit amber was formerly dug in open
   works, but is now also worked by underground galleries. The nodules
   from the blue earth have to be freed from matrix and divested of their
   opaque crust, which can be done in revolving barrels containing sand
   and water. The sea-worn amber has lost its crust, but has often
   acquired a dull rough surface by rolling in sand.

   Amber is extensively used for beads and other ornaments, and for
   cigar-holders and the mouth-pieces of pipes. It is regarded by the
   Turks as specially valuable, inasmuch as it is said to be incapable of
   transmitting infection as the pipe passes from mouth to mouth. The
   variety most valued in the East is the pale straw-coloured, slightly
   cloudy amber. Some of the best qualities are sent to Vienna for the
   manufacture of smoking appliances. In working amber, it is turned on
   the lathe and polished with whitening and water or with rotten stone
   and oil, the final lustre being given by friction with flannel. During
   the working much electricity is developed.

   When gradually heated in an oil-bath, amber becomes soft and flexible.
   Two pieces of amber may be united by smearing the surfaces with linseed
   oil, heating them, and then pressing them together while hot. Cloudy
   amber may be clarified in an oil-bath, as the oil fills the numerous
   pores to which the turbidity is due. Small fragments, formerly thrown
   away or used only for varnish, are now utilized on a large scale in the
   formation of "ambroid" or "pressed amber". The pieces are carefully
   heated with exclusion of air and then compressed into a uniform mass by
   intense hydraulic pressure; the softened amber being forced through
   holes in a metal plate. The product is extensively used for the
   production of cheap jewellery and articles for smoking. This pressed
   amber yields brilliant interference colours in polarized light. Amber
   has often been imitated by other resins like copal and kauri, as well
   as by celluloid and even glass. True amber is sometimes coloured
   artificially.

   Amber was much valued as an ornamental material in very early times. It
   has been found in Mycenaean tombs; it is known from lake-dwellings in
   Switzerland, and it occurs with neolithic remains in Denmark, whilst in
   England it is found with interments of the bronze age. A remarkably
   fine cup turned in amber from a bronze-age barrow at Hove is now in the
   Brighton Museum. Beads of amber occur with Anglo-Saxon relics in the
   south of England; and up to a comparatively recent period the material
   was valued as an amulet. It is still believed to possess a certain
   medicinal virtue.

   Rolled pieces of amber, usually small but occasionally of very large
   size, may be picked up on the east coast of England, having probably
   been washed up from deposits under the North Sea. Cromer is the
   best-known locality, but it occurs also on other parts of the Norfolk
   coast, such as Great Yarmouth, as well as Southwold, Aldeburgh and
   Felixstowe in Suffolk, and as far south as Walton-on-the-Naze in Essex,
   whilst northwards it is not unknown in Yorkshire. On the other side of
   the North Sea, amber is found at various localities on the coast of the
   Netherlands and Denmark. On the shores of the Baltic it occurs not only
   on the German and Polish coast but in the south of Sweden, in Bornholm
   and other islands, and in southern Finland. Amber has indeed a very
   wide distribution, extending over a large part of northern Europe and
   occurring as far east as the Urals. Some of the amber districts of the
   Baltic and North Sea were known in prehistoric times, and led to early
   trade with the south of Europe through the Amber Road. Amber was
   carried to Olbia on the Black Sea, Massilia (today Marseille) on the
   Mediterranean, and Adria at the head of the Adriatic; and from these
   centres it was distributed over the Hellenic world.

   The Amber Room was a collection of chamber wall panels commissioned in
   1701 for the king of Prussia, then given to Tsar Peter the Great. The
   room was hidden in place from invading Nazi forces in 1941, who upon
   finding it in the Cathrine Palace, disassembled it and moved it to
   Königsberg. What happened to the room beyond this point is unclear. It
   is presumed lost. It was re-created in 2003.

   Since the establishment of the Amber Road amber (which is also commonly
   referred to as the "Lithuanian gold") has substantially contributed to
   Lithuanian economy and culture. Nowadays a great variety of amber
   jewelry and amberware is offered to foreign tourists in most souvenir
   shops as distinctive to Lithuania and its cultural heritage.

   Amber and certain similar substances are found to a limited extent at
   several localities in the United States, as in the green-sand of New
   Jersey, but they have little or no economic value. A fluorescent amber
   occurs in the southern state of Chiapas in Mexico, and is used
   extensively to create eye-catching jewellery. Blue amber is recorded in
   the Dominican Republic. These Central American ambers are formed from
   the resins of Legume trees (Hymenea) and not conifers.

Varieties

   Besides succinite, which is the common variety of European amber, the
   following varieties also occur:
     * Gedanite, or brittle amber, closely resembling succinite, but much
       more brittle, not quite so hard, with a lower melting point and
       containing no succinic acid. It is often covered with a white
       powder easily removed by wiping. The name comes from Gedanum, the
       Latin name of Gdańsk at the Baltic Sea.
     * Stantienite, a brittle, deep brownish-black resin, destitute of
       succinic acid.
     * Beckerite, a rare amber in earthy-brown nodules, almost opaque,
       said to be related in properties to gutta-percha.
     * Glessite, a nearly opaque brown dark resin, with numerous
       microscopic cavities and dusty enclosures, named from glesum, an
       old name for amber.
     * Krantzite, a soft red amber-like resin, found in the lignites of
       Saxony.
     * Allingite, a fossil resin allied to succinite, from Switzerland.
     * Roumanite, or Romanian amber, a dark reddish resin, occurring with
       lignite in Tertiary deposits. The nodules are penetrated by cracks,
       but the material can be worked on the lathe. Sulphur is present to
       the extent of more than 1%, whence the smell of sulphuretted
       hydrogen when the resin is heated. According to Gheorghe Murgoci
       the Romanian amber is true succinite.
     * Simetite, or Sicilian amber, takes its name from the river Simeto
       or Giaretta. It occurs in lower Miocene deposits and is also found
       washed up by the sea near Catania. This beautiful material presents
       a great diversity of tints, but a rich hyacinth red is common. It
       is remarkable for its fluorescence, which in the opinion of some
       authorities adds to its beauty. Amber is also found in many
       localities in Emilia, especially near the sulphur-mines of Cesena.
       It has been conjectured that the ancient Etruscan ornaments in
       amber were wrought in the Italian material, but it seems that amber
       from the Baltic reached the Etruscans at Hatria. It has even been
       supposed that amber passed from Sicily to northern Europe in early
       times - a supposition said to receive some support from the fact
       that much of the amber dug up in Denmark is red; but it must not be
       forgotten that reddish amber is found also on the Baltic, though
       not being fashionable it is used rather for varnish-making than for
       ornaments. Moreover, yellow amber after long burial is apt to
       acquire a reddish colour. The amber of Sicily seems not to have
       been recognized in ancient times, for it is not mentioned by local
       authorities like Diodorus Siculus.
     * Burmite is the name under which the Burmese amber is now described.
       Until the British occupation of Burma but little was known as to
       its occurrence, though it had been worked for centuries and was
       highly valued by the natives and by the Chinese. It is found in
       flat rolled pieces, irregularly distributed through a blue clay
       probably of Miocene age. It occurs in the Hukawng valley, in the
       Nangotaimaw hills, where it is irregularly worked in shallow pits.
       The mines were visited some years ago by Dr Fritz Noetling, and the
       mineral has been described by Dr Otto Helm. The Burmese amber is
       yellow or reddish, some being of ruby tint, and like the Sicilian
       amber it is fluorescent. Burmite and simetite agree also in being
       destitute of succinic acid. Most of the Burmese amber is worked at
       Mandalay into rosary-beads and ear-cylinders.

   Many other fossil resins more or less allied to amber have been
   described. Schraufite is a reddish resin from the Carpathian sandstone,
   and it occurs with jet in the Cretaceous rocks of the Lebanon; ambrite
   is a resin found in many of the coals of New Zealand; retinite occurs
   in the lignite of Bovey Tracey in Devonshire and elsewhere; whilst
   copaline has been found in the London Clay of Highgate in North London.
   Chemawinite or cedarite is an amber-like resin from the Saskatchewan
   river in Canada.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amber"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
