   #copyright

Amsterdam

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: European Geography

                                  Amsterdam

   Canals of the Jordaan neighbourhood

   Location

   Location of Amsterdam

   Flag

   Flag of Amsterdam

   Country
          Netherlands

   Province
          North Holland

   Population
          741,329 ( 1 August 2006)

   Demonym
          Amsterdammer

   Coordinates
          52°22′N 4°54′E

   Website
          www.amsterdam.nl

   Mayor
          Job Cohen ( PvdA)

   Amsterdam , the official capital of the Netherlands, lies on the banks
   of two bodies of water, the IJ bay and the Amstel river. Founded in the
   late 12th century as a small fishing village on the banks of the
   Amstel, it is now the largest city in the country and is a financial
   and cultural centre. As of August 1, 2006, the population of the city
   proper is 741,329; the population of the official Greater Amsterdam
   area is approximately 1.5 million, but the real agglomeration is
   estimated at 2 to 2,5 million. Amsterdam is also one of the core urban
   centres of the greater metropolitan area called " Randstad" (Ring City)
   which encompasses other Dutch cities such as Haarlem, Utrecht, Leiden,
   The Hague and Rotterdam and has a population of over 7.5 million.

   Amsterdam has one of the largest historic city centres in Europe,
   dating largely from the 17th century. At this time, a series of
   concentric, semi-circular canals ("grachten") were dug around the old
   city centre. Along the canals houses and warehouses were built. The
   canals still define Amsterdam's layout and appearance today. Many fine
   houses and mansions are situated along the canals. Some of the narrow
   brick houses are gradually sinking because they are built on wooden
   piles to cope with the marshy subsoil.

   Although Amsterdam is officially designated as the capital of the
   Netherlands, it has never been (save a brief period between 1808 and
   1810), the seat of the court, government, or parliament of the
   Netherlands, which are all located at The Hague. Amsterdam is also not
   the capital of the province in which it is located, North Holland,
   whose capital is located at Haarlem. for more information.

   Amsterdam is famous for its free-spirited liberalism, diversity and
   tolerance.

History

   Amsterdam began as a fishing village in the in the late 12th century.
   According to legend Amsterdam was founded by two Frisian fishermen, who
   landed on the shores of the Amstel in a small boat with their dog. The
   damming of the river Amstel gave it its name (in Dutch: Amstelredam
   "Dam in the Amstel", turned into Amsterdam in the course of time). The
   traditional founding of the city of Amsterdam is October 27, 1275, when
   the inhabitants living around the Amstel dam were granted freedom from
   paying the tolls associated with the locks and bridges of Holland. It
   was given city rights in 1300 or 1301. From the 14th century on,
   Amsterdam flourished, largely on the basis of trade with the cities of
   the Hanseatic League.

   In the 16th century the Dutch rebelled against Philip II of Spain and
   his successors. The revolt escalated into the Eighty Years' War which
   ultimately led to Dutch independence. After the break with Spain the
   Dutch Republic became known for its relative religious tolerance. Jews
   from Spain and Portugal, prosperous merchants from Antwerp (economic
   and religious refugees from the part of the Low Countries still
   controlled by Spain), Huguenots from France (persecuted for their
   religion) sought safety in Amsterdam.
   Dam Square in the late 17th century: painting by Gerrit Adriaensz.
   Berckheyde (Gemäldegalerie, Dresden)
   Enlarge
   Dam Square in the late 17th century: painting by Gerrit Adriaensz.
   Berckheyde (Gemäldegalerie, Dresden)

   The 17th century is considered Amsterdam's "Golden Age". In the early
   17th century Amsterdam became one of the wealthiest cities in the
   world. Ships sailed from Amsterdam to the Baltic Sea, North America,
   Africa and present-day Indonesia and Brazil and formed the basis of a
   worldwide trading network. Amsterdam's merchants had the biggest share
   in the VOC and WIC. These companies acquired the overseas possessions
   which formed the seeds of the later Dutch colonies. Amsterdam was the
   most important point for the trans-shipment of goods in Europe and it
   was the leading financial centre of the world. Amsterdam's stock
   exchange was the first to trade continuously.

   The population grew from slightly over 10,000 around 1500 to 30,000
   around 1570, 60,000 around 1600, 105,000 in 1622 and almost 200,000
   around 1700 (a twenty fold increase in 200 years). Thereafter, the
   population did not change much for another century and a half. During
   the century before World War II it almost quadrupled to 800,000, but
   then remained fairly constant again to this day.
   River Amstel by NightPainting by Koppelaar
   Enlarge
   River Amstel by Night
   Painting by Koppelaar

   The 18th and early 19th centuries saw a decline in Amsterdam's
   prosperity. The wars of the Dutch Republic with the United Kingdom and
   France took their toll on Amsterdam. During the Napoleonic Wars
   Amsterdam's fortunes reached their lowest point. However, with the
   establishment of the Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1815, things slowly
   began to improve. In Amsterdam new developments were started by people
   like Samuel Sarphati who found their inspiration in Paris.

   The end of the 19th century is sometimes called Amsterdam's second
   Golden Age. New museums, a train station, and the Concertgebouw were
   built. At this time the Industrial Revolution reached Amsterdam. The
   Amsterdam-Rhine Canal was dug to give Amsterdam a direct connection to
   the Rhine and the North Sea Canal to give the port a shorter connection
   to the North Sea. Both projects improved communication with the rest of
   Europe and the world dramatically. Joseph Conrad gives a brief
   description of Amsterdam, seen from the sea at this period, in The
   Mirror of the Sea (1906).
   In 2005, 965,000 people visited the museum adjoining #263
   Prinsengracht, better known as the Anne Frank House.
   Enlarge
   In 2005, 965,000 people visited the museum adjoining #263
   Prinsengracht, better known as the Anne Frank House.

   Shortly before the First World War the city began expanding and new
   suburbs were built. During World War I, the Netherlands remained
   neutral. Amsterdam suffered a food shortage and heating fuel became
   scarce. The shortages sparked riots in which several people were
   killed.

   Germany invaded the Netherlands on 10 May 1940, taking control of the
   country after five days of fighting. The Germans installed a Nazi
   civilian government in Amsterdam that cooperated in the persecution of
   Jews. However, a minority of people in Amsterdam helped the Jews in
   hiding and suffered persecution themselves in doing so. More than 103,
   000 to 105,000 Jews were deported from the Netherlands to concentration
   camps, of whom perhaps the most famous was a young German girl, Anne
   Frank. Only 5,000 Dutch Jews survived the war. In the last months of
   the war, communication with the rest of the country broke down and food
   and fuel became scarce. Many inhabitants of the city had to travel to
   the countryside to collect food. Dogs, cats and raw sugar beets were
   consumed to stay alive. Most of the trees in Amsterdam were cut down
   for fuel and all the wood of the apartments from the Jewish people who
   were deported.

Coat of arms

   Enlarge

   The coat of arms of Amsterdam is composed of three St Andrew's crosses,
   aligned vertically. Historians believe they represent the three dangers
   which have traditionally plagued the city: flood, fire, and pestilence.
   The city's official motto, Heldhaftig, Vastberaden, Barmhartig
   ("Valiant, Resolute, Merciful") which is displayed on the coat of arms,
   was bestowed on it by Queen Wilhelmina in 1947 in recognition of the
   city's bravery during World War II. The lions were added in the
   sixteenth century.

   The Imperial Crown of Austria was awarded to the city in 1489 by
   Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor, out of gratitude for services and
   loans. The crown was a sign of imperial protection and acted as a seal
   of approval for Amsterdam merchants abroad. The Westertoren also
   features the imperial crown.

City government

   Lloyd building in Amsterdam
   Enlarge
   Lloyd building in Amsterdam

   As all Dutch municipalities, Amsterdam is governed by a mayor, his
   aldermen, and the municipal council. However, unlike most other Dutch
   municipalities, Amsterdam is subdivided into fifteen stadsdelen
   (boroughs), a system that was implemented in the 1980s to improve local
   governance. The stadsdelen are responsible for many activities that
   previously had been run by the central city. Fourteen of these have
   their own council, chosen by a popular election. The fifteenth,
   Westpoort, covers the harbour of Amsterdam, has very few inhabitants,
   and is governed by the central municipal council. Local decisions are
   made at borough level, and only affairs pertaining to the whole city,
   such as major infrastructure projects, are handled by the central city
   council. See also: List of mayors of Amsterdam

Tourist attractions

   Leaning buildings are common in Amsterdam
   Enlarge
   Leaning buildings are common in Amsterdam
   One of many coffeeshops in Amsterdam. The coffeeshops are most famous
   for selling small amounts of cannabis
   Enlarge
   One of many coffeeshops in Amsterdam. The coffeeshops are most famous
   for selling small amounts of cannabis
   The red-light district of Amsterdam by night
   Enlarge
   The red-light district of Amsterdam by night

   Amsterdam is noted for many outstanding museums, including the
   Rijksmuseum, the Stedelijk Museum, Rembrandt House Museum, and its
   world-class symphony orchestra, the Concertgebouworkest, whose home
   base is the Concertgebouw. The Van Gogh Museum houses the largest
   collection of Van Gogh's paintings and drawings in the world. Anne
   Frank House is also a popular tourist attraction.

   Amsterdam is also famous for its red-light district, de Wallen.
   Prostitution is legal in the Netherlands at specific places. The
   red-light district is located in the centre of the city along major
   canals and is clearly marked on maps. However, this is not unique to
   Amsterdam as other Dutch cities such as Utrecht, The Hague, Leeuwarden,
   Haarlem and Groningen also have "Hoerenbuurten" ("Hooker areas").

   Centred around the Wallen, but also elsewhere in the city, coffee shops
   sell cannabis. This is not completely legal but is tolerated when small
   quantities of the drug (up to 5 grammes) are involved. There is also a
   festival held annually known as the Cannabis Cup. The event centers
   around high grade cannabis, mainly high quality marijuana grown under
   lights in Holland. Patrons of the festival can sample any of the
   various and numerous strains presented at the cup. At the end of the
   festival one of the strains presented is named the Cannabis Cup winner.
   Usually the cup winning strain becomes very sought after and well
   known.

Nightlife

   Amsterdam has a vibrant nightlife and is famous for its many (lounge)
   clubs. It is considered one of the best destinations to go out in
   Europe together with Paris, London, Madrid and Berlin. Many youngsters
   from all over the country and even abroad visit Hotel Arena, Escape
   (Deluxe), Powerzone, Jimmy Woo, Supperclub, Club More, Chemistry,
   Panama, Melkweg, Paradiso or Club 11 - which are among the most famous.
   These clubs are located everywhere around, but there are concentrations
   around Rembrandtplein and Leidseplein, where you can also find many
   bars and restaurants.

   Amsterdam has a vibrant gay scene centred around The
   Reguliersdwarsstraat next to Rembrandtplein. From 1989 till 1996
   Europe's biggest gay-club 'iT' was settled in Amsterdam.

Weather

   Amsterdam enjoys a moderate temperate climate, with the weather
   patterns being strongly influenced by Amsterdam's proximity to the
   Atlantic Ocean to the west and the prevailing westerly winds. Winters
   are mild and average above freezing, although frosts are not uncommon
   during periods of easterly or northeasterly winds that blow from the
   interior of the continent. Summers are warm but seldom hot. Although
   days with measurable precipitation are common, Amsterdam averages less
   than 760 mm of precipitation annually. Most of the rain falls as
   protracted drizzle or light rain. Cloudy and damp days are common,
   particularly in the cooler months.

Economy

   Amsterdam is the financial/business capital of the Netherlands and
   repeatedly chosen the fifth most important city in Europe to do
   business after London, Frankfurt, Paris and Brussels, but has reacently
   moved to a sixth place just behind Barcelona (Cushman and Wakefield).
   Many large Dutch corporations and banks have their headquarters in
   Amsterdam, like ABN Amro, Heineken, ING Group, Ahold, Delta Lloyd Group
   and Philips. KPMG International's global headquarter is located in
   Amsterdam, just as the European headquarter of Cisco Systems.

   Because of the many large companies in Amsterdam, and the rest of the
   Netherlands, Reuters has a relatively large representation in the city.

   Though many subsidiaries are located along the old canals, more and
   more companies decide to move to a newly built office tower outside the
   city centre. The South Axis (Dutch: Zuidas) is increasingly a banking
   area, and is intended to become the new business-face of the
   Netherlands. There the recently expanded World Trade Centre also has
   its location.

   The Amsterdam Stock Exchange (AEX) is part of Euronext, and is the
   oldest stock exchange on earth. Nowadays it still is one of the most
   important in Europe.

Academia

   Amsterdam has two universities: the University of Amsterdam
   (Universiteit van Amsterdam), and the Free University (Vrije
   Universiteit). Other institutions for higher education include an art
   school, De Rietveldacademie, the Hogeschool van Amsterdam and the
   Amsterdamse Hogeschool voor de Kunsten. Amsterdam's International
   Institute of Social History is one of the world's largest documentary
   and research institutions concerning social history, and especially the
   history of the labour movement. Amsterdam's Hortus Botanicus, founded
   in the early 1600s, is one of the oldest botanical gardens in the
   world, with many old and rare specimens, amongst which the coffee plant
   that served as the parent for the entire coffee culture in Central and
   South America.

Public transport

   NS double-decker train at Amsterdam Central Station
   Enlarge
   NS double-decker train at Amsterdam Central Station

Current situation

   Public transport in Amsterdam, operated by Gemeentelijk Vervoerbedrijf,
   Connexxion, Arriva, and Nederlandse Spoorwegen, consists of:
     * national and international train connections
     * 3 metro lines, 1 light rail line and 1 more metro line under
       construction, together the Amsterdam metro
     * 16 tram lines
     * An express tram line (IJtram)
     * 55 local bus lines
     * regional bus lines
     * several ferries for pedestrians and cyclists across the IJ (free of
       charge)
     * a Fast Flying Ferry towards Velsen-Zuid on the North Sea shore
     * local night bus lines

   A new underground line, the North/South Line (Noord/Zuidlijn) is under
   construction. The estimated completion date is in 2012.(See also
   Gemeentelijk Vervoerbedrijf, Amsterdam metro, Amsterdam Centraal).

   As of the start of 2006 most of the regional transport is handled by
   Arriva, Connexxion used to handle all of regional transport and still
   operates a few lines.

History

   During the construction of the Amsterdam metro, plans to demolish the
   entire former Jewish neighbourhood near the Nieuwmarkt led to strong
   protests. The metro was still built (wall decorations at the Nieuwmarkt
   station are dedicated to the protests), but plans to build a highway
   through the neighbourhood in the centre of Amsterdam were abolished.

Private transport

   Many bikes parked in Amsterdam.
   Enlarge
   Many bikes parked in Amsterdam.
   A few of the ubiquitous cyclists in Amsterdam
   Enlarge
   A few of the ubiquitous cyclists in Amsterdam

   Amsterdam is known as one of the most bicycle-friendly cities in the
   world and is a centre of bicycle culture. Most main streets have bike
   paths. Bike racks are ubiquitous throughout the city. There are about
   700,000 bicycles in the city. Each year, about 80,000 of them are
   stolen and 25,000 end up in the canals. In the city centre, driving a
   car is discouraged, parking fees are steep and a great number of
   streets are closed off for cars. The A10 Ringroad surrounds the city
   and provides connections to four major motorways: the A1, A2, A4 and
   A8, as well as quite a few exits to roads leading into the city (S101
   through S118).

Airport

   Amsterdam Schiphol Airport, is less than 20 minutes by train from
   Amsterdam Central Station. It is the biggest airport in the
   Netherlands, the fourth largest in Europe and the tenth largest in the
   world. It handles about 42 million passengers a year and is home base
   to KLM, since 2004 part of Air France-KLM.

Sports

   Amsterdam is the home town of Ajax, a team in the Dutch Football
   League. Its home base is the modern stadium Amsterdam ArenA, located in
   the south-east of the city. The team shares that facility with the
   Amsterdam Admirals, an American football team.

   In 1928, Amsterdam hosted the Games of the IXth Olympiad. The Olympic
   Stadium built for the occasion has been completely restored and is now
   used for cultural and sporting events.

   Amsterdam also is home to a famous ice rink, the Jaap Eden baan. The
   Amstel Tijgers play in this arena in the Dutch ice hockey premier
   league. In speed skating many international championships have been
   fought in the 400-meter lane of this ice rink.

   The city also has a baseball team, the Amsterdam Pirates who play in
   the Dutch Major League. Three field hockey teams, Amsterdam, Pinoké and
   Hurley who play their matches around the Wagener stadium. These teams
   are offently refered to as playing in Amsterdam. However, all of them
   (even Amsterdam) are playing their matches on the grounds of
   neighbourcity Amstelveen There is also a basketball team, the Amsterdam
   Astronauts who play in the Dutch premier division and play their games
   in the Sporthallen Zuid, near the Olympic Stadium.

   Since 1999 the city of Amsterdam honours it's best sportsmen and -women
   at the Amsterdam Sports Awards. Boxer Raymond Joval and fieldhockey
   midfielder Carole Thate were the first to receive the awards in 1999.

Periodic events

     * April - Koninginnedag, Queen's day, 30 April, the former Queen's (
       Juliana) birthday, also the day Juliana transferred her title to
       her daughter Beatrix.
     * June - The Amsterdam Roots Festival, last week of June.
       International music festival
     * June - Holland Festival is an international festival for theatre,
       music, dance, opera, film and art, throughout the month of June.
     * August - Amsterdam Pride, first weekend of August, gay pride
       weekend
     * August - Hartjesdag, 3rd Weekend in August.
     * August - Uitmarkt, last weekend in August, the start of the
       cultural season
     * August - Amsterdam Tournament, late August, International
       Football-tournament hosted by AFC Ajax
     * August - Sail Amsterdam, a five-yearly event, when tall ships from
       all over the world can be visited. Next event 2010.
     * October - Amsterdam Marathon, mid-October
     * October – The Bokbier Beer Festival in the Beurs van Berlage (Old
       stock Exchange)
     * October – Grachtenrace (Canal Race), 25km rowing race, 2nd Saturday
       in October.
     * November - Shadow Festival of Documentary Film
     * November – December The IDFA International Documentary Film
       Festival Amsterdam
     * November - Cannabis Cup, mid-November annual cannabis competition,
       hosted by High Times.
     * December – Sinterklaas

Demography

   CAPTION: Demographic evolution of Amsterdam between 1300 and 2006

   1300 1400 1500 1600 1650 1796 1830 1849 1879 1899 1925 2006
   1,000 3,000 12,000 60,000 140,000 200,600 202,400 224,000 317,000
   510,900 714,200 743,905

Famous Amsterdammers

     * Karel Appel - painter
     * Frits Bolkestein - Dutch politician and former EU commissioner
     * George Hendrik Breitner - painter
     * Simon Carmiggelt - writer and columnist
     * Johan Cruijff - football player
     * Anne Frank - Holocaust diarist
     * Theo van Gogh - filmmaker and columnist
     * André Hazes - singer

     * Freddy Heineken - beer magnate
     * Meindert Hobbema - painter
     * Jozef Israëls - painter
     * Wim Kok - former prime minister
     * Harry Mulisch - writer
     * Multatuli - writer
     * Rembrandt - painter
     * Baruch Spinoza - philosopher

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amsterdam"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
