   #copyright

Anaconda

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Insects, Reptiles and
Fish

                 iAnaconda
   Yellow Anaconda, Eunectes notaeus
   Yellow Anaconda, Eunectes notaeus
         Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Animalia
   Phylum:   Chordata
   Class:    Reptilia
   Order:    Squamata
   Suborder: Serpentes
   Family:   Boidae
   Genus:    Eunectes
             Wagler, 1830

                                   Species

   4, see article.

   Anacondas (local names: Jibóia and Sucuri) are four species of aquatic
   boa inhabiting the swamps and rivers of the dense forests of tropical
   South America. The Yellow Anaconda can be found as far south as
   Argentina.

   There are two possible origins for the word 'anaconda': It is perhaps
   an alteration of the Sinhalese word 'henakanday', meaning 'whip snake',
   or alternatively, the Tamil word 'anaikondran', which means 'elephant
   killer', as early Spanish settlers in South America referred to the
   anaconda as 'matatoro', or 'bull killer'. It is unclear how the name
   originated so far from the snake's native habitat; it is likely due to
   its vague similarity to the large Asian pythons.^

Taxonomy and General Characteristics

   Two species are well-known:
     * The Green Anaconda ( Eunectes murinus, from the Greek "ευνήκτης,
       eunectes", meaning "good swimmer"), which has been reported at over
       10 meters (32.8 feet) in length (although most are considerably
       smaller). Although shorter than the longest recorded species, the
       Reticulated Python, it is considerably heavier. In fact, it is the
       heaviest snake species in existence. It can weigh 250 kg (551
       pounds) and have a diameter of more than 30 cm (11.8 inches).
       Females are larger than males, averaging 22-26 feet and 12-16 feet
       respectively. These are found mainly in northern South America, in
       Venezuela, Colombia, Brazil, Ecuador, northern Bolivia, northeast
       Peru, Guyana, and the Nariva Swamp in Trinidad where they are known
       as "Huille" (pronounced Wheel). Although charismatic, very little
       information was known about the anacondas until 1992 when the first
       study (and so far the only) was made on the field biology of this
       species in the Venezuelan llanos by Dr. Jesus Rivas. ^

   Green Anaconda, Eunectes murinus
   Enlarge
   Green Anaconda, Eunectes murinus
   A wild anaconda snake, Amazon basin, Peru.
   Enlarge
   A wild anaconda snake, Amazon basin, Peru.
   An anaconda snake on a tree branch, waiting for its prey above the
   river, Amazon basin, Peru.
   Enlarge
   An anaconda snake on a tree branch, waiting for its prey above the
   river, Amazon basin, Peru.
     * The Yellow Anaconda ( Eunectes notaeus), which reaches a relatively
       smaller average adult length of 3 metres (9.8 feet). These live
       further south in Bolivia, Paraguay, Uruguay, western Brazil, and
       northeast Argentina.

   The two lesser known species are:
     * The Dark-Spotted or Deschauense's Anaconda ( Eunectes
       deschauenseei) found in northeast Brazil.
     * The Bolivian Anaconda ( Eunectes beniensis) found in Bolivia, which
       was only identified in 2002 by Lutz Dirksen, and is still being
       studied.

   Eunectes murinus (formerly called Boa murina) differs from Boa by the
   snout being covered with shields instead of small scales, the inner of
   the three nasal shields being in contact with that of the other side.
   The general colour is dark olive- brown, with large oval black spots
   arranged in two alternating rows along the back, and with smaller
   white-eyed spots along the sides. The belly is whitish, spotted with
   black spots. The anaconda combines an arboreal with an aquatic life and
   is active mostly during the night. It lies submerged in the water, with
   only a small part of its head above the surface, waiting for any
   suitable prey, or it establishes itself upon the branches of a tree
   which overhangs the water or the track of game.

   The anaconda has a large head and a thick neck. Its eyes and nostrils
   are positioned on the top of the head, enabling the anaconda to breathe
   and to see its prey while its stocky body lies submerged under water.
   The extremely muscular anaconda is a constrictor and is not venomous;
   however, it still has teeth and powerful jaws that it utilizes to
   clench onto its prey. It grabs its victim and pulls it underwater,
   drowning the prey. The anaconda has a cavity called a cloaca which is
   where the intestinal and genito-urinary tracts empty, with spurs on
   either side of the cloaca, and a gland which emits a foul-smelling
   musk.

   They typically feed on large rodents, tapirs, capybaras, deer,
   peccaries, fish, turtles, birds, sheep, dogs and aquatic reptiles like
   caiman. They have been known to occasionally prey on jaguars and
   attacks on humans can be confirmed, although this is rare. Younger
   anacondas feed on mice, rats, chicks, frogs and fish. Most local people
   kill these snakes on sight, out of the fear that they are man-eaters.
   In most instances, if an anaconda senses humans in the area, it will
   retreat in another direction. Human death by anaconda is quite rare.
   They themselves are preyed by jaguars, large caimans and by other
   anacondas. A wounded anaconda can also fall prey to piranhas.

   Anacondas are usually coiled up in a murky, shallow pool or at the
   river's edge. They wait to ambush their unsuspecting prey when they
   come down for a drink. Anacondas bite their prey with their sharp
   teeth, hold on with their powerful jaws and pull them under water. The
   victim may drown first or it may be squeezed to death in the anaconda's
   muscular coils. Anacondas, true to the boa family, constrict their
   hapless victims to death. The snake squeezes tighter each time its prey
   breathes out, so the prey cannot breath in again. Suffocation does not
   take long. Anacondas swallow their prey whole, starting with the head.
   This is so the legs fold up and the prey goes down smoothly. The
   Anaconda can swallow prey much bigger than the size of its mouth since
   its jaw can unhinge and the jaw bones are loosely connected to the
   skull. While the snake eats, its muscles have wave-like contractions,
   crushing the prey even further and surging it downward with each bite.

   Just about every species of snake on earth has teeth, but the
   anacondas' teeth are not used for chewing. Most snakes' teeth are used
   for holding onto their prey, preventing them from escaping. Some snakes
   have venom in two specially designed, extra long teeth which they use
   to kill their prey. Anacondas do have teeth, but their bites are
   neither fatal nor venomous. They rely on their enormous size and power
   to subdue their victims. It is possible to be bitten by an anaconda,
   but the bite itself would not be fatal. Like almost all boas, anacondas
   give birth to live young.

Giant Anacondas

   The largest known anaconda measured 10 meters (32.8 feet) long, but
   unverified reports of much larger snakes have occasionally been made.
   This is the famous Lamon-Dunn record, named for a geological survey
   expedition from 1944. The geologists who led the expedition found the
   gigantic snake by the water of the Orinoco river in East Venezuela.
   Together with a platoon of soldiers of the Farc they shot the dangerous
   snake, and with the help of 20 men, carried it out on shore. The
   anaconda was measured with a special measuring device for geological
   purposes. Although this is probably the largest verified anaconda
   account, the animal was unfortunately not weighed because after
   shooting it, the workers went back to camp for lunch. When they
   returned, it was apparent that the snake was not dead as it had left
   and the trails indicated that it swam up the river.

   An anaconda of 9 meters can weigh up to about 500 kg (1100 lb). The
   well-fed ones typically weigh about a hundred kilograms per meter of
   length. A snake this large can kill a large bull or tapir easily.
   Zoological research has shown trails of snakes on the dry riverbeds on
   the llanos in Venezuela that indicate extremely large snakes awaiting
   discovery, some of them were more than 0.50 m wide. Anacondas, like all
   large species of boas and pythons, continue to grow throughout their
   lives. Their growth speed reduces after reaching maturity but these
   snakes possibly reach 50 or 60 years of age, some maybe 80.

   There are some exaggerated reports of early European explorers of the
   South American jungles seeing giant anacondas up to 60 feet long and
   some of the native peoples of the South American jungle have reported
   seeing anacondas up to 50 feet long. No one has caught and measured an
   anaconda anywhere near that size.

   Another apparently exaggerated account was reported by adventurer Percy
   Fawcett. In 1906, Fawcett wrote that he had shot and wounded an
   anaconda in South America; he reported the snake measured some 18.9
   meters (62 ft) from nose to tail.

   Once publicized, Fawcett’s account of the giant snake was widely
   ridiculed, although he insisted his account was both truthful and
   accurate. Bernard Heuvelmans came to his defense arguing that Fawcett
   was generally honest and reliable when relating things. Furthermore,
   Heuvelmans noted that mainstream experts were repeatedly forced to
   revise their limits regarding the maximum size of snakes when
   confronted with specimens that defied the generally-accepted estimates.
   At one point in time, 6 meters (20 feet) in length was the
   widely-accepted maximum size of an anaconda. These giant snakes are one
   of the few that have documented, but not verified, cases of eating
   people. Given maximum size, it is possible, although likely exceedingly
   rare. When it sheds, an adult anaconda relieves itself of an average of
   2 pounds of skin. An anaconda's skin can stretch up to 30% larger than
   the original size of the snake.

In captivity

   Anacondas have a reputation for bad temperament; that plus the massive
   size of the green species mean that anacondas are comparatively less
   popular as pets than other boas, but they are fairly commonly available
   in the exotic pet trade.

In movies

     * In Swiss Family Robinson, Firtz and Ernst have a run-in with an
       Anaconda.

     * In the movies Anaconda and its sequel Anacondas: The Hunt for the
       Blood Orchid the anaconda has the role of a giant man-eating snake.
       In the first film the anaconda is shown at an exceptionally
       exaggerated length and girth, clearly far larger than actual
       anacondas in the wild get. However, in the second film it is shown
       as a 'super snake', growing up to 70 feet long, supposedly because
       of the blood orchid. Even with extremely rare and old specimens, an
       anaconda anywhere near that size has never been recorded. Anacondas
       on average grow between 16-20.2 feet, but have been rumored to
       reach between 30 and 40 feet.

     * In Jackass: Number Two, Johnny Knoxville, Ryan Dunn, and Wee Man
       crawl around in a ball pit, trying to catch two anacondas that were
       let loose in the pit. Knoxville is bitten several times in the
       arms.

     * The Discovery Channel series Animal Face-Off featured an episode
       wherein an Anaconda was pitted against a Jaguar in a computer
       simulation to determine which animal would win a battle between the
       two.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anaconda"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
