   #copyright

Andrew Jackson

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: USA Presidents

   Andrew Jackson
   Andrew Jackson
     __________________________________________________________________

   7th President of the United States
   In office
   March 4, 1829 –  March 4, 1837
   Vice President(s)   John C. Calhoun (1829-1832),
   None (1832-1833),
   Martin Van Buren (1833-1837)
   Preceded by John Quincy Adams
   Succeeded by Martin Van Buren
     __________________________________________________________________

   Born March 15, 1767
   Waxhaw, South Carolina
   Died June 8, 1845
   The Hermitage, Nashville, Tennessee
   Political party Democratic-Republican and Democratic
   Spouse Widowed. Rachel Donelson Robards Jackson. (Niece Emily Donelson
   Jackson and daughter-in-law Sarah Yorke Jackson were first ladies)
   Religion Presbyterian
   Signature

   Andrew Jackson ( March 15, 1767 – June 8, 1845) was the seventh
   President of the United States (1829-1837), He was military governor of
   Florida (1821), general of the Battle of New Orleans (1815), a
   co-founder of the Democratic Party, and the eponym of the era of
   Jacksonian democracy. He was a polarizing figure who helped shape the
   Second Party System of American politics in the 1820s and 1830s.

   Nicknamed "Old Hickory" because he was renowned for his toughness,
   Jackson was the first President primarily associated with the American
   frontier (although born in South Carolina, he spent most of his life in
   Tennessee).

Early life and career

   Jackson was born in a backwoods settlement to Presbyterian Scots-Irish
   immigrants Andrew and Elizabeth Jackson in Lancaster County, South
   Carolina, on March 15, 1767. He was the youngest of three brothers and
   was born just a few weeks after his father's death. Both North Carolina
   and South Carolina have claimed Jackson as a "native son," because the
   community straddled the state line, and a cousin later claimed that
   Jackson was born on the North Carolina side. Jackson himself always
   stated that he was born in a cabin on the South Carolina side, a fact
   which historians accept, since he presumably was repeating the
   recollections of his mother and others in the immediate family. He
   received a sporadic education. At age thirteen, he joined the
   Continental Army as a courier. He was captured and imprisoned by the
   British during the American Revolutionary War. Jackson was the last
   U.S. President to have been a veteran of the American Revolution, and
   the only President to have been a prisoner of war. The war took the
   lives of Jackson's entire immediate family.
   Jackson refusing to clean a British officer's boots (1876 lithography)
   Enlarge
   Jackson refusing to clean a British officer's boots (1876 lithography)

   Andrew and his brother Robert Jackson were taken as prisoners, and they
   nearly starved to death. When Andrew refused to clean the boots of a
   British officer, the irate redcoat slashed at him, giving him scars on
   his left hand and head, as well as an intense hatred for the British.
   Both of them contracted small pox while imprisoned, and Robert died
   days after their release. In addition Jackson's entire immediate family
   died from war-time hardships that Jackson also blamed upon the British.
   This anglophobia would help to inspire a distrust and dislike of
   Eastern "aristocrats," whom Jackson felt were too inclined to favour
   and emulate their former colonial "masters." Jackson admired Napoleon
   Bonaparte for his willingness to contest British military supremacy.

   Jackson came to Tennessee by 1787. Though he could barely read law, he
   found he knew enough to become a young lawyer on the frontier. Since he
   was not from a distinguished family, he had to make his career by his
   own merits; and soon he began to prosper in the rough-and-tumble world
   of frontier law. Most of the actions grew out of disputed land-claims,
   or from assaults and battery. He was elected as Tennessee's first
   Congressman, upon its statehood in the late 1790s, and quickly became a
   U.S. Senator in 1797 but resigned within a year. In 1798, he was
   appointed judge on the Tennessee Supreme Court.

Military career

Creek War and War of 1812

   Jackson became a colonel in the Tennessee militia, which he had led
   since the beginning of his military career in 1801. In 1813, Northern
   Creek Band chieftain Peter McQueen massacred 400 men, women, and
   children at Fort Mims (in what is now Alabama). Jackson commanded in
   the campaign against the Northern Creek Indians of Alabama and Georgia,
   also known as the " Red Sticks." Creek leaders such as William
   Weatherford (Red Eagle), Peter McQueen, and Menawa, who had been allies
   of the British during the War of 1812, violently clashed with other
   chiefs of the Creek Nation over white encroachment on Creek lands and
   the "civilizing" programs administered by U.S. Indian Agent Benjamin
   Hawkins.

   In the Creek War, a theatre of the War of 1812, Jackson defeated the
   Red Stick Creeks at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend. Jackson was aided by
   members of the Southern Creek Indian Band, who had requested Jackson's
   aid in putting down what they considered to be the "rebellious" Red
   Sticks, and some Cherokee Indians, who also sided with the Americans.
   800 Northern Creek Band "Red Sticks" Indians were massacred. Jackson
   spared Weatherford's life from any acts of vengeance. Sam Houston and
   David Crockett, later to become famous themselves in Texas, served
   under Jackson at this time. Following the victory, Jackson imposed the
   Treaty of Fort Jackson upon both his Northern Creek enemy and Southern
   Creek allies, wresting 20 million acres (81,000 km²) from all Creeks
   for white settlement.

   Jackson's service in the War of 1812 was conspicuous for its bravery
   and success. He was a strict officer, but was popular with his troops.
   It was said he was "tough as old hickory" wood on the battlefield,
   which gave him his nickname. The war, and particularly his command at
   the Battle of New Orleans on January 8, 1815, made his national
   reputation. He advanced in rank to Major General. In the battle,
   Jackson's 6,000 militiamen behind barricades of cotton bales opposed
   12,000 British regulars marching across an open field, led by General
   Edward Pakenham. The battle was a total American victory. The British
   had over 2,000 casualties to Jackson's 8 killed and 58 wounded or
   missing.

First Seminole War

   Jackson served in the military again during the First Seminole War when
   he was ordered by President James Monroe in December 1817 to lead a
   campaign in Georgia against the Seminole and Creek Indians. Jackson was
   also charged with preventing Spanish Florida from becoming a refuge for
   runaway slaves. Critics later alleged that Jackson exceeded orders in
   his Florida actions, but Monroe and the public wanted Florida. Before
   going, Jackson wrote to Monroe, "Let it be signified to me through any
   channel... that the possession of the Floridas would be desirable to
   the United States, and in sixty days it will be accomplished." Monroe
   gave Jackson orders that were purposely ambiguous, sufficient for
   international denials.

   Jackson's Tennessee volunteers were attacked by Seminoles, but this
   left their villages vulnerable, and Jackson burned them and their
   crops. He found letters that indicated that the Spanish and British
   were secretly assisting the Indians. Jackson believed that the United
   States would not be secure as long as Spain and Great Britain
   encouraged American Indians to fight and argued that his actions were
   undertaken in self-defense. Jackson captured Pensacola, Florida with
   little more than some warning shots and deposed the Spanish governor.
   He illegally tried, and then captured and executed two British
   subjects, Robert Ambrister and Alexander Arbuthnot who had been
   supplying and advising the Indians. Jackson's action also struck fear
   into the Seminole tribes as word of his ruthlessness in battle spread.

   This also created an international incident, and many in the Monroe
   administration called for Jackson to be censured. However, Jackson's
   actions were defended by Secretary of State John Quincy Adams. When the
   Spanish minister demanded a "suitable punishment" for Jackson, Adams
   wrote back "Spain must immediately [decide] either to place a force in
   Florida adequate at once to the protection of her territory, ... or
   cede to the United States a province, of which she retains nothing but
   the nominal possession, but which is, in fact, ... a post of annoyance
   to them." Adams used Jackson's conquest, and Spain's own weaknesses, to
   convince the Spanish (in the Adams-Onís Treaty) to cede Florida to the
   United States. Jackson was subsequently named its territorial governor.

Election of 1824

   The Tennessee legislature nominated Jackson for president in 1822. It
   also made him a Senator again in the United States Senate. In 1824,
   most of the Democratic-Republican Party in Congress had boycotted the
   traditional nominating caucus; those that adhered to it backed William
   H. Crawford for president and Albert Gallatin for vice president. A
   convention in Pennsylvania nominated Jackson for president almost a
   month later, on March 4. Gallatin critiqued Jackson as "an honest man
   and the idol of the worshippers of military glory, but from incapacity,
   military habits, and habitual disregard of laws and constitutional
   provisions, altogether unfit for the office." Thomas Jefferson, who
   would later write to William Crawford and William Branch Giles in
   dismay at the outcome of the election, wrote to Jackson in December of
   1823:

     "I recall with pleasure the remembrance of our joint labors while in
     the Senate together in times of great trial and of hard battling,
     battles indeed of words, not of blood, as those you have since
     fought so much for your own glory & that of your country; with the
     assurance that my attamts continue undiminished, accept that of my
     great respect & consideration."

   Biographer Robert V. Remini said that Jefferson "had no great love for
   Jackson." Daniel Webster wrote that Jefferson told him in December of
   1824:

     "I feel much alarmed at the prospect of seeing General Jackson
     President. He is one of the most unfit men I know of for such a
     place. He has had very little respect for laws or constitutions, and
     is, in fact, an able military chief. His passions are terrible. When
     I was President of the Senate he was a Senator; and he could never
     speak on account of the rashness of his feelings. I have seen him
     attempt it repeatedly, and as often choke with rage. His passions
     are no doubt cooler now; he has been much tried since I knew him,
     but he is a dangerous man."

   During his first run for the presidency in 1824, Jackson received a
   plurality of both the popular and electoral votes. Since no candidate
   received a majority, the election decision was given to the House of
   Representatives, which chose John Quincy Adams as president in 1825.
   Jackson denounced it as a " corrupt bargain" because House Speaker
   Henry Clay gave his votes to Adams, who then appointed Clay Secretary
   of State. Jackson later called for the abolishment of the Electoral
   College. Jackson's defeat burnished his political credentials, however,
   since many voters believed the "man of the people" had been robbed by
   the "corrupt aristocrats of the East."

Election of 1828

   The Tennessee legislature again nominated Jackson for the presidency.
   He resigned from United States Senate in 1825. Jackson allied himself
   with Vice President John C. Calhoun, Martin Van Buren, and former
   supporters of William H. Crawford; together they built a coalition that
   handily defeated the reelection of John Quincy Adams in 1828. His
   supporters called themselves "Jackson Men," or Jacksonians.

Presidency 1829-1837

Spoils system

   When Jackson became President, he implemented the theory of rotation in
   office, declaring it "a leading principle in the republican creed." He
   believed that rotation in office would prevent the development of a
   corrupt civil service. On the other hand, Jackson's supporters wanted
   to use the civil service to reward party loyalists to make the party
   stronger. In practice, this meant replacing civil servants with friends
   or party loyalists into those offices. However, contrary to popular
   belief, the Spoils System, as the rotation in office system was called,
   did not originate with Jackson. It originated under Thomas Jefferson
   when he removed Federalist office-holders after becoming president.
   Also, Jackson did not out the entire civil service. At the end of his
   term, Jackson had only dismissed less than twenty percent of the
   original civil service. While Jackson did not start the "spoils
   system", he did indirectly encourage its growth for many years to come.

Opposition to the National Bank

   As president, Jackson worked to take away the federal charter of the
   Second Bank of the United States (it would continue to exist as a state
   bank). The second Bank had been authorized, during James Madison's
   tenure in 1816, for a 20 year period. Jackson opposed the national bank
   concept on ideological grounds. In Jackson's veto message (written by
   George Bancroft), the bank needed to be abolished because:
   Democratic cartoon shows Jackson fighting the monster Bank
   Enlarge
   Democratic cartoon shows Jackson fighting the monster Bank
     * It concentrated an excessive amount of the nation's financial
       strength into a single institution
     * It exposed the government to control by "foreign interests"
     * It served mainly to make the rich richer
     * It exercised too much control over members of the Congress
     * It favored Northeastern states over Southern and Western states

   Jackson followed Jefferson as a supporter of the ideal of an
   "agricultural republic" and felt the bank improved the fortunes of an
   "elite circle" of commercial and industrial entrepreneurs at the
   expense of farmers and laborers. After a titanic struggle, Jackson
   succeeded in destroying the bank by vetoing its 1832 re-charter by
   Congress and by withdrawing U.S. funds in 1833. The bank's
   money-lending functions were taken over by the legions of local and
   state banks that sprang up feeding an expansion of credit and
   speculation; the commercial progress of the nation's economy was
   noticeably dented by the resulting failures.
   1833 Democratic cartoon shows Jackson destroying the devil's Bank
   Enlarge
   1833 Democratic cartoon shows Jackson destroying the devil's Bank

   The U.S. Senate censured Jackson on March 27, 1834 for his actions in
   defunding the Bank of the United States; the censure was later expunged
   when the Jacksonians had a majority in the Senate.

Nullification crisis

   Another notable crisis during Jackson's period of office was the "
   nullification crisis," or "secession crisis," of 1828 – 1832, which
   merged issues of sectional strife with disagreements over tariffs.
   Critics alleged that high tariffs (the " Tariff of Abominations") on
   imports of common manufactured goods made in Europe made those goods
   more expensive than ones from the northern U.S., thus raising the
   prices paid by planters in the South. Southern politicians thus argued
   that tariffs benefited northern industrialists at the expense of
   southern farmers.

   The issue came to a head when Vice President John C. Calhoun, in the
   South Carolina Exposition and Protest of 1828, supported the claim of
   his home state, South Carolina, that it had the right to
   "nullify"—declare illegal—the tariff legislation of 1828, and more
   generally the right of a state to nullify any Federal laws which went
   against its interests. Although Jackson sympathized with the South in
   the tariff debate, he was also a strong supporter of a strong union,
   with considerable powers for the central government. Jackson attempted
   to face Calhoun down over the issue, which developed into a bitter
   rivalry between the two men. Particularly infamous was an incident at
   the April 13, 1830 Jefferson Day dinner, involving after-dinner toasts.
   Jackson rose first and voice booming, and glaring at Calhoun, yelled
   out "Our federal Union: IT MUST BE PRESERVED!", a clear challenge to
   Calhoun. Calhoun glared at Jackson and yelled out, his voice trembling,
   but booming as well, "The Union: NEXT TO OUR LIBERTY, MOST DEAR!"

   In response to South Carolina's threat, Congress passed a " Force Bill"
   in 1833, and Jackson vowed to send troops to South Carolina in order to
   enforce the laws. In December 1832, he issued a resounding proclamation
   against the "nullifiers," stating that he considered "the power to
   annul a law of the United States, assumed by one State, incompatible
   with the existence of the Union, contradicted expressly by the letter
   of the Constitution, unauthorized by its spirit, inconsistent with
   every principle on which it was founded, and destructive of the great
   object for which it was formed." South Carolina, the President
   declared, stood on "the brink of insurrection and treason," and he
   appealed to the people of the state to reassert their allegiance to
   that Union for which their ancestors had fought. Jackson also denied
   the right of secession: "The Constitution...forms a government not a
   league.... To say that any State may at pleasure secede from the Union
   is to say that the United States is not a nation."

   The crisis was resolved when Jackson sent warships to Charleston, South
   Carolina and enforced Congress acts through the Force Bill. Tariffs
   gradually lowered until 1842.

   Passage of the Force Bill depended on the vote of Henry Clay. Clay
   would finally yield to those urging him to save the day. He introduced
   a plan to reduce the tariff gradually until 1842, by which time no rate
   would be more than 20 percent. The Compromise Tariff of 1833 was to be
   a resolution to the Nullification Crisis. On March 1, 1833 Congress
   passed the Force Bill and the compromise tariff and Jackson signed
   both. The South Carolina Convention then met and rescinded its
   nullification ordinance. The Force Bill was then nullified because
   Jackson no longer had a need for it. Henry Clay had saved the day.

"Indian Removal"

   Perhaps the most controversial aspect of Andrew Jackson's presidency
   was his policy regarding American Indians. Jackson was a leading
   advocate of a policy known as " Indian Removal," signing the Indian
   Removal Act into law in 1830. The Act authorized the President to
   negotiate treaties to purchase tribal lands in the east in exchange for
   lands further west, outside of existing U.S. state borders.

   According to biographer Robert V. Remini, Jackson promoted this policy
   primarily for reasons of national security, seeing that Great Britain
   and Spain had recruited Native Americans within U.S. borders in
   previous wars with the United States. According to historian Anthony
   Wallace, Jackson never publicly advocated removing American Indians by
   force. Instead, Jackson made the negotiation of treaties priority:
   nearly seventy Indian treaties—many of them land sales—were ratified
   during his presidency, more than in any other administration.
   Statue of Andrew Jackson in Nashville, Tennessee.
   Enlarge
   Statue of Andrew Jackson in Nashville, Tennessee.

   The Removal Act was especially popular in the South, where population
   growth and the discovery of gold on Cherokee land had increased
   pressure on tribal lands. The state of Georgia became involved in a
   contentious jurisdictional dispute with the Cherokees, culminating in
   the 1832 U.S. Supreme Court decision ( Worcester v. Georgia) that ruled
   that Georgia could not impose its laws upon Cherokee tribal lands.
   About this case, Jackson is often quoted as having said, "John Marshall
   has made his decision, now let him enforce it!" Jackson probably never
   said this; the popular story that Jackson defied the Supreme Court in
   carrying out Indian Removal is untrue. Instead, Jackson used the
   Georgia crisis to pressure Cherokee leaders to sign a removal treaty. A
   faction of Cherokees led by Jackson's old ally Major Ridge negotiated
   the Treaty of New Echota with Jackson's administration, a document
   which was rejected by most Cherokees. The terms of the treaty were
   strictly enforced by Jackson's successor, Martin Van Buren, which
   resulted in the deaths of over 4000 Cherokee on the " Trail of Tears."

   In all, more than 45,000 American Indians were relocated to the West
   during Jackson's administration. During this time, the administration
   purchased about 100 million acres (400,000 km²) of Indian land for
   about $68 million and 32 million acres (130,000 km²) of western land.
   Jackson was criticized at the time for his role in these events, and
   the criticism has grown over the years. Remini characterizes the Indian
   Removal era as "one of the unhappiest chapters in American history."

Assassination attempt

   On January 30, 1835 an unsuccessful attack occurred in the United
   States Capitol Building; it was the first assassination attempt made
   against an American President. One Richard Lawrence approached Jackson
   and fired two pistols, which both misfired. Jackson proceeded to attack
   Lawrence with his cane, prompting his aides to restrain him. As a
   result, Jackson's statue in the Capitol Rotunda is placed in front of
   the doorway in which the attempt occurred. Lawrence was later found to
   be mentally ill.

Administration and Cabinet

   Official White House portrait of Jackson.
   Enlarge
   Official White House portrait of Jackson.
   OFFICE                    NAME               TERM
   President                 Andrew Jackson     1829–1837
   Vice President            John C. Calhoun    1829–1832
                             Martin Van Buren   1833–1837
   Secretary of State        Martin Van Buren   1829–1831
                             Edward Livingston  1831–1833
                             Louis McLane       1833–1834
                             John Forsyth       1834–1837
   Secretary of the Treasury Samuel D. Ingham   1829–1831
                             Louis McLane       1831–1833
                             William Duane      1833
                             Roger B. Taney     1833–1834
                             Levi Woodbury      1834–1837
   Secretary of War          John H. Eaton      1829–1831
                             Lewis Cass         1831–1836
   Attorney General          John M. Berrien    1829–1831
                             Roger B. Taney     1831–1833
                             Benjamin F. Butler 1833–1837
   Postmaster General        William T. Barry   1829–1835
                             Amos Kendall       1835–1837
   Secretary of the Navy     John Branch        1829–1831
                             Levi Woodbury      1831–1834
                             Mahlon Dickerson   1834–1837

Supreme Court appointments

     * John McLean – 1830
     * Henry Baldwin – 1830
     * James Moore Wayne – 1835
     * Roger Brooke Taney ( Chief Justice) – 1836
     * Philip Pendleton Barbour – 1836
     * John Catron – 1837

Major Supreme Court cases

     * Cherokee Nation vs. Georgia, 1831
     * Worcester v. Georgia, 1832
     * Charles River Bridge v. Warren Bridge, 1837

States admitted to the Union

     * Arkansas - June 15, 1836
     * Michigan - January 26, 1837

Family and personal life

   Portrait of Andrew Jackson
   Enlarge
   Portrait of Andrew Jackson
   Daguerreotype of Andrew Jackson (1844/1845)
   Enlarge
   Daguerreotype of Andrew Jackson (1844/1845)

   Jackson met Rachel after her first husband, Colonel Lewis Robards, left
   her to get a divorce. They fell in love and quickly married. Robards
   returned two years later without ever having obtained a divorce. Rachel
   quickly divorced her first husband and then legally married Jackson.
   This remained a sore point for Jackson who deeply resented attacks on
   his wife's honor. Jackson fought 103 duels, many nominally over his
   wife's honour. Charles Dickinson, the only man Jackson ever killed in a
   duel, had been goaded into angering Jackson by Jackson's political
   opponents. Fought over a horse-racing debt and an insult to his wife on
   May 30, 1806, Dickinson shot Jackson in the ribs before Jackson
   returned the fatal shot. The bullet that struck Jackson was so close to
   his heart that it could never be safely removed. Jackson had been
   wounded so frequently in duels that it was said he "rattled like a bag
   of marbles." . At times he would cough up blood, and he experienced
   considerable pain from his wounds for the rest of his life.

   Rachel died of an unknown cause two months prior to Jackson taking
   office as President. Jackson blamed John Quincy Adams for Rachel's
   death because the marital scandal was brought up in the election of
   1828. He felt that this had hastened her death and never forgave Adams.

   Jackson had two adopted sons, Andrew Jackson Jr., the son of Rachel's
   brother Severn Donelson, and Lyncoya, a Creek Indian orphan adopted by
   Jackson after the Creek War. Lyncoya died in 1828 at age 16, probably
   from pneumonia or tuberculosis.

   The Jacksons also acted as guardians for eight other children. John
   Samuel Donelson, Daniel Donelson, and Andrew Jackson Donelson were the
   sons of Rachel's brother Samuel Donelson who died in 1804. Andrew
   Jackson Hutchings was Rachel's orphaned grand nephew. Caroline Butler,
   Eliza Butler, Edward Butler, and Anthony Butler were the orphaned
   children of Edward Butler, a family friend. They came to live with the
   Jacksons after the death of their father.

   The widower Jackson invited Rachel's niece Emily Donelson to serve as
   hostess at the White House. Emily was married to Andrew Jackson
   Donelson, who acted as Jackson's private secretary. The relationship
   between the President and Emily became strained during the Petticoat
   Affair, and the two became estranged for over a year. They eventually
   reconciled and she resumed her duties as White House hostess. Sarah
   Yorke Jackson, the wife of Andrew Jackson Jr., became co-hostess of the
   White House in 1834. It was the only time in history when two women
   simultaneously acted as unofficial First Lady. Sarah took over all
   hostess duties after Emily died from tuberculosis in 1836.

   Jackson remained influential in both national and state politics after
   retiring to " The Hermitage," his Nashville home, in 1837. Though a
   slave-holder, Jackson was a firm advocate of the federal union of the
   states, and declined to give any support to talk of secession.

   Jackson was a lean figure standing at 6 feet, 1 inch (1.85 m) tall, and
   weighing between 130 and 140 pounds (64 kg) on average. Jackson also
   had an unruly shock of red hair, which had completely grayed by the
   time he became president at age 61. He had penetrating deep blue eyes.
   Jackson was one of the more sickly presidents, suffering from chronic
   headaches, abdominal pains, and a hacking cough, caused by a musket
   ball in his lung which was never removed, that often brought up blood
   and sometimes even made his whole body shake. After retiring to
   Nashville, he enjoyed eight years of retirement and died at the
   Hermitage on June 8, 1845 at the age of 78, of chronic tuberculosis, "
   dropsy" and heart failure.

   In his will, Jackson left his entire estate to his adopted son, Andrew
   Jackson Jr., except for specifically enumerated items that were left to
   various other friends and family members. Jackson left several slaves
   to his daughter-in-law and grandchildren.

Memorials and movies

   Jackson Square in New Orleans.
   Enlarge
   Jackson Square in New Orleans.
     * Memorials to Jackson include a set of three identical equestrian
       statues located in different parts of the country. One is in
       Jackson Square in New Orleans, Louisiana. Another is in Nashville
       on the grounds of the Tennessee State Capitol. The other is in
       Washington, D.C. near the White House.
     * Numerous counties and cities are named after him, including
       Jacksonville, Florida, Jackson, Michigan, Jackson, Mississippi,
       Jackson, Missouri, Jackson, Tennessee, Jackson County, Florida, and
       Jackson County, Missouri.
     * Jackson's portrait appears on the American twenty dollar bill. He
       has appeared on $5, $10, $50, and $10,000 bills in the past, as
       well as a Confederate $1,000 bill.
     * Jackson's image is on the Blackjack postage stamp
     * The story of Andrew and Rachel Jackson's life together was told in
       Irving Stone's best-selling 1951 novel The President's Lady, which
       was made into the 1953 film of the same title, starring Susan
       Hayward, Charlton Heston, John McIntire, and Carl Betz and directed
       by Henry Levin. The relationship between the two was also the basis
       of a successful documentary by the Public Broadcasting Service,
       called Rachel and Andrew Jackson: A Love Story.
     * Heston played Jackson in the 1958 version of The Buccaneer, a film
       about the role of pirate Jean Lafitte in the Battle of New Orleans.
       Hugh Sothern played Jackson in the original 1938 version of the
       film.

Trivia

   U.S. $20 bill
   Enlarge
   U.S. $20 bill
     * During Jackson's Administration, the U.S Government was, for the
       first and last time, debt free.
     * During the 1828 election, his opponents referred to him as a "
       Jackass." Jackson liked the name and used the jackass as a symbol
       for a while, but it died out. However, it later became the symbol
       for the Democratic Party.
     * Andrew Jackson was the first president to be born in a log cabin.
       He also was the first president to ride a railroad train while in
       office.
     * Was the only U.S. president to be a prisoner of war.
     * Jackson held an open house party where a 1,400 pound (635 kg) wheel
       of cheddar cheese was served as refreshment. The cheese was
       consumed in two hours.
     * Of the first seven presidents, Jackson was the last of five
       Veterans of the American Revolution to become President (Washington
       and Monroe were in the Continental Army; Jefferson and Madison were
       Colonels in the Virginia Militia).
     * Jackson was the first president to be the target of a known
       assassination attempt (see above, " Assassination Attempt").
     * Andrew Johnson, Lincoln's vice-president, greatly admired Jackson
       and wanted to be just like him when Johnson became president after
       Lincoln was assassinated.
     * Jackson disliked paper money, as he preferred coined money instead,
       and ironically, he is featured on the U.S. $20 bill.
     * At President Andrew Jackson's funeral in 1845 his pet parrot was
       removed for swearing.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrew_Jackson"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
