   #copyright

Andrés Nocioni

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Sports and games people

   CAPTION: Andrés Nocioni

    Position   Small forward/ Power forward
     Height    6  ft 7  in (2.01  m)
     Weight    225  lb (102  kg)
      Team     Chicago Bulls
   Nationality Flag of Argentina  Argentina
      Born     November 30, 1979
               Santa Fe, Argentina
      Draft    undrafted
   Pro career  2004 – present

   Andrés Marcelo Nocioni (born November 30, 1979 in Santa Fe, Argentina)
   is a basketball player for the NBA's Chicago Bulls, and the Argentine
   national team. Nocioni won a gold medal with the Argentine national
   team at the 2004 Olympics in Athens, Greece. His natural position is
   small forward, though with the Bulls he has played some minutes at
   power forward. He shares both Argentine and Italian citizenship.
   Nocioni is known as Chapu after the Mexican children TV series El
   Chapulín Colorado. Nocioni has a wife named Paula and a son named
   Laureano.

International career

   Olympic medal record
   Competitor for Flag of Argentina  Argentina
                 Men's basketball
   Gold 2004 Athens Team

   Nocioni's professional career began in the Argentine basketball league
   (LNB) in the 1995/96 season, and in 1998/99 he was already named Best
   Sixth Man. A year later, he was called up to the national team that won
   the silver medal at the South American basketball championship.

   In 2001, Nocioni played on the Argentina national team that won the
   2001 South American Title. In 2002, Nocioni was part of a team that
   made basketball history, when Argentina became the first team to beat
   the United States team at the Basketball World Championship, held that
   year in Indianapolis, Indiana. His team once again earned the silver
   medal, losing to Yugoslavia in a controversial final. In 2003, Nocioni
   went to Europe, where he spent two seasons as a refuerzo (reinforcement
   player) with Spain's TAU Cerámica of the ACB Spanish professional
   league. He was the league's 2004 Most Valuable Player. In 2004, Nocioni
   was a key factor when Argentina became the first South American team,
   as well as the first Latin American one, in Olympic basketball history
   (and the fourth team ever, after the United States, Yugoslavia, and the
   USSR) to win the Olympic Gold medal.

   The Argentine national team has 4 NBA players among which is Nocioni,
   who is currently starting for Argentina, in the FIBA World
   Championship. In a game against Venezuela, Nocioni landed on an
   opponent's foot and looked to have injured his ankle, though he was
   cleared to play in Argentina's next game against Nigeria. In
   Argentina’s game against Nigeria, Nocioni led the team in scoring with
   23 points playing 18 minutes, while not missing a single shot. Nocioni
   was 9-9 from the field including 5-5 from the 3-point line. "I don't
   think I've ever played a game where I didn't miss a shot - at least not
   for the national team." Argentina secured winning group A of the
   tournament, going a perfect 5-0 in the first round of play.

   Argentina lost to Spain's national team in the FIBA 2006 world
   championships semi-final, with a final score of 75-74. Nocioni had a
   chance to win the game for Argentina, but his three pointer at the end
   of the game missed, giving Spain the win, and the chance to win the
   championship. Nocioni's Argentine team next played the US team in the
   bronze medal game, which Argentina lost 96-81. Nocioni scored 18 points
   in this game, in which he played against NBA teammate Kirk Hinrich.
   Andrés Nocioni signing basketballs for fans
   Enlarge
   Andrés Nocioni signing basketballs for fans

NBA career

   After winning the gold medal in the Olympics, Nocioni was signed as a
   undrafted rookie free-agent by the Bulls. He joined Puerto Rico's
   Carlos Arroyo and Daniel Santiago, Brazil's Leandro Barbosa and Nenê,
   Mexico's Eduardo Nájera, Hispanic-American Gilbert Arenas and his
   countrymen Manu Ginobili and Carlos Delfino, as NBA players.

   He played in 81 games during his rookie campaign and posted averages of
   8.3 ppg, 4.8 rpg, 1.5 apg and 23.4 mpg. Nocioni's physical style of
   defense created controversy around the league, and he was suspended for
   one game after a hard foul to Detroit's Tayshaun Prince. Nocioni had
   previously committed a hard foul on the Miami Heat’s Dwyane Wade and
   then was shoved past photographers and into the first row of spectators
   by Udonis Haslem. A spectator tossed a drink at Nocioni, which was
   similar to the incident that triggered a massive brawl at The Palace of
   Auburn Hills. The fan was ejected by security. For the insident Nocioni
   received a flagrant-one foul (which is a foul involving excessive or
   unjustified contact) and a technical. Haslem received a technical and a
   ejection.

   While giving a teleconference interview with NBA.com, Nocioni spoke
   about the hard fouls and his suspension, "First, the one with Wade was
   completely my fault. It was a bad reaction on my part. If I had
   received any penalties because of it, it would be a fair sanction, but
   it was not given. However, the sanction set after the game against the
   Pistons is totally unfair. I see it as a totally real play taken out of
   context in the game — absolutely nothing happened. It was an accidental
   blow. Without purposely trying to, I hit him. I apologized on the
   court. I also asked Carlos Delfino to give my apologies to him, so I
   don’t understand why there is a sanction for something totally normal
   in a game."

   In Nocioni's first NBA playoff game, he scored 25 points and grabbed 18
   rebounds, the most by a rookie in a playoff game in NBA history, while
   playing all 48 minutes.

   In Nocioni's second season with the Chicago Bulls, he averaged 13.0
   ppg, 6.1 rpg,and 1.4 apg, while playing in all 82 games, 43 of them
   starts. Nocioni was named the Chicago Bulls CDW/ Lenovo Player of the
   Year for the 2005-06 NBA season . In the playoffs Nocioni averaged 22.8
   points, 9.6 rebounds, 1.6 assists including two double doubles. In game
   two against the Miami Heat he scored 30 points shooting 10-12 overall
   from the field (83.3%), including 3-3 in from the three point line and
   1-1 in free throws, with 6 rebounds and one steal in almost 40 minutes
   played. Nocioni got to score 30 points again on November 19, during the
   82-72 defeat against L.A. Lakers

Titles

     * 1995 South America Youth Championship (Argentina)
     * 2001 South America Title (Argentina)
     * 2002 Copa del Rey (Tau Cerámica)
     * 2004 Olympic Gold medal (Argentina)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andr%C3%A9s_Nocioni"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
