   #copyright

Andrew Carnegie

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Engineers and inventors

   CAPTION: Andrew Carnegie

      Born:    November 25, 1835
               Dunfermline, Scotland
      Died:    August 11, 1919
               Lenox, Massachusetts
   Occupation: Businessman and Philanthropist

   Andrew Carnegie ( November 25, 1835 – August 11, 1919) was a
   Scottish-American businessman, a major philanthropist, and the founder
   of the Carnegie Steel Company which later became U.S. Steel. He is
   known for having built one of the most powerful and influential
   corporations in United States history, and, later in his life, giving
   away most of his riches to fund the establishment of many libraries,
   schools, and universities in Scotland, America and worldwide.

Early life

Scotland

   Carnegie's birthplace, Dunfermline
   Enlarge
   Carnegie's birthplace, Dunfermline

   Andrew Carnegie was born on November 25, 1835, in Dunfermline, Fife,
   Scotland. He was the son of a hand loom weaver, William Carnegie. His
   mother, Margaret, was a daughter of Thomas Morrison, a tanner and
   shoemaker. Although his family was impoverished, he grew up in a
   cultured, political home.

   Many of Carnegie's closest relatives were self-educated tradesmen and
   class activists. William Carnegie, although poor, had educated himself
   and, as far as his resources would permit, ensured that his children
   received an education. William Carnegie was politically active and was
   involved with those organising demonstrations against the Corn laws. He
   was also a Chartist. He wrote frequently to newspapers and contributed
   articles in the radical pamphlet, Cobbett's Register edited by William
   Cobbett. Amongst other things, he argued for abolition of the Rotten
   Boroughs and reform of the British House of Commons, Catholic
   Emancipation, and laws governing safety at work, which were passed many
   years later in the Factory Acts. He promoted the abolition of all forms
   of hereditary privilege, including all monarchies.

   Another great influence on the young Andrew Carnegie was his uncle,
   George Lauder, a proprietor of a small grocer's shop in Dunfermline
   High Street. This uncle introduced the young Carnegie to such
   historical Scottish heroes as Robert the Bruce, William Wallace, and
   Rob Roy. He was introduced to the writings of Robert Burns and
   Shakespeare. Lauder had Carnegie commit to memory many pages of Burns's
   writings.

   George Lauder was interested in the United States. Lauder saw the U.S.
   as a country with "democratic institutions". Carnegie later considered
   the U.S. as the role model for democratic government.

   Another uncle, his mother's brother, Tom Kennedy, was also a radical
   political firebrand. A fervent nonconformist, the chief objects of his
   tirades were the Church of England and the Church of Scotland. In 1842,
   the young Carnegie's radical sentiments were stirred further at the
   news of "Ballie" being imprisoned for his part in a "Cessation of
   Labour" ( strike). At the time, withdrawal of labour by a hireling was
   a criminal offense.

   Andrew Carnegie's direct descendants still live in Scotland today.
   William Thomson CBE, the great grandson of Andrew, is Chairman of the
   Carnegie Trust Dunfermline, a trust which maintains Andrew Carnegie's
   legacy.

Immigration to America

   Andrew Carnegie's weaver work involved receiving the mill's raw
   materials at his cottage and weaving them into cloth on the primitive
   loom in the cottage. In the 1840s, a new system was coming into being,
   the factory system. During this era, mill owners began constructing
   weaving mills with looms powered at first by water wheels and later by
   steam engines. These factories could produce cloth at far lower cost,
   partly through increased mechanisation and economies of scale, but
   partly also by paying mill workers very low wages and by working them
   very long hours. The success of the mills forced hundreds of hand loom
   workers to find work elsewhere, including Andrew's father William.

   He chose to emigrate. His mother had two sisters who had already
   emigrated, but it was his wife who persuaded William Carnegie to make
   the passage. Making the passage was not easy, however, for they had to
   find the passage money. They were forced to sell their meagre
   possessions and borrow some £20 from friends, a considerable sum in
   1848.

   In May 1848, his family emigrated to the United States, sailing on the
   Wiscasset, a former whaler that took the family from Broomielaw in
   Glasgow to New York City. From there they proceeded up the Hudson River
   and the Erie Canal to Lake Erie and then to Allegheny, Pennsylvania
   (present day Pittsburgh's northside neighborhoods), where William
   Carnegie found work in a cotton factory.

   Young Andrew Carnegie found work in the same building as a "Bobbin boy"
   for the sum of US$1.20 a week. His brother, Thomas, eight years
   younger, was sent to school. Andrew Carnegie quickly grew accustomed to
   his new country: three years after arriving in the United States, the
   young Carnegie began writing to his friends in Scotland extolling the
   great virtues of American democracy whilst disparaging and criticising
   "feudal British institutions". At the same time, he followed in his
   father's footsteps and wrote letters to the newspapers including the
   New York Tribune on subjects such as slavery.

Early career

1850–1860: A 'self made man'

   Andrew, aged 16, with brother Thomas
   Enlarge
   Andrew, aged 16, with brother Thomas

   Andrew Carnegie's education and passion for reading was given a great
   boost by Colonel James Anderson, who opened his personal library of 400
   volumes to working boys each Saturday night. Carnegie was a consistent
   borrower. He was a "self-made man" in both his economic development and
   his intellectual and cultural development. His capacity and willingness
   for hard work, his perseverance, and his alertness, soon brought forth
   opportunities.

   In 1851, he became a telegraph messenger boy in the Pittsburgh Office
   of the Ohio Telegraph Company, at US$2.50 per week. This, to the young
   Carnegie, seemed like a fortune. In addition to providing him with an
   increase in income, the job also provided him with a lifelong love of
   William Shakespeare's works. He was frequently required to deliver
   messages to a theatre, and he often managed to contrive appearing just
   as the curtain had been raised on a performance. Using a charm that was
   to pay even greater dividends in the future, Carnegie was then usually
   able to convince the theatre's manager to allow him to stay and watch
   the performance for free. When Carnegie was not at the theatre or
   improving his mind with a book, he would spend time listening to the
   telegraph instrument itself. The electric telegraph transmitted its
   signals along the wires that traversed the nation. When they were
   received into the telegraph office, they were transcribed into readable
   script on a long paper tape with the aid of an elaborate machine. He
   quickly learned to distinguish the differing sound the incoming signals
   produced and learned to transcribe it by ear without having to write it
   down. At the time, Andrew Carnegie was one of only two or three persons
   so gifted in the entire country. Having learned telegraphy, he was
   noted by Thomas A. Scott of the Pennsylvania Railroad Company, who
   employed him as a secretary/telegraph operator starting in 1853, at a
   salary of US$4.00 per week. Carnegie was eighteen and soon began a
   rapid advancement through the company, eventually becoming the
   superintendent of the Pittsburgh Division.

1860–1865: Civil War

   Before the Civil War Carnegie had formed a partnership with a Mr.
   Woodruff, an inventor. Woodruff's invention was the sleeping car. The
   great distances transversed by railways had meant stopping for the
   night at hotels and inns by the railside, so that passengers could
   rest. The sleeping car sped up travel and helped Americans settle the
   American West. The investment proved a great success and a source of
   great fortune for Woodruff and Carnegie. The young Carnegie became the
   superintendent of the Western Division. In this post, Carnegie was
   responsible for several improvements in the service.

   When the Civil War began in 1861, he accompanied his boss, Thomas A.
   Scott, to the front lines, where he was "the first casualty of the war"
   when he pulled up telegraph wires the Confederate Army had buried. He
   gained a scar on his cheek from when the wire came up too fast and cut
   him. He would tell the story of that scar for years to come.

   Carnegie was selected by Scott, who was now Assistant Secretary of War
   in charge of military transportation, to join him in Washington, D.C.
   Carnegie was appointed Superintendent of the Military Railways and the
   Union Government's telegraph lines in the East. Carnegie was on the
   foot plate of the locomotive that pulled the first brigade of Union
   troops to reach Washington. Shortly after this, following the defeat of
   Union forces at Bull Run, he personally supervised the transportation
   of the defeated forces. Under his organization, the telegraph service
   rendered efficient service to the Union cause and significantly
   assisted in the eventual victory. During his work "in the field",
   Carnegie fell ill and needed treatment for sunstroke.

   Carnegie proceeded to increase his wealth through careful investments.
   In 1864, Carnegie invested US$40,000 in Storey Farm on Oil Creek in
   Venango County, Pennsylvania. In one year, the farm yielded over
   US$1,000,000 in cash dividends, and petroleum from oil wells on the
   property sold profitably. Carnegie was subsequently associated with
   others in establishing a steel rolling mill.

   The Civil War, as so many wars before it, brought boom times to the
   suppliers of war. The U.S. iron industry was one such profiter. Before
   the war its production was of little significance, but the sudden huge
   demand brought boom times to Pittsburgh and similar cities and great
   wealth to the iron masters.

   Carnegie had some investments in this industry before the war and,
   after the war, he left the railroads to devote all his energies to the
   ironworks trade. Carnegie worked to develop several iron works,
   eventually forming The Keystone Bridge Works and the Union Ironworks,
   in Pittsburgh. Although he had left the Pennsylvania Railroad Company,
   he did not totally sever his links with the railroads. The Keystone
   Bridge Company made iron train bridges, and, as company superintendent,
   Carnegie had noticed the weakness of the traditional wooden structures.
   These were replaced in large numbers with iron bridges made in his
   works. As well as having good business sense, Carnegie possessed charm
   and literary knowledge. He was invited to many important social
   functions—functions that Carnegie exploited to his own advantage.
   Carnegie, circa 1878
   Enlarge
   Carnegie, circa 1878

   Carnegie’s philanthropic inclinations began some time before
   retirement. He wrote;


   Andrew Carnegie

    I propose to take an income no greater than $50,000 per annum! Beyond
   this I need ever earn, make no effort to increase my fortune, but spend
      the surplus each year for benevolent purposes! Let us cast aside
     business forever, except for others. Let us settle in Oxford and I
     shall get a thorough education, making the acquaintance of literary
   men. I figure that this will take three years active work. I shall pay
   especial attention to speaking in public. We can settle in London and I
    can purchase a controlling interest in some newspaper or live review
   and give the general management of it attention, taking part in public
    matters, especially those connected with education and improvement of
   the poorer classes. Man must have an idol and the amassing of wealth is
   one of the worst species of idolatry! No idol is more debasing than the
      worship of money! Whatever I engage in I must push inordinately;
     therefore should I be careful to choose that life which will be the
   most elevating in its character. To continue much longer overwhelmed by
   business cares and with most of my thoughts wholly upon the way to make
       more money in the shortest time, must degrade me beyond hope of
    permanent recovery. I will resign business at thirty-five, but during
     these ensuing two years I wish to spend the afternoons in receiving
                 instruction and in reading systematically!


   Andrew Carnegie

1880–1900: scholar and activist

   Whilst Carnegie continued his business career, some of his literary
   intentions were fulfilled. During this time, he made many friends in
   the literary and political worlds. Among these were such as Matthew
   Arnold and Herbert Spencer as well as being in correspondence and
   acquaintance with most of the U.S. Presidents, statesmen, and notable
   writers of the time. Many were visitors to the Carnegie home. Carnegie
   greatly admired Spencer. He did not, however, agree with Spencer's
   Social Darwinism which held that philanthropy was a bad idea.

   In 1881, Carnegie took his family, which included his mother, then age
   70, on a trip to Great Britain. They toured the Scotland by coach,
   having several receptions en-route. The highlight for them all was a
   triumphal return to Dunfermline where Carnegie's mother laid the
   foundation stone of the "Carnegie Library". Andrew Carnegie's criticism
   of British society did not point to a dislike of the country of his
   birth; on the contrary, one of Carnegie's ambitions was to act as a
   catalyst for a close association between the English speaking peoples.
   To this end, he purchased, in the first part of the 1880s, numerous
   newspapers in England, all of which were to advocate the abolition of
   the monarchy and the establishment of "the British Republic".
   Carnegie's charm aided by his great wealth meant that he had many
   British friends, including Prime Minister Gladstone.

   In 1886, Carnegie's younger brother Thomas died at age 43. Success in
   the business continued, however. At the same time as owning steel
   works, Carnegie had purchased, at low cost, the most valuable of the
   iron ore fields around Lake Superior. The same year Andrew Carnegie
   became a figure of controversy. Following his tour of Great Britain, he
   wrote about his experiences in a book entitled An American Four-in-hand
   in Britain. Although still actively involved in running his many
   businesses, Carnegie had become a regular contributor of articles to
   numerous magazines, most notably the Nineteenth Century, under the
   editorship of James Knowles, and the North American Review, whose
   editor, Lloyd Bryce, oversaw the publication during its most
   influential period.

   In 1886, Carnegie penned his most radical work to date, entitled
   Triumphant Democracy. The work, liberal in its use of statistics to
   make its arguments, was an attempt to argue his view that the American
   republican system of government was superior to the British monarchical
   system. It gave an overly-favourable and idealistic view of American
   progress and had considerable criticism of the British royal family.
   Most antagonistic, however, was the cover that depicted amongst other
   motifs, an upended royal crown and a broken scepter. Given these
   aspects, it was no surprise that the book was the cause of considerable
   controversy in Great Britain. The book itself was successful. It made
   many Americans aware for the first time of their country's economic
   progress and sold over 40,000 copies, mostly in the U.S.

   In 1889, Carnegie published an article entitled "Wealth" in the June
   issue of the North American Review. After reading it, Gladstone
   requested its publication in England, and it appeared under a new
   title, "The Gospel of Wealth" in the Pall Mall Gazette. The article was
   the subject of much discussion. In the article, the author argued that
   the life of a wealthy industrialist such as Carnegie should comprise
   two parts. The first part was the gathering and the accumulation of
   wealth. The second part was to be used for the subsequent distribution
   of this wealth to benevolent causes.

   In 1898, Carnegie tried to give the Philippines its independence. As
   the end of the Spanish American War neared, the United States bought
   the Philippines from Spain for $20 million USD. To counter what he
   perceived as imperialism on the part of the United States, Carnegie
   personally offered $20 million USD to the Philippines so that the
   Filipino people could buy their independence from Spain. However,
   nothing came of this gesture and the Philippine-American War ensued.

Industrialist

1885–1900: Empire of Steel

   Carnegie made his fortune in the steel industry, controlling the most
   extensive integrated iron and steel operations ever owned by an
   individual in the United States. His great innovation was in the cheap
   and efficient mass production of steel rails for railroad lines.

   In the late 1880s, Carnegie Steel was the largest manufacturer of pig
   iron, steel rails, and coke in the world, with a capacity to produce
   approximately 2,000 tons of pig metal per day. In 1888, he bought the
   rival Homestead Steel Works, which included an extensive plant served
   by tributary coal and iron fields, a 425-mile (685 km) long railway,
   and a line of lake steamships. An agglutination of Carnegie's assets
   and those of his associates occurred in 1892 with the launching of the
   Carnegie Steel Company.

   By 1889, the U.S. output of steel exceeded that of the UK, and Andrew
   Carnegie owned a large part of it. Carnegie's empire grew to include
   the J. Edgar Thomson Steel Works, (named for John Edgar Thomson,
   Carnegie's former boss and president of the Pennsylvania Railroad),
   Pittsburgh Bessemer Steel Works, the Lucy Furnaces, the Union Iron
   Mills, the Union Mill (Wilson, Walker & County), the Keystone Bridge
   Works, the Hartman Steel Works, the Frick Coke Company, and the Scotia
   ore mines. Carnegie, through Keystone, supplied the steel for and owned
   shares in the landmark Eads Bridge project across the Mississippi River
   in St. Louis, Missouri (completed 1874). This project was an important
   proof-of-concept for steel technology which marked the opening of a new
   steel market.

1901: U.S. Steel

   In 1901, Carnegie was 65 years old and was considering retirement. He
   reformed his enterprises into conventional joint stock corporations as
   preparation to this end.

   John Pierpont Morgan was a banker and perhaps America's most important
   financial deal maker. He had observed how efficiency produced profit.
   He envisioned an integrated steel industry that would cut costs, lower
   prices to consumers and raise wages to workers. To this end, he needed
   to buy out Carnegie and several other major producers and integrate
   them into one company, thereby eliminating duplication and waste.
   Negotiations were concluded on March 2, 1901, with the formation of the
   United States Steel Corporation. It was the first corporation in the
   world with a market capitalization in excess of US$1 billion.

   The buyout, which was negotiated in secret by Charles M. Schwab (no
   relation to Charles R. Schwab, the brokerage house founder), was the
   largest such industrial takeover in United States history to date. The
   holdings were incorporated in the United States Steel Corporation, a
   trust organized by Morgan, and Carnegie retired from business. His
   steel enterprises were bought out at a figure equivalent to twelve
   times their annual earnings—US$480 million —which at the time was the
   largest ever personal commercial transaction. Andrew Carnegie's share
   of this amounted to US$225,639,000, which was paid to Carnegie in the
   form of 5%, 50 year gold bonds. The letter agreeing to sell his share
   was signed on February 26, 1901. On March 2, the circular formally
   filing the organization and capitalization (at US$1,400,000,000—4% of
   U.S. national wealth at the time) of the United States Steel
   Corporation actually completed the contract. The bonds were to be
   delivered within two weeks to the Hudson Trust Company of Hoboken, New
   Jersey, in trust to Robert A. Franks, Carnegie's business secretary.
   There, a special vault was built to house the physical bulk of nearly
   US$230,000,000 worth of bonds. It was said that "....Carnegie never
   wanted to see or touch these bonds that represented the fruition of his
   business career. It was as if he feared that if he looked upon them
   they might vanish like the gossamer gold of the leprechaun. Let them
   lie safe in a vault in New Jersey, safe from the New York tax
   assessors, until he was ready to dispose of them...."

   As they signed the papers of sale, Carnegie remarked, "Well, Pierpont,
   I am now handing the burden over to you." In return, Andrew Carnegie
   became one of the world's wealthiest men!

Retirement

   Retirement was something many men dreaded. Carnegie was not one of
   them. He looked forward to retirement when he could chart a new course
   in life.

   Besides steel, Carnegie's companies were involved in other areas of the
   railroad industry. His company, Pittsburgh Locomotive and Car Works,
   was noted for its building of large steam locomotives at the turn of
   the 20th century. His associates and partners included Henry Clay Frick
   and F. T. F. Lovejoy.

   At the height of his career, he was the second richest person in the
   world, behind only John D. Rockefeller.

1901–1915: philanthropist

   Carnegie with James Bryce, 1st Viscount Bryce; Bryce was a trustee of
   the Carnegie Trust for the Universities of Scotland
   Enlarge
   Carnegie with James Bryce, 1st Viscount Bryce; Bryce was a trustee of
   the Carnegie Trust for the Universities of Scotland
   A Carnegie library, Macomb, Illinois
   Enlarge
   A Carnegie library, Macomb, Illinois

   Andrew Carnegie spent his last years as a philanthropist. From 1901
   forward, public attention was turned from the shrewd business capacity
   which had enabled Carnegie to accumulate such a fortune, to the
   public-spirited way in which he devoted himself to utilizing it on
   philanthropic objects. His views on social subjects and the
   responsibilities which great wealth involved were already known from
   Triumphant Democracy (1886), and from his Gospel of Wealth (1889). He
   acquired Skibo Castle, in Sutherland, Scotland, and made his home
   partly there and partly in New York. He then devoted his life to the
   work of providing the capital for purposes of public interest and
   social and educational advancement.

   He was a powerful supporter of the movement for spelling reform as a
   means of promoting the spread of the English language.

   Among all of his many philanthropic efforts, the establishment of
   public libraries in the United States, the United Kingdom, and in other
   English-speaking countries was especially prominent. Carnegie
   libraries, as they were commonly called, were built seemingly
   everywhere. The first was opened in 1883 in Dunfermline, Scotland. His
   method was to build and equip, but only on condition that the local
   authority provided site and maintenance. To secure local interest, in
   1885, he gave US$500,000 to Pittsburgh for a public library, and in
   1886, he gave US$250,000 to Allegheny City for a music hall and
   library, and US$250,000 to Edinburgh, Scotland, for a free library. In
   total Carnegie funded some 3,000 libraries, located in every U.S. state
   except Alaska, Delaware, and Rhode Island. Carnegie also built
   libraries in Canada and overseas in Britain, Ireland, Australia, New
   Zealand, the West Indies, and Fiji.

   He gave US$2 million in 1901 to start the Carnegie Institute of
   Technology (CIT) at Pittsburgh, and the same amount in 1902 to found
   the Carnegie Institution at Washington, D.C. He later contributed more
   to these and other schools. CIT is now part of Carnegie Mellon
   University.

   In Scotland, he gave US$2 million in 1901 to establish a trust for
   providing funds for assisting education at the Scottish universities, a
   benefaction which resulted in his being elected Lord Rector of
   University of St. Andrews. He was a large benefactor of the Tuskegee
   Institute under Booker Washington for African American education. He
   also established large pension funds in 1901 for his former employees
   at Homestead and, in 1905, for American college professors. He also
   funded the construction of 7,000 church organs.

   Also, long before he sold out, in 1879, he erected commodious
   swimming-baths for the use of the people of his hometown of
   Dunfermline, Scotland. In the following year, Carnegie gave US$40,000
   for the establishment of a free library in the same city. In 1884, he
   gave US$50,000 to Bellevue Hospital Medical College to found a
   histological laboratory, now called the Carnegie Laboratory.

   He owned Carnegie Hall in New York City.

   He founded the Carnegie Hero Fund commissions in America (1904) and in
   the United Kingdom (1908) for the recognition of deeds of heroism,
   contributed US$500,000 in 1903 for the erection of a Peace Palace at
   The Hague, and donated US$150,000 for a Pan-American Palace in
   Washington as a home for the International Bureau of American
   Republics.

   By the standards of 19th century tycoons, Carnegie was not a
   particularly ruthless man, but the contrast between his life and the
   lives of many of his own workers and of the poor, in general, was
   stark. "Maybe with the giving away of his money," commented biographer
   Joseph Wall, "he would justify what he had done to get that money."

   By the time he died, Carnegie had given away US$350,695,653. At his
   death, the last US$30,000,000 was likewise given away to foundations,
   charities, and to pensioners.

Later personal life

   In an era in which financial capital was consolidated in New York City,
   Carnegie stayed aloof from the city, preferring to live near his
   factories in western Pennsylvania and at Skibo Castle, Scotland, which
   he bought and refurbished. However, he also built (in 1901) and resided
   in a townhouse on New York City's Fifth Avenue that later came to house
   Cooper-Hewitt's National Design Museum.

   Carnegie married Louise Whitfield in 1887 and had one daughter,
   Margaret, who was born in 1897.

   Carnegie died in Lenox, Massachusetts, on August 11, 1919. He is
   interred in Sleepy Hollow Cemetery in Sleepy Hollow, New York.

Controversies

1892: Homestead Strike

   The Homestead Strike
   Enlarge
   The Homestead Strike

   The Homestead Strike was a bloody labor confrontation lasting 143 days
   in 1892 and was one of the most serious in U.S. history. The conflict
   was situated around Carnegie Steel's main plant in Homestead,
   Pennsylvania, and grew out of a dispute between the National
   Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers of the United States
   and the Carnegie Steel Company.

   Carnegie, who had cultivated a pro-labor image in his dealings with
   company mill workers, departed the country for a trip to his Scottish
   homeland before the unrest peaked. In doing so, Carnegie left mediation
   of the dispute in the hands of his associate and partner Henry Clay
   Frick. Frick was well known in industrial circles as maintaining
   staunch anti-union sensibilities.

   The company had attempted to cut the wages of the skilled steel
   workers, and when the workers refused the pay cut, management locked
   the union out (workers considered the stoppage a " lockout" by
   management and not a " strike" by workers). Frick brought in thousands
   of strikebreakers to work the steel mills and Pinkerton agents to
   safeguard them.

   On July 6, the arrival of a force of 300 Pinkerton agents from New York
   City and Chicago resulted in a fight in which 10 men—seven strikers and
   three Pinkertons—were killed and hundreds were injured. Pennsylvania
   Governor Robert Pattison discharged two brigades of the state militia
   to the strike site. Then, allegedly in response to the fight between
   the striking workers and the Pinkertons, anarchist Alexander Berkman
   tried to kill Frick with a gun provided by Emma Goldman. However, Frick
   was only wounded, and the attempt turned public opinion away from the
   striking workers. Afterwards, the company successfully resumed
   operations with non-union immigrant employees in place of the Homestead
   plant workers, and Carnegie returned to the United States.

   Carnegie was one of more than 50 wealthy members of the South Fork
   Fishing and Hunting Club, which was blamed for the Johnstown Flood that
   killed more than 2,200 people in 1887.

Philosophy

   Andrew Carnegie at Skibo Castle, 1914
   Enlarge
   Andrew Carnegie at Skibo Castle, 1914

   Carnegie wrote The Gospel of Wealth, in which he stated his belief that
   the rich should use their wealth to help enrich society.

   The following is taken from one of Carnegie's memos to himself:


   Andrew Carnegie

    Man does not live by bread alone. I have known millionaires starving
   for lack of the nutriment which alone can sustain all that is human in
     man, and I know workmen, and many so-called poor men, who revel in
     luxuries beyond the power of those millionaires to reach. It is the
    mind that makes the body rich. There is no class so pitiably wretched
    as that which possesses money and nothing else. Money can only be the
   useful drudge of things immeasurably higher than itself. Exalted beyond
   this, as it sometimes is, it remains Caliban still and still plays the
       beast. My aspirations take a higher flight. Mine be it to have
      contributed to the enlightenment and the joys of the mind, to the
   things of the spirit, to all that tends to bring into the lives of the
     toilers of Pittsburgh sweetness and light. I hold this the noblest
                           possible use of wealth.


   Andrew Carnegie

   Carnegie believed that achievement of financial success could be
   reduced to a simple formula, which could be duplicated by the average
   person. In 1908, he commissioned (at no pay) Napoleon Hill, then a
   journalist, to interview more than 500 high and wealthy achievers to
   find out the common threads of their success. Hill eventually became a
   Carnegie collaborator, and their work was published in 1928, after
   Carnegie's death, in Hill's book The Law of Success ( ISBN
   0-87980-447-5) and in 1937, Think and Grow Rich ( ISBN 1-59330-200-2).
   The latter has not been out of print since it was published and has
   sold more than 30 million copies worldwide. In 1960, Hill published an
   abridged version of the book containing the Andrew Carnegie formula for
   wealth creation. For years it was the only version generally available.
   In 2004, Ross Cornwell published Think and Grow Rich!: The Original
   Version, Restored and Revised, which restored the book to its original
   form, with slight revisions, and added comprehensive endnotes, an
   index, and an appendix.

Writings

   Carnegie was a frequent contributor to periodicals on labour issues.

   In addition to Triumphant Democracy (1886), Gospel of Wealth (1900) and
   The Law of Success (1928), other publications by him were An American
   Four-in-hand in Britain (1883), Round the World (1884), The Empire of
   Business (1902), a Life of James Watt (1905) and Problems of To-day
   (1907).

Trivia

     * Various sources quote Carnegie's height at between 60 and 63 inches
       (1.52 - 1.60 m); a claim that he was 5 feet 6 inches (1.68 m) tall
       is incorrect.
     * Carnegie, Pennsylvania, and Carnegie, Oklahoma, are both named
       after Andrew Carnegie.
     * The dinosaur Diplodocus carnegiei (Hatcher) was named for Andrew
       Carnegie after he sponsored the expedition that discovered its
       remains in the Morrison Formation (Jurassic) of Utah. Carnegie was
       so proud of “Dippi” that he had casts made of the bones and plaster
       replicas of the whole skeleton donated to several museums in
       Europe. The original fossil skeleton is assembled and stands in the
       Hall of Dinosaurs at the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in
       Pittsburgh.
     * His name is not pronounced Carn-egie but Carniigiie.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrew_Carnegie"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
