   #copyright

Anguilla

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Central & South American
Countries; Countries

   CAPTION: Anguilla


   Flag of Anguilla Coat of Arms of Anguilla
     ( Full Size)         ( In Detail)
   National motto:
   Strength and Endurance
   National anthems:
   God Bless Anguilla (unofficial); God Save the Queen (official)
   Image:LocationAnguilla.png
   Official language English
   Political status Non- sovereign, Overseas territory of the U.K.
   Capital The Valley
   Governor Andrew George
   Chief Minister Osbourne Fleming
   Area
    - Total
    - % water Ranked 220th
   102 km²
   39.4 mi²
   Negligible
   Population

    - Total
    - Density
   Ranked 221st

   13,477 (2006 est.)
   132/km²
   342/mi²
   Currency East Caribbean dollar
   Time zone UTC -4
   National Song God Bless Anguilla
   Internet TLD .ai
   Calling Code 1-264

   Anguilla (English pronunciation: ang-GWILL-a) is a British overseas
   territory in the Caribbean, the most northerly of the Leeward Islands
   in the Lesser Antilles. It consists of the main island of Anguilla
   itself, approximately 16 miles long by 3 miles wide at its widest
   point, together with a number of much smaller islands and cays with no
   permanent population. The island's capital is The Valley. The total
   land area of the territory is 102 square kilometres (39.4 square
   miles), with a population of approximately 13,500 (2006 estimate).

History

   Anguilla was first settled in pre-history by Amerindian tribes who
   migrated from South America. The date of European discovery is
   uncertain: some sources claim that Columbus sighted the island in 1493,
   while others state that the island was first discovered by the French
   in 1564 or 1565. The name Anguilla derives from the word for "eel" in
   any of various European languages (modern Spanish: anguila; French:
   anguille; Italian: Anguilla), probably chosen because of the island's
   eel-like shape.

   Anguilla was first colonised by English settlers from Saint Kitts,
   beginning in 1650. The island was administered by Great Britain until
   the early 19th century, when – against the wishes of the inhabitants –
   it was incorporated into a single British dependency along with Saint
   Kitts and Nevis. After a 1967 rebellion and brief period as a
   self-declared independent republic, it became a separate British
   dependency (now termed a British overseas territory) in 1980.

Politics

   Anguilla is an internally self-governing overseas territory of the
   United Kingdom. Its politics takes place in a framework of a
   parliamentary representative democratic dependency, whereby the Chief
   Minister is the head of government, and of a pluriform multi-party
   system.

   The United Nations Committee on Decolonisation includes Anguilla on the
   United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. The territory's
   constitution is Anguilla Constitutional Order 1 April 1982 (amended
   1990). Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative
   power is vested in both the government and the House of Assembly. The
   Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. Military
   defence is the responsibility of the United Kingdom.

Geography

   Map of Anguilla
   Enlarge
   Map of Anguilla
   Overlooking Sandy Ground, Anguilla
   Enlarge
   Overlooking Sandy Ground, Anguilla

   Anguilla is a flat, low-lying island of coral and limestone in the
   Caribbean Sea, east of Puerto Rico. It is approximately 16 miles long
   by 3 miles wide. The soil is generally thin and poor, supporting only
   scrub vegetation.

   Anguilla is noted for its spectacular and ecologically important coral
   reefs. Apart from the main island of Anguilla itself, the territory
   includes a number of other smaller islands and cays, mostly tiny and
   uninhabited. Some of these are:
     * Anguillita
     * Dog Island
     * Prickly Pear Cays
     * Scrub Island
     * Seal Island
     * Sombrero, also known as Hat Island

   For a longer list see Geography of Anguilla.

Climate

   Anguilla has a tropical though rather dry climate, moderated by
   northeast trade winds. Temperatures vary little throughout the year.
   Average daily maxima range from about 27°C (80°F) in December to 30°C
   (86°F) in July. Rainfall is erratic, averaging about 90 cm (35 in) per
   year, the wettest months being September and October, and the driest
   February and March. Anguilla is vulnerable to hurricanes from June to
   November.

Economy

   Anguilla's thin arid soil is largely unsuitable for agriculture, and
   the island has few land-based natural resources. Its main industries
   are tourism and fishing, with the formation of offshore companies
   playing an increasingly important role in the economy.

   Anguilla's currency is the East Caribbean dollar, though the US dollar
   is also widely accepted.

Demographics

   The majority of residents (90.08%) are predominantly black, the
   descendants of slaves transported from Africa. Growing minorities
   include whites at 3.74% and persons of mixed race at 4.65% (figures
   from 2001 census).

   72% of the population is Anguillian while 28% is non-Anguillian (2001
   census). Of the non-Anguillian population, many are citizens of the
   United States, United Kingdom, St Kitts & Nevis or Jamaica.

Culture

   The Anguilla National Trust, or ANT was established in 1993 to preserve
   the heritage of the island, including its cultural heritage. The Trust
   has programs encouraging Anguillan writers and the preservation of the
   island's history.

   The island's cultural history begins with the Arawak Indians. Artifacts
   have been found around the island, telling of life before Europeans
   settlers arrived.

   As throughout the Caribbean, holidays are a cultural fixture.
   Anguilla's most important holidays are of historic as much as cultural
   importance – particularly the anniversary of the emancipation
   (previously August Monday in the Park), celebrated as the Summer
   Festival. British holidays such as the Queen's birthday are also
   celebrated.

Rastafarianism

   Anguilla is the birthplace of Robert Athlyi Rogers, author of The Holy
   Piby. The Holy Piby has a large influence on Rastafarian beliefs, and
   to this day many Rastafarian activists such as Ijahnya Christian of
   Anguilla have praised Rogers as a key shaker and mover of the faith.
   Today, there are many "rastas" living on the island, and the influence
   of the religion spreads even to those who are not a member of it.

Music

   hjghjg

Other topics

     * Communications in Anguilla
     * Transportation in Anguilla

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anguilla"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
