   #copyright

Animal law

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Animal & Human Rights


   Animal rights

   Activists
   Greg Avery · David Barbarash
   Rod Coronado · Barry Horne
   Ronnie Lee · Keith Mann
   Ingrid Newkirk · Andrew Tyler
   Jerry Vlasak · Robin Webb

   Groups/campaigns
   Animal Aid
   Animal Liberation Front
   Animal liberation movement
   Animal Rights Militia
   BUAV · Great Ape Project
   Justice Department
   PETA
   PCRM · SPEAK
   Stop Huntingdon Animal Cruelty
   Viva!

   Issues
   Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act
   Animal rights
   Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986
   Animal testing · Bile bear
   Factory farming
   Great Ape research ban
   International trade in primates
   Nafovanny
   Non-human primate experiments
   Operation Backfire
   Speciesism

   Cases
   Britches
   Cambridge University primates
   Covance · Huntingdon Life Sciences
   Pit of despair · Silver Spring monkeys
   Unnecessary Fuss

   Writers/advocates
   Steven Best · Stephen R.L. Clark
   Gary Francione · Gill Langley
   Tom Regan · Richard D. Ryder
   Peter Singer · Steven M. Wise

   Categories
   Animal experimentation
   Animal Liberation Front
   Animal rights movement
   Animal rights

   Animal law is a combination of statutory and case law in which the
   nature – legal, social or biological – of nonhuman animals is an
   important factor. Animal law encompasses companion animals, wildlife,
   animals used in entertainment and animals raised for food and research.
   The emerging field of animal law is often analogized to the
   environmental law movement 30 years ago. The Animal Legal Defense Fund
   was founded by attorney Joyce Tischler in 1979 as the first
   organization dedicated to promoting the field of animal law and using
   the law to protect the lives and defend the interests of animals.

   Currently, animal law is being taught at 69 law schools in the U.S.,
   including Harvard, Stanford, UCLA, Northwestern, University of Michigan
   and Duke. A growing number of state and local bar associations now have
   animal law committees.

   Animal law issues encompass a broad spectrum of approaches—from
   philosophical explorations of the rights of animals to pragmatic
   discussions about the rights of those who use animals, who has standing
   to sue when an animal is harmed in a way that violates the law, and
   what constitutes legal cruelty. Animal law permeates and affects most
   traditional areas of the law – including tort, contract, criminal and
   constitutional law. Examples of this intersection include:
     * Animal custody disputes in divorce or separations.
     * Veterinary malpractice cases.
     * Housing disputes involving “no pets” policies and discrimination
       laws.
     * Damages cases involving the wrongful death or injury to a companion
       animal.
     * Enforceable trusts for companion being adopted by states across the
       country.
     * Criminal law encompassing domestic violence and anti-cruelty laws.

   The comprehensive animal law casebook is Animal Law: Cases and
   Materials, Third Edition, co-authored by Sonia S. Waisman, Bruce A.
   Wagman, and Pamela D. Frasch. Because animal law is not a traditional
   legal field, most of the book’s chapters are framed in terms of
   familiar subsets of law such as tort, contract, criminal and
   constitutional law. Each chapter sets out cases and commentary where
   animal law affects those broader areas.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Animal_law"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
