   #copyright

Anteater

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mammals

                 iAnteaters
   Northern Tamandua(Tamandua mexicana)
   Northern Tamandua
   (Tamandua mexicana)
         Scientific classification

   Kingdom:    Animalia
   Phylum:     Chordata
   Class:      Mammalia
   Superorder: Xenarthra
   Order:      Pilosa
   Suborder:   Vermilingua
               Illiger, 1811

                                  Families

   Cyclopedidae
   Myrmecophagidae

   Anteaters are the four mammal species of the suborder Vermilingua
   commonly known for eating ants and termites. Together with the sloths
   and armadillos, they make up the superorder Xenarthra.

Physiology

   The largest representative of the group is the giant anteater, or
   ant-bear (Myrmecophaga tridactyla), an animal measuring 4 feet (1.2 m)
   in length, excluding the tail, and 2 feet (60 cm) in height at the
   shoulder. It has a long, thin head and a large, bushy tail. Its
   prevailing colour is gray, with a broad black band, bordered with
   white, starting on the chest, and passing obliquely over the shoulder,
   diminishing gradually in breadth as it approaches the loins, where it
   ends in a point.

   It is extensively distributed in the tropical parts of South and
   Central America, frequenting low swampy savannas, along the banks of
   rivers, and the depths of the humid forests, but is nowhere abundant.

   Its food consists mainly of termites, which it obtains by opening their
   nests with its powerful sharp anterior (front) claws. As the insects
   swarm to the damaged part of their dwelling, it draws them into its
   mouth by means of its long, flexible, rapidly moving tongue covered
   with sticky saliva. A full-grown giant anteater eats upwards of 30,000
   ants and termites a day.

   The giant anteater lives above ground, not burrowing underground like
   armadillos. Though generally an inoffensive animal, when attacked it
   can defend itself with its sabre-like anterior claws. The female
   produces one offspring per birth.

   The two anteaters of the genus Tamandua, the Southern Tamandua
   (Tamandua tetradactyla) and the Northern Tamandua (Tamandua mexicana),
   are much smaller than the Giant Anteater, and differ essentially from
   it in their habits, being mainly arboreal. They inhabit the dense
   primeval forests of South and Central America. The usual colour is
   yellowish-white, with a broad black lateral band, covering nearly the
   whole of the side of the body.

   The silky anteater (Cyclopes didactylus) is a native of the hottest
   parts of South and Central America, and about the size of a rat, of a
   general yellowish colour, and exclusively arboreal in its habits.

Family order

   ORDER PILOSA
     * Suborder Folivora ( sloths)
     * Suborder Vermilingua
          + Family Cyclopedidae
               o Genus Cyclopes
                    # Silky Anteater ( Cyclopes didactylus)
          + Family Myrmecophagidae
               o Genus Myrmecophaga
                    # Giant Anteater ( Myrmecophaga tridactyla)
               o Genus Tamandua
                    # Northern Tamandua ( Tamandua mexicana)
                    # Southern Tamandua ( Tamandua tetradactyla)

Gallery

   Ant eater Tamandua mexicana in Corcovado, NP Costa Rica

Similar animals

     * Pangolins are also called scaly anteaters.
     * The Numbat (Myrmecobius fasciatus), a marsupial, formerly called
       the Banded Anteater. This species is very endangered.
     * Echidnas, a family of monotremes, are still sometimes called spiny
       anteaters.
     * Aardvarks are African animals with similar habits.

Anteaters as Mascots

   The Anteater is the mascot of the University of California, Irvine, and
   of Methuen High School, Massachusetts.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anteater"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
