   #copyright

Antigua and Barbuda

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Central & South American
Countries; Countries

   Antigua and Barbuda

   Flag of Antigua and Barbuda Coat of arms of Antigua and Barbuda
   Flag                        Coat of arms
   Motto: Each Endeavouring, All Achieving
   Anthem: Fair Antigua, We Salute Thee
   Royal anthem: God Save the Queen^1
   Location of Antigua and Barbuda
   Capital
   (and largest city) Saint John's
   17°7′N 61°51′W
   Official languages English
   Government Federal const. monarchy
    - Head of State Elizabeth II
    - Governor-General James Carlisle
    - Prime Minister Baldwin Spencer
   Independence
    - From the UK November 1, 1981
   Area
    - Total 442 km² ( 198th)
   171 sq mi
    - Water (%) negligible
   Population
    - 2005 estimate 81,479 ( 197th)
    - Density 184/km² ( 57)
   394/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total US$750 million ( 170th)
    - Per capita US$11,523 ( 59th)
   HDI  (2005) 0.797 (medium) ( 60)
   Currency East Caribbean dollar ( XCD)
   Time zone AST ( UTC-4)
    - Summer ( DST) ADT ( UTC-3)
   Internet TLD .ag
   Calling code +Area code 268
   ^1 God Save The Queen is officially a national anthem but is generally
   used only on regal and vice-regal occasions.

   Antigua and Barbuda is an island nation located in the eastern
   Caribbean Sea on the boundary with the Atlantic Ocean. Antigua ( IPA:
   [ænˈtiːgə]) and Barbuda ( IPA: [bɑrˈbjuːdə]) are located in the middle
   of the Leeward Islands in the Eastern Caribbean, roughly 17 degrees
   north of the equator. Antigua and Barbuda are part of the Lesser
   Antilles archipelago with the islands of Guadeloupe, Dominica,
   Martinique, St. Lucia, St. Vincent & the Grenadines, Barbados, Grenada,
   Trinidad and Tobago to the south, Montserrat to the southwest, Saint
   Kitts and Nevis to the west and Saint Barthélemy, Saint Martin and
   Anguilla to the northwest.

History

   Pre-ceramic Amerindians were the first to inhabit the islands of
   Antigua and Barbuda in 2400 BC. Later Arawak and Carib Amerindian
   tribes populated the islands. The island of Antigua was originally
   named Wadadli by the natives. Christopher Columbus landed on his second
   voyage in 1493 and gave the island the name Antigua. Early settlements
   by the Spanish and French were succeeded by the English who formed a
   colony in 1667 by transporting Irish Catholic slaves to Antigua.
   Slavery, established to run the sugar plantations on Antigua, was
   abolished in 1834.

   The islands became an independent state within the Commonwealth of
   Nations on 1 November 1981, and Vere Bird became the first prime
   minister.

Politics

   Politics of Antigua and Barbuda takes place in a framework of a federal
   parliamentary representative democratic monarchy, whereby the Prime
   Minister is the head of government, and of a pluriform multi-party
   system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative
   power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of the
   Parliament. The Bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate (17-member
   body appointed by the governor general) and the House of
   Representatives (17 seats; members are elected by proportional
   representation to serve five-year terms). The last elections held were
   on 23 March 2004 for the House of Representatives (next to be held in
   2009). The Antigua Labour Party got 4 seats, while the United
   Progressive Party got 13.

Government

   Since 1949 the party system had been dominated by the personalist
   Antigua Labour Party. However the Antigua and Barbuda legislative
   election, 2004, saw the defeat of the longest-serving elected
   government in the Caribbean. The Prime Minister, Lester Bird, had been
   in office since 1994, when he succeeded his father, Vere Bird. The
   elder Bird had been Prime Minister from independence in 1981, and
   before independence had been Chief Minister of Antigua from 1960,
   except for the period 1971-76.

Structure

   The Head of State is the Queen, who is represented by the
   Governor-General. A Council of Ministers is appointed by the governor
   general on the advice of the prime minister. The Judicial Branch is the
   Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court (based in Saint Lucia; one judge of the
   Supreme Court is a resident of the islands and presides over the Court
   of Summary Jurisdiction). Antigua is also a member of the Caribbean
   Court of Justice. The Supreme Court of Appeal was the British Judicial
   Committee of the Privy Council, up until 2001, when the nations of the
   Caribbean Community voted to abolish the right of appeal to the Privy
   Council in favour of a Caribbean Court of Justice. Some debate between
   member countries had repeatedly delayed the court's date of
   inauguration. As of March, 2005, only Barbados was set to replace the
   process of appeals of Her Majesty in Council with the Caribbean Court
   of Justice which then had come into operation.

Administrative divisions

   The island of Antigua is divided into six parishes:-
     * 1 Saint George (4,473)
     * 2 Saint John (14,121)
     * 3 Saint Mary (5,303)

                               * 4 Saint Paul (6,117)
                               * 5 Saint Peter (3,622)
                               * 6 Saint Philip (2,964)

                                                       The Parishes of Antigua

   The island of Barbuda (1,241) and the uninhabited island of Redonda
   each enjoy dependency status.

   The capital is the city of Saint John's (21,514)

Geography

   Enlarge

   The country consists of a number of islands, of which Antigua is the
   largest one, and the most populated. Barbuda, just north of Antigua is
   the other main island. The islands have a warm, tropical climate, with
   fairly constant temperatures year round. Redonda – annexed in the 1860s
   when Phosphate reserves were noted, unoccupied since 1930 also belongs
   to the nation of Antigua and Barbuda.

   The islands are mostly low-lying, with the highest point being Boggy
   Peak, at 402 metres (1,319 ft). The small country's main town is the
   capital Saint John's on Antigua; Barbuda's largest town is Codrington.

Economy

   Tourism dominates its economy, accounting for more than half of its
   GDP. Weak tourist arrival numbers since early 2000 have slowed the
   economy, however, and pressed the government into a tight fiscal
   corner. The dual-island nation's agricultural production is focused on
   the domestic market and constrained by a limited water supply and a
   labour shortage stemming from the lure of higher wages in tourism and
   construction work.

   Manufacturing comprises enclave-type assembly for export with major
   products being bedding, handicrafts, and electronic components.
   Prospects for economic growth in the medium term will continue to
   depend on income growth in the industrialised world, especially in the
   United States, which accounts for about one-third of all tourist
   arrivals.

Demographics

   Most of the population are descendants of the slaves that used to work
   in the sugar plantations, but there are also groups of Europeans,
   notably Irish, British and Portuguese. While the official language is
   English, most of the locals speak patois, a form of Creole English.

   Almost all Antiguans are Christians, with the Anglican Church (about
   44%) being the largest denomination. Catholicism is another significant
   denomination. Non-Christian religions practiced on the islands include
   Rastafarianism, Islam, and Baha'i.

Places of interest

   The following information is derrived from the Antiguan website
   "Antigua Nice"

Museum of Antigua & Barbuda

   The Museum of Antigua & Barbuda was opened in 1985 and is operated by
   the Historical & Archaeological Society, a private non-profit
   organisation. The exhibits, which interpret the story of Antigua from
   its geological birth to political independence, are placed in the old
   St. John's Court House of 1750, a very historic building. Today, it is
   indeed a fine setting for an interpretive museum and is an excellent
   example of adaptive use for the oldest building of the capital city.

   Collecting is central to the mission of the Museum. It acquires objects
   and specimens by field collecting, gifts, loans, and exchanges and
   welcomes input from all those who are interested in preserving and
   expressing the island's heritage. Other objectives are education and
   research of the nation's heritage. It presents to visitors an overview
   of the island's history and natural history. There is a fine reference
   library and there are many computer databases totalling 25,000 records,
   available for quick reference. Some of the Museum's programmes include
   an education programme for Antigua & Barbuda's schoolchildren,
   providing special lectures and the organising of monthly field trips to
   historic sites. Cultural evenings are held for the general public, and
   a newsletter is distributed to the Society's members. The Museum has
   something for everyone.

   Come in and enjoy the historic atmosphere in a cool oasis in the middle
   of St. John's, purchase gifts, meditate and forget the cares of the
   world.

Dockyard Museum

   The Dockyard Museum interprets the story of Antigua's famous English
   Harbour. The harbour was known to be first used in 1671 as a hurricane
   shelter and for the act of careening warships of the Royal Navy.

   It was not until 1725 the first buildings were erected for maintaining
   British ships on the West Indies Station. The museum tells the story of
   how the Dockyard was built, its purpose, the social conditions
   encountered by the people who worked and toiled in this ancient naval
   establishment.

   A fine figurehead welcomes visitors to the museum. Also on display are
   ship models, tools, instruments and excavated artifacts from the naval
   hospital and other dockyard buildings of the sailing ship days. There
   is an interesting case of Nelson memorabilia which contains the famous
   admiral's telescope and other items. The story is told to the present
   day, of the yards restoration from the 1930's and of the return of the
   sailing ships in the 1950's in the form of cruising and charter yachts.

   There is a library of reference books embracing many subjects. The
   library includes a lending section as well as a paperback swop section.
   A large database of naval history is available for researchers, as well
   as all the historical databases available at the Museum of Antigua &
   Barbuda in St. John's. A gift shop sells items connected to the sea and
   to the harbour, including maps, charts and posters. A visit to this
   famous dockyard is not complete without a visit to it's museum and
   giftshop.

Nelson's Dockyard

   English Harbour has been the haunt of many famous naval officers
   including Rodney, Nelson, Collingwood, Prince William Henry, Hood, and
   Cochrane. Today the Dockyard at English Harbour is named after the
   victor of the battle of Trafalgar, Admiral Lord Nelson. Nelson was
   based at English Harbour from 1784 to 1787. He was Senior Captain at 27
   years of age and became temporary Commander-in-Chief of the Leeward
   Islands for a short time.

   At the yard, there were skilled resident tradesman and artificers, many
   of them black. They were employed for the repair of ships. The Bosun
   was in charge of labourers who were Africans, and who were bought by
   the Navy and were known as the King's Negroes. Their responsibilities
   included the building and maintenance of facilities and wharves, the
   warping of ships into the harbour and the preparation work prior to
   careening.

   Today you can visit Nelson's Dockyard where many of the restored
   buildings house modern facilities that still reflect the naval heritage
   of English Harbour. Private yachts now replace Naval vessels in the
   harbour, But English Harbour remains a favorite port for those making
   the long Atlantic crossing. English Harbour and Nelson's Dockyard also
   has a number of tourist facilities, including banks, restaurants,
   t-shirt market and tour and travel agencies.

Devil's Bridge

   At the north-eastern point of Antigua there is a remote wild area known
   as Indian Town Point. Why it was named thus, is unknown as to date no
   Indian archaeological remains have been found on this peninsula. The
   area was legally constituted a National Park in the 1950's.

   Within the park there is a remarkable example of sea-water erosion.
   Geological, Devil's Bridge is a natural arch carved by the sea from
   soft and hard limestone ledges of the Antigua formation, a geological
   division of the flat north-eastern part of Antigua. A bridge was
   created when a soft part of the limestone eroded away by action of
   Atlantic breakers over countless centuries.

   Sammy Smith, a 104 year old Antiguan patriot had the answer. Here is a
   quote from his memoirs "To shoot Hard Labour".

   "On the east coast of the island is the famous Devil's Bridge. Devil's
   Bridge was call so because a lot of slaves from the neighboring estates
   use to go there and throw themselves overboard. That was an area of
   mass suicide, so people use to say the Devil have to be there. The
   waters around Devil's Bridge is always rough and anyone fall over the
   bridge never come out alive".

Betty's Hope

   Betty's Hope is located in the limestone district of Antigua's tranquil
   rural area, with beautiful vistas over the rolling landscape to the
   distant ocean. The founder of Betty's Hope was Governor Keynell, whose
   widow inherited the estates upon is death in 1663, but had to flee
   Antigua during the French occupation in 1666. When Antigua was
   reoccupied by the British, Parliament annulled all land claims prior to
   the French occupation, (of those who had fled or been disloyal to the
   Crown). Instead, in 1674, Betty's Hope was granted to the Codrington
   family, then residing in Barbados.

   Like other large plantations, Betty's Hope was an agricultural as well
   as an industrial enterprise, and home to a large number of people.
   Supervised by a handful of European managers, hundreds of Africans
   lived out their lives on this and similar plantations, first as slaves,
   then as laborers after emancipation in 1834. Enduring the hardship of
   cultivating and processing the sugar under exhausting conditions, they
   developed great skills as craftsmen, boilers and distillers which gave
   Betty's Hope its reputation for excellence lasting to this day.

   Today an active restoration of Betty's Hope is under way. New sails
   have been installed on the mill and the crushing machinery has been
   restored to working condition. The next phase of restoration involves
   repairing the cistern complex and the planting of trees and crops of
   former times.

   A visitor centre has been created by converting a former cotton house
   storeroom into a museum. This includes various aspects of the
   plantation's history and shows early estate plans, pictures and maps,
   artifacts and a model of the central site to giving an overview of the
   of "Betty's Hope".

Antigua Cruise Ship Dock

   If you are on a Cruise ship Holiday in the Caribbean and visiting
   Antigua, this is your first stop on our little corner of paradise. The
   Antigua cruise ship dock is located at Heritage and Redcliffe Quay, in
   the capital of St, John's. This modern 900 foot dock, built in 1988,
   accommodates up to 4 cruise ships a day touring the Caribbean. The
   Cruise ship dock is just steps away from many duty free shops,
   restaurants, boutiques, and services at Heritage and Redcliffe Quays.
   From here shop, have lunch, or take one of the popular taxi tours
   around the island or to one of our fantastic Antigua beaches.

   For more ideas on things to do take a look at our Great Days Out
   category.

   We hope you enjoy your visit to Antigua on your Caribbean Cruise Ship
   holiday. If you want to talk to others who have stopped off on a cruise
   for the day in Antigua visit the Cruise Critic Forum and find out what
   they did and what they thought about it.

   If you like a town with atmosphere and entertainment then cruise ship
   days are a great day to visit St. John’s. If you prefer quieter
   shopping then days when less or no boats are in will suit you better –
   the choice is yours.

The Bethesda Tamarind Tree

   In 1951, when the Antigua Trades & Labour Union was in its infancy,
   Union field officers went into the estates and said no crop would start
   until the workers were told their rates of pay.

   Sugar cane cutters had already been on strike for three months and both
   the workers and the Antigua Sugar Estates were losing money.
   Subsequently the employer, Mr. Alexander Moody-Stuart, had stated he
   would starve the workers into submission. Meetings were arranged
   between the workers and Moody-Stuart, and one of these was under the
   old Tamarind Tree and the other was at Betty's Hope estate.

   The employer, sitting on his white horse, insisted on speaking first,
   "I know you are losing a lot of money, you are losing wages and may I
   admit that I am losing much myself. I think you should stop this thing
   and you should go back to work". The answer from the workers was
   unanimous. "You said you were going to starve us into submission.
   Nobody shall ever use that remark again. We are not going to work for
   the balance of the year". For the rest of that year no crop was reaped.

   The people went into the fields, picked natural resources such as
   Widdy-Widdy bush Corchorus siliquosus and went down to the sea to
   collect cockles and wilks Livona pica. Without pay they managed to
   survive, though it was hard. On Jan 2 1952, after a long strike, the
   workers got the 25% increase they had asked for. The strength,
   determination, solidarity and sacrifice of the workers fighting against
   tyranny and injustice had brought the sugar barons to their knees...and
   much of it had happened in the meeting place of this old tree. The
   workers had won their rights by their own enormous efforts. It was one
   of the greatest accomplishments of Antigua people.

   This historical landmark may be found about one and a half miles from
   Bethesda on the road towards the northeast. It grows on the north side
   of the road on a slight curve. Underneath the tree a large boulder has
   been placed to mark the spot for future generations.

Potworks Reservoir

   This expanse of freshwater is reputed to be largest in the Eastern
   Caribbean. It is about a mile long and half a mile wide, when full. It
   covers an area of about 320 acres and holds 1 billion gallons of water.
   This water is held by two dams; the largest is the Potworks dam at the
   eastern end and the Delaps dam is to the south. The reservoir is named
   after an 18th century pottery works at the Garden estate, which was
   owned by the Codrington family from the early 18th to the end of the
   20th century. A part of the dam is built over the site of the works and
   a 19th century bridge. Skilled black potters using a wheel and kiln
   technology made sugar pots here. The main product was a conical sugar
   pot used for draining molasses from raw sugar.

   The Potworks dam was planned in the late 1960's. While work was
   underway in 1968, only 24 inches of rain fell during the entire year;
   Antigua's average rainfall is 44 inches a year. Scarcely had the dam
   been finished when great rains filled the reservoir to capacity.
   Potworks dam and its reservoir were officially opened on 28th May 1970,
   and there is a small monument on the west of the dam commemorating this
   event. Potworks served well in 1974, when there was little or no
   rainfall from January to mid-August. In September 1984, 5.58 inches
   fell to end a drought. Potworks dam caught 20 million gallons of water.

   There is interesting bird watching around the western edge of the
   reservoir. Some of the year round species include the West Indian
   whistling duck Dendrocygna arborea, snowy egret Egretta thula, cattle
   egret Bubulcus ibis and the osprey Pandion haliaetus.

St. John's Cathedral

   St. John's Catherdral
   Enlarge
   St. John's Catherdral

   Two St. John's Anglican Churches have already stood on the site of the
   present cathedral. The first was built of wood as early as 1681 and was
   said to be "totally destitute of beauty or comfort". The second was
   constructed with English brick about 1720 when the first fell in
   disrepair and became too small.

   The church was designed by Mr. Robert Cullen and had a short steeple at
   its western end. After over a century, the church was elevated to the
   status of a cathedral when the Diocese of Antigua was created in August
   1842. As plans were being made to make the church worthy of its new
   status, a violent earthquake severely damaged it in February 1843.
   Temporary repairs were made and in it Bishop Daniel Davis was enthroned
   as the first Bishop of Antigua. Next to the site of the first two
   churches a new purpose built cathedral was planned and approved by the
   House of Assembly. The Governor, Sir Charles Augustus Fitzroy, laid the
   cornerstone on October 9, 1843 and on October 10 three years later, the
   Cathedral was opened for divine service. It was consecrated on July 25,
   1848.

   The Cathedral is built of freestone and the architect was Mr. J. Fuller
   of Bath and the Clerk of Works was Mr. F.W. Rowe of Bristol. The
   interior is encased in pitch pine, intending to secure the building
   from ruin during earthquake or hurricane. It has been described as "a
   building within a building". The Cathedral is dominated by twin towers
   at the west end and provides a distinct baroque flavour. They are 70 ft
   high and the cupolas that crown the towers are aluminium in colour. At
   the time of erection, the edifice was criticised by ecclesiastical
   architects as being like "a pagan temple with two dumpy pepper pot
   towers", however in modern times the edifice has been cited as "the
   most imposing of all the Cathedrals of the West Indian Province".
   Originally the south gate was the main entrance to the Cathedral. On
   top of its pillars are the bronze figures of St. John the Divine and
   St. John the Baptist. H.M.S. Temple is said to have taken these figures
   from a French ship destined for Martinique in 1756 during the Seven
   Years War. The iron gates themselves date from 1789.

   A centenarian, Samuel Smith in his memoirs (To Shoot Hard Labour), says
   the planters called the Cathedral 'Big Church' and that it frightened
   the people as a symbol of English power. He also said that the Anglican
   Church catered more for the planter class, but the black people got
   more involved at about the time of World War I. At last some black
   persons names were memorialised on the cathedral's walls.

Wallings Reservoir

   One of the finest mixed evergreen deciduous forest walks may be had at
   Wallings. Proceed westerly from John Hughes village up a slight
   gradient. At the top on turning to the left, is the pumping station of
   Wallings reservoir. From the station, start walking westerly to find
   the footpath that leads to the reservoir.

   After walking about half a mile along dry scrubland with scattered
   trees, the spillway of the dam appears. The workmanship of this fine
   example of Victorian industrial architecture is truly magnificent with
   its rounded capping and small round tower. The reservoir was started in
   1890, but there were complaints in 1897 that it could not hold water.
   However, it was finally finished to perfection in 1900. It was designed
   to hold 13 million gallons. Nine years later it had to be repaired
   again. It was then supplying thirty water tanks in fifteen villages.

   In 1912, after three years of drought, Wallings became empty, but later
   heavy rains fell in October and November of that year. A small
   additional dam creating the Fig Tree reservoir next to the main road
   was finished in November 1945. This was used to pump additional water
   up to Wallings. Together these two reservoirs cover 268 acres with a
   storage volume of 50 acres/ft.

   In 1915, 13 acres of the reservoir catchment area were sown with tree
   seeds with a view to reforestation, as the area had become denuded
   after the turn of the century. In recent years some attention has been
   focused for both watershed protection and forestry products. Follow the
   east bank and find a rough footpath that meanders upwards into the
   forest. Proceed slowly and quietly to listen and watch for birds. If
   you are lucky you could observe a black whiskered vireo (Vireo
   altiloquus), Antillean euphonia (Euphonia musica) or a red-necked
   pigeon (Columba squamosa). On your way back, explore the back of the
   reservoir where some interesting water diversion channels and sediment
   traps can be seen.

   The predominant tree species are locust Hymenaea courbaril, ironwood
   Exostema caribaeum, mahoe Daphnosis caribaea, black loblolly Pisonia
   fragrans, and mango, Mangifera indica. Of the mid-level types are white
   cedar Tabebuia pallida, turpentine Bursera simaruba, and gunstock
   Gauzuma martinicense. In the lower level are mahogany Swietenia
   mohogani, Spanish oak Inga laurina and white prickle Zanthoxylum
   martinicense.

   In a certain area near the reservoir, picnic tables have been
   installed. Plan to make an outing into this section of Antigua's forest
   - a perfect place for peace and quiet in this bustling world - full of
   history and natural history.

Culture

Sport

   Cricket is very popular in Antigua and Barbuda, along with most
   Commonwealth nations. The 2007 Cricket World Cup will be hosted in the
   West Indies from 11 March to 28 April 2007. Antigua hopes to host some
   matches at the Sir Vivian Richards Stadium, which is still under
   construction, and will hold 20,000 people at full capacity.

   Football (Soccer) is also a very popular sport and in its season, it
   seems to be the topic on everyones' mind. Antigua has a national
   football team but because of lack of experience not much has come out
   in that sector.

   Athletics is also big in Antigua. In the schools from a young age
   talented athletes are trained and Antigua has produced one or two
   fairly adept athletes. Janelle Williams, a young athlete with much
   promise hails from Grey's Farm, Antigua. Also, there is Sonia Williams
   and Heather Samuel who have represented Antigua at the Olympic Games.

Cuisine

   The national dish is fungie (pronounced foon-gee) and pepper pot.
   Fungie is a dish very similar to the Italian Polenta being made mainly
   of cornmeal. Other local dishes include ducana, season rice, Saltfish
   and lobster (from Barbuda). There are also local confectionaries which
   include: sugarcake, fudge, raspberry and tamarind stew and peanut
   brittle.

   Although these foods are indigenous to Antigua and Barbuda and to some
   other Caribbean countries, the local diet has diversified and now
   include the local dishes of Jamaica (e.g. jerk pork), Guyana (e.g.
   Roti) and other Caribbean countries. Chinese restaurants have also
   begun to become more mainstream. The supermarkets sell a wide variety
   of food, from American to Italian. Meals also vary depending on social
   class.
     * A typical breakfast in Antigua might include cereal or a sandwich
       and tea/chocolate milk.
     * Lunch might be anything that can be easily bought from a nearby
       shop, especially a bakery.
     * Dinner is definitely the most varied, as it differs depending on
       taste, social class and education on nutrition. But it will
       typically include a starch, like rice/macaroni/pasta,
       vegetables/salad, an entree (fish, chicken, pork, beef etc.) and a
       side dish like macaroni pie, scalloped potatoes or plantains. Local
       drinks are mauby, seamoss, tamarind juice, raspberry juice, mango
       juice, lemonade, coconut milk etc. Adults favour beers and rums,
       many of which are made locally.

   Sunday is the main Sabbath of the country and is the day when the
   culture is mostly reflected in the food. For breakfast one might have
   saltfish, eggplant, eggs, bacon, sausages, or lettuce. Dinner on
   Sundays is eaten earlier (around 2:00 pm) because parents are usually
   off from work and can stay home and cook. It may include pork, baked
   chicken, stewed lamb, or turkey, alongside rice (prepared in a variety
   of ways), macaroni pie, salads, and a local drink. Dessert may be ice
   cream and cake or an apple pie (mango and pineapple pie in their
   season) or Jello.

Antiguan Creole (Dialect)

   Antiguan Creole is a dialect spoken on the small Caribbean island of
   Antigua and Barbuda although the Barbudan accent is slightly different.

   Persons of higher social status find it easier to switch between
   Standard English and Antiguan English (dialect) mainly because of
   better education. The Dialect gets more raw the lower down the
   socio-economic ladder one moves.

   In the years before Antigua and Barbuda's independence (in 1981),
   Standard English was widely spoken, but after independence, perhaps as
   a avenue of defiance Antiguan's taught themselves that speaking dialect
   was a part of their culture and that nothing at all was wrong with it.

   Many of the words used in the Antiguan dialect are derived from English
   and also African origins. The dialect was formed when slaves owned by
   English planters imitated the English of their masters but failed to
   pronounce it correctly. This can be easily seen in some phrases like:
   "Me nah go" meaning "I am not going." Another example is: "Ent it?"
   meaning "Ain't it?" which is in itself dialect and means "isn't it?"
   Common island proverbs often can be traced to Africa.

Famous Antiguans

     * Jan-Eric Ahlfors - Stem cell research scientist
     * Paget Henry - Intellectual/Sociologist
     * Shermain Jeremy - Singer, Beauty Queen
     * Sir Issac Vivian Richards - Cricketer
     * Curtly Ambrose - Cricketer
     * Richie Richardson - Cricketer
     * Andy Roberts - Cricketer
     * Jamaica Kincaid - Author
     * Ledley King - Footballer
     * Craig Speedy Claxton - Basketball player (of Antiguan descent)
     * Maurice Hope - Boxer
     * Bert Williams - Actor, Singer, Writer
     * Anna Maria Horsford - Actress (of Antiguan descent)
     * Emile Heskey - Football player (of Antiguan descent)
     * Colin Kazim-Richards - Football Player (of Antiguan descent)
     * Gregory Abbott - Singer
     * Tim Hector - Intellectual, journalist and politician
     * Basil Hill - Author
     * Vere Cornwall Bird - Former Prime Minister (1981-1994)
     * Lester Bird - Former Prime Minister (1994-2004)
     * Baldwin Spencer - Prime Minister (2004 - )
     * Sir James Carlisle - Govenor General/Queen's representative
     * William Harper - US Senator (South Carolina) in the 1800s.
     * Josiah Martin - Colonial governor of the Province of North Carolina
       (1771-1775)
     * Gregson Davis - Intellectual/Classicist
     * King Short Shirt - Calypsonian
     * Swallow (Calypsonian) - Calypsonian
     * King Obstinate - Calypsonian
     * Burning Flames - Soca Band, (Official Web site )
     * Conrad Roberts - Actor

Trivia

     * Antigua was an important port to Great Britain in the sailing ship
       days. Because of its unique position in relation to the trade
       winds, it was hard for ships to leave the port and easy for ones to
       come in. Therefore, when enemy ships tried to retreat back out to
       sea, it was very difficult for them, and they could more easily be
       caught by the British Navy.

     * The Antigua Racer Snake is the rarest snake in the world, with only
       about two hundred living. It is found on Bird Island, a island off
       the coast of Antigua.

     * Dickenson Bay Beach, and Half-moon Bay, two beaches in Antigua have
       been named by wikipedia.co.uk as Two of the Best Beaches in the
       World.

     * Antigua and Barbuda claim to collectively have 365 beaches, one for
       every day in the year. This has never been tested and is taken
       lightly as humour.

     * Vere Cornwall Bird Antigua and barbuda's first Prime Minister is
       accredited to have brought Antigua and the Caribbean into a New era
       of independence.

     * Antigua and Barbuda has been named the best Island Wedding
       Destination in the 12th annual International Caribbean World
       Awards. And has been cited by the Guinness world records as having
       the most marraiges per capita.

     * Antigua's English Harbour Rum has been named one of The Best Rums
       in the World by Forbes Magazine.

     * Claudette Peters, Antigua's Soca princess has been awarded Best new
       Female Aritist in the international Soca Awards.

     * Young Destroyer, An Antiguan Calypsonian is now crown the Calypso
       King of the World after winning the CARIFESTA Calypso Competition
       in September 2006 in Trinidad.

     * Eric Clapton, Musician, has founded a Rehabilitation Clinic, the
       The Crossroads Centre, in Antigua which has had celebrity visitors
       like Whitney Houston.

     * Giorgio Armani, fashion designer, has a million dollar mansion in
       Antigua.

Foreign relations

   Antigua and Barbuda is a member of the Caribbean Community, United
   Nations, World Trade Organization, Commonwealth of Nations,
   Organization of American States, Organisation of Eastern Caribbean
   States, and the Eastern Caribbean's Regional Security System.

   Antigua and Barbuda is also a member of the International Criminal
   Court with a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the
   US-military (as covered under Article 98).
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antigua_and_Barbuda"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
