   #copyright

Antimony

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Chemical elements

          Not to be confused with antinomy, a type of paradox.


                51               tin ← antimony → tellurium
                As
                ↑
                Sb
                ↓
                Bi

                                  Periodic Table - Extended Periodic Table

                                                                   General
                                     Name, Symbol, Number antimony, Sb, 51
                                                Chemical series metalloids
                                             Group, Period, Block 15, 5, p
                                          Appearance silvery lustrous grey
                                             Atomic mass 121.760 (1) g/mol
                               Electron configuration [Kr] 4d^10 5s^2 5p^3
                                       Electrons per shell 2, 8, 18, 18, 5
                                                       Physical properties
                                                               Phase solid
                                      Density (near r.t.) 6.697 g·cm^−3
                                    Liquid density at m.p. 6.53 g·cm^−3
                                                   Melting point 903.78  K
                                               (630.63 ° C, 1167.13 ° F)
                                                      Boiling point 1860 K
                                                    (1587 ° C, 2889 ° F)
                                         Heat of fusion 19.79 kJ·mol^−1
                                  Heat of vaporization 193.43 kJ·mol^−1
                          Heat capacity (25 °C) 25.23 J·mol^−1·K^−1

   CAPTION: Vapor pressure

                                        P/Pa   1  10  100  1 k  10 k 100 k
                                       at T/K 807 876 1011 1219 1491 1858

                                                         Atomic properties
                                            Crystal structure rhombohedral
                                               Oxidation states −3, 3, 5
                                    Electronegativity 2.05 (Pauling scale)
                                                       Ionization energies
                                             ( more) 1st: 834 kJ·mol^−1
                                                  2nd: 1594.9 kJ·mol^−1
                                                    3rd: 2440 kJ·mol^−1
                                                      Atomic radius 145 pm
                                              Atomic radius (calc.) 133 pm
                                                    Covalent radius 138 pm
                                                             Miscellaneous
                                                 Magnetic ordering no data
                                Electrical resistivity (20 °C) 417 nΩ·m
                       Thermal conductivity (300 K) 24.4 W·m^−1·K^−1
                       Thermal expansion (25 °C) 11.0 µm·m^−1·K^−1
                               Speed of sound (thin rod) (20 °C) 3420 m/s
                                                    Young's modulus 55 GPa
                                                      Shear modulus 20 GPa
                                                       Bulk modulus 42 GPa
                                                         Mohs hardness 3.0
                                                  Brinell hardness 294 MPa
                                             CAS registry number 7440-36-0
                                                         Selected isotopes

                 CAPTION: Main article: Isotopes of antimony

                            iso     NA   half-life   DM   DE ( MeV)   DP
                           ^121Sb 57.36% Sb is stable with 70 neutrons
                           ^123Sb 42.64% Sb is stable with 72 neutrons
                           ^125Sb syn    2.7582 y  Beta^- 0.767     ^125Te

                                                                References

   Antimony ( IPA: /anˈtɪməni/) is a chemical element in the periodic
   table that has the symbol Sb ( Latin: stibium, meaning "mark") and
   atomic number 51. A metalloid, antimony has four allotropic forms. The
   stable form of antimony is a blue-white metal. Yellow and black
   antimony are unstable non-metals. Antimony is used in flame-proofing,
   paints, ceramics, enamels, a wide variety of alloys, electronics, and
   rubber.

Notable characteristics

   Antimony in its elemental form is a silvery white, brittle, fusible,
   crystalline solid that exhibits poor electrical and heat conductivity
   properties and vaporizes at low temperatures. A metalloid, antimony
   resembles a metal in its appearance and physical properties, but does
   not chemically react as a metal. It is also attacked by oxidizing acids
   and halogens. Antimony and some of its alloys are unusual in that they
   expand on cooling.

   Estimates of the abundance of antimony in the Earth's crust range from
   0.2 to 0.5 ppm. Antimony is geochemically categorized as a chalcophile,
   occurring with sulfur and the heavy metals lead, copper, and silver.

Applications

   Antimony is increasingly being used in the semiconductor industry in
   the production of diodes, infrared detectors, and Hall-effect devices.
   As an alloy, this semi-metal greatly increases lead's hardness and
   mechanical strength. The most important use of antimony metal is as a
   hardener in lead for storage batteries. Uses include:
     * Batteries
     * antifriction alloys
     * type metal
     * small arms and tracer bullets
     * cable sheathing
     * matches
     * medicines
     * plumbing
     * soldering - some "lead-free" solders contain 5% Sb
     * main and big-end bearings in internal combustion engines (as alloy)
     * used in the past to treat Schistosomiasis; today Praziquantel is
       universally used
     * used in linotype printing machines

   Antimony compounds in the form of oxides, sulfides, sodium antimonate,
   and antimony trichloride are used in the making of flame-proofing
   compounds, ceramic enamels, glass, paints, and pottery. Antimony
   trioxide is the most important of the antimony compounds and is
   primarily used in flame-retardant formulations. These flame-retardant
   applications include such markets as children's clothing, toys,
   aircraft and automobile seat covers. Also, antimony sulfide is one of
   the ingredients of a modern match.

   The natural sulfide of antimony, stibnite, was known and used in
   Biblical times as medicine and as a cosmetic. Stibnite is still used in
   some developing countries as medicine. Antimony has been used for the
   treatment of schistosomiasis. Antimony attaches itself to sulfur atoms
   in certain enzymes which are used by both the parasite and human host.
   Small doses can kill the parasite without causing damage to the
   patient. Antimony and its compounds are used in several veterinary
   preparations like Anthiomaline or Lithium antimony thiomalate, which is
   used as a skin conditioner in ruminants. Antimony has a nourishing or
   conditioning effect on keratinized tissues, at least in animals. Tartar
   emetic is another antimony preparation which is used as an
   anti-schistosomal drug. Treatments chiefly involving antimony have been
   called antimonials.

   A coin made of antimony was issued in the Keichow Province of China in
   1931. The coins were not popular, being too soft and they wore quickly
   when in circulation. After the first issue no others were produced.

History

   Antimony was recognized in antiquity ( 3000 BC or earlier) in various
   compounds, and it was prized for its fine casting qualities.

   The word Antimony is a Latin corruption of Arabic انتيمون
   ([al-]ithmīd), which is derived from Latin Stibium, which came from
   Greek στιβι [stibi] = a cosmetic powder (Sb[2]S[3] was used for
   cosmetic purposes). The relationship between antimony's modern name and
   its symbol is complex; the Coptic name for the cosmetic powder antimony
   sulfide was borrowed by the Greeks, which was in turn borrowed by
   Latin, resulting in stibium. The chemical pioneer Jöns Jakob Berzelius
   used an abbreviation of this name for antimony in his writings, and his
   usage became the standard symbol. A black antimony-based powder soluble
   in water known as stibium was the ancient version of mascara during
   Roman times. It was used to darken the brows and lashes, or to draw a
   line around the perimeter of the eye.

   According to the history of metallurgy the first description of the
   procedure to isolate antimony is in the Italian book " De la
   pirotechnia" of 1540 of Vannoccio Biringuccio. This book precedes the
   more famous Latin book " De re metallica" of 1556 of Agricola, although
   the latter has been often incorrectly considered the discoverer of
   metallic antimony.
   Alchemical symbol for antimony
   Alchemical symbol for antimony

   According to the traditional history of western alchemy metallic
   antimony was described (previous to Biringuccio) by the Prior Basilius
   Valentinus in the Latin manuscript "Currus Triumphalis Antimonii" of
   about 1450, published, in the English translation "The triumphal
   chariot of antimony", only in 1604 by Johann Thölde (1565-1614). The
   marvellous finding of all of the Valentinus' manuscripts, as in the
   alchemical tales, is fully described by Jean-Jacques Manget in his
   "Bibliotheca chemica curiosa" (1702): these manuscripts remained
   enclosed for more than a century in a pillar of St. Peter's Abbey, at
   Erfurt, until the pillar was shattered by a thunderbolt. Many authors
   consider Basilius Valentinus a mythological personage: the most
   authoritative of them is Leibniz (1646-1716), who declared after a
   careful search that the Prior Valentinus never existed in the Abbey of
   Erfurt, but was only a pseudonym, probably of Thölde himself, used to
   merge poorly-translated materials of various origins.

   According to the traditional history of Middle Eastern alchemy, pure
   antimony was well known to Geber, sometimes called "the Father of
   Chemistry", in the 8th century. Here there is still an open
   controversy: Marcellin Berthelot, who translated a number of Geber's
   books, stated that antimony is never mentioned in them, but other
   authors claim that Berthelot translated only some of the less important
   books, while the more interesting ones (some of which might describe
   antimony) are not yet translated, and their content is completely
   unknown.

Precautions

   Antimony and many of its compounds are poisonous. Clinically, antimony
   poisoning is very similar to arsenic poisoning. In small doses,
   antimony causes headache, dizziness, and depression. Such small doses
   have in the past been reported in some acidic fruit drinks. The acidic
   nature of the drink is sufficient to dissolve small amounts of antimony
   oxide contained in the packaging of the drink; modern manufacturing
   methods prevent this occurrence. Larger doses cause violent and
   frequent vomiting, and will lead to death in a few days.

   A study found that antimony is leached from PET bottles, but at levels
   below drinking water guidelines. The guidelines are:
     * WHO, 20 µg l^–1
     * US EPA, Health Canada and the Ontario Ministry of Environment, 6 µg
       l^–1
     * German Federal Ministry of Environment, 5 µg l^–1
     * Japan, 2 µg l^–1

Compounds

   Antimony pentafluoride SbF[5], antimony trioxide Sb[2]O[3], stibine
   (antimony trihydride SbH[3]), indium antimonide (InSb)
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antimony"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
