   #copyright

Arctic Circle

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: General Geography

   World map showing the Arctic Circle in red
   Enlarge
   World map showing the Arctic Circle in red
   A sign along the Dalton Highway marking the location of the Arctic
   Circle
   Enlarge
   A sign along the Dalton Highway marking the location of the Arctic
   Circle

   The Arctic Circle is one of the five major circles of latitude that
   mark maps of the Earth. This is the parallel of latitude that (in 2000)
   runs 66 ° 33′ 39″ (or 66.56083 °) north of the Equator. Everything
   north of this circle is known as the Arctic, and the zone just to the
   south of this circle is the Northern Temperate Zone.

   The Arctic Circle marks the southern extremity of the polar day (24
   hour sunlit day) of the summer solstice in June and the polar night (24
   hour sunless night) of the winter solstice in December. Within the
   Arctic Circle, the Sun is above the horizon for 24 continuous hours at
   least once per year, in conjunction with the Arctic's Summer Solstice -
   this is often referred to in local vernacular as midnight sun.
   Likewise, in conjunction with the Arctic’s Winter Solstice, the Arctic
   sun will be below the horizon for at least 24 continuous hours. (In
   fact, because of the atmospheric refraction and because the sun appears
   as a disk and not a point, part of the midnight sun may be seen at the
   night of the summer solstice up to about 50′ (90 km) south of the
   geometric arctic circle; similarly, at the day of the winter solstice
   part of the sun may be seen up to about 50′ north of the geometric
   arctic circle. This is true at sea level; these limits increase with
   elevation above sea level, however in mountainous regions there is
   often no direct view of the horizon.)

   The position of the Arctic Circle is determined by the axial tilt
   (angle) of the polar axis of rotation of the Earth on the ecliptic.
   This angle is not constant, but has a complex motion determined by many
   cycles of short to very long periods. At 2000, its mean value was about
   23°26′21″. Due to nutation the tilt oscillates over 9″ (about 280 m on
   the surface) over a period of 18.6 years. The main long-term cycle has
   a period of 41,000 years and an amplitude of about 0.68°, or 76 km on
   the surface. Currently the tilt is decreasing by about 0.47″ per year,
   so the Arctic Circle is moving north by about 15 m per year. Also see
   precession.

   Countries which have significant territory within the Arctic Circle
   are:
     * Russia
     * Canada
     * Denmark (Greenland)
     * United States ( Alaska)
     * Norway
     * Sweden
     * Finland

   The country of Iceland also has territory within the Arctic Circle, but
   less than 1 km². This area is on a few small islets, of which only
   Grímsey (which lies directly on the Arctic Circle) is inhabited.

   There are very few people living above the Arctic Circle. The largest
   towns above the Arctic Circle are Murmansk (population 325,100) in
   Russia, and Norilsk (135,000) also in Russia. Tromsø in Norway has
   about 62,000 dwellers, whereas Rovaniemi in Finland has a bit less than
   58,000 inhabitants.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arctic_Circle"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
