   #copyright

Argentina

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Central & South American
Countries; Countries

   SOS Children works in Argentina. For more information see SOS Children
   in Argentina
                          República Argentina
   Argentine Republic

   Flag of Argentina Coat of arms of Argentina
   Flag              Coat of arms
   Motto: Spanish: En Unión y Libertad
   (English: "In Union and Freedom")
   Anthem: Himno Nacional Argentino
   Location of Argentina
   Capital
   (and largest city) Buenos Aires
                      (1)) 34°20′S 58°30′W
   Official languages Spanish
   Government         Federal republic
    - President       Néstor Kirchner
    - Vice President  Daniel Scioli
      Independence    From Spain
    - May Revolution  25 May 1810
    - Declared        9 July 1816
    - Recognized      1821 (by Portugal)
                                  Area
    - Total           2,780,400 (1) km² ( 8th)
                      1,073,514 sq mi
    - Water (%)       1.1
                               Population
    - 2006 estimate   39,921,833 ( 32nd)
    - 2001 census     36,260,130
    - Density         14/km² ( 195th)
                      36/sq mi
       GDP ( PPP)     2006 estimate
    - Total           US $548.754 billion ( 22nd)
    - Per capita      US $14,838 ( 48th)
      HDI  (2006)     0.863 (high) ( 36th)
        Currency      Peso ( ARS)
       Time zone      ART ( UTC-3)
    - Summer ( DST)   ARST ( UTC-3)
      Internet TLD    .ar
      Calling code    +54
   (1) Argentina also has a territorial dispute with the United Kingdom
   over an additional 1,000,000 km² of Antarctica, the Falkland Islands
   and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, for a total of
   3,761,274 km² (1,452,236 sq mi).

   Argentina is a country in southern South America. It ranks second in
   land area in South America, and eighth in the world.

   Argentina occupies a continental surface area of 2,791,810 km²
   (1,078,000  sq mi) between the Andes mountain range in the west and the
   southern Atlantic Ocean in the east and south. It is bordered by
   Paraguay and Bolivia in the north, Brazil and Uruguay in the northeast,
   and Chile in the west and south. The country claims the British
   overseas territories of the Falkland Islands (Spanish: Islas Malvinas)
   and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands. Under the name of
   Argentine Antarctica, it claims 969,464 km² (374,312 sq mi) of
   Antarctica, overlapping other claims made by Chile and the United
   Kingdom.

   The country is formally called the Argentine Republic (Spanish:
   República Argentina, IPA [reˈpuβlika aɾxenˈtina]). For many legal
   purposes, Nación Argentina (Argentine Nation) is used.

Origin and history of the name

   "Argentina" derives from the Latin argentum (silver). When the first
   Spanish conquistadors discovered the Río de la Plata, they named the
   estuary Mar Dulce ('Sweet Sea', as in a fresh water sea). Indigenous
   people gave gifts of silver to the survivors of the shipwrecked
   expedition, who were led by Juan Díaz de Solís. The legend of Sierra
   del Plata — a mountain rich in silver — reached Spain around 1524, and
   the name was first seen in print on a Venice map from 1536. The source
   of the silver was the area where the city of Potosí was to be founded
   in 1546. An expedition that followed the trail of the silver up the
   Paraná and Pilcomayo rivers finally reached the source only to find it
   already claimed by explorers who reached it from Lima, the capital of
   the Viceroyalty.

   The name Argentina was first used extensively in Ruy Díaz de Guzmán's
   1612 book Historia del descubrimiento, población, y conquista del Río
   de la Plata (History of the discovery, population, and conquest of the
   Río de la Plata), naming the territory Tierra Argentina (Land of
   Silver).

History

   Río de la Plata aboriginals, as pictured by Hendrick Ottsen (1603)
   Enlarge
   Río de la Plata aboriginals, as pictured by Hendrick Ottsen (1603)

   The first signs of human presence in Argentina are located in the
   Patagonia ( Piedra Museo, Santa Cruz), and date from 11,000 BC. Around
   1 AD, several corn-based civilizations developed in the western Andean
   region (Santa María, Huarpes, Diaguitas, Sanavirones, among others). In
   1480 the Inca Empire, under the rule of emperor Pachacutec, launched an
   offensive and conquered present-day northwestern Argentina, integrating
   it into a region called Collasuyu. In the northeastern area, the
   Guaraní developed a culture based on yuca and sweet potato. The central
   and southern areas ( Pampas and Patagonia) were dominated by nomadic
   cultures, unified in the 17th century by the Mapuches.
   Buenos Aires in 1536
   Enlarge
   Buenos Aires in 1536

   Europeans arrived in 1502. Spain established a permanent colony on the
   site of Buenos Aires in 1580; the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata
   was created in 1776. In 1806 and 1807 the British Empire launched two
   invasions to Buenos Aires, but the creole population repelled both
   attempts. On May 25, 1810, after confirmation of the rumors about the
   overthrow of King Ferdinand VII by Napoleon, citizens of Buenos Aires
   took advantage of the situation and created the First Government Junta
   ( May Revolution). Formal independence from Spain was declared on July
   9, 1816 in Tucumán. In 1817, General José de San Martín crossed the
   Andes to free Chile and Peru, thus eliminating the Spanish threat.
   Centralist and federalist groups (Spanish: Unitarios and Federales)
   were in conflict until national unity was established and the
   constitution promulgated in 1853.

   Foreign investment and immigration from Europe led to the adoption of
   modern agricultural techniques. In the 1880s, the " Conquest of the
   Desert" subdued or exterminated the remaining indigenous tribes
   throughout the southern Pampas and Patagonia.

   From 1880 to 1930, Argentina enjoyed increasing prosperity and
   prominence through an export-led economy, and the population of the
   country swelled sevenfold. Conservative forces dominated Argentine
   politics until 1916, when their traditional rivals, the Radicals, won
   control of the government. The military forced Hipólito Yrigoyen from
   power in 1930, leading to another decade of Conservative rule.
   Political change led to the presidency of Juan Perón in 1946, who tried
   to empower the working class and greatly expanded the number of
   unionized workers. The Revolución Libertadora of 1955 deposed him.
   President Juan Perón (1946)
   Enlarge
   President Juan Perón (1946)

   From the 1950s to 1970s, soft military and weak civilian
   administrations traded power. During those years the economy grew
   strongly and poverty declined (less than 7% in 1975), but became
   increasingly protectionist. At the same time political violence
   continued to escalate. In 1973, Perón returned to the presidency, but
   he died within a year of assuming power. His third wife Isabel, the
   Vice President, succeeded him in office, but the military coup of March
   24, 1976 removed her from office.

   The armed forces took power through a junta in charge of the
   self-appointed National Reorganization Process until 1983. The military
   government repressed opposition and terrorist leftist groups using
   harsh illegal measures (the " Dirty War"); thousands of dissidents "
   disappeared", while the SIDE cooperated with DINA and other South
   American intelligence agencies, and with the CIA in Operation Condor.
   Many of the military leaders that took part in the Dirty War were
   trained in the U.S.-financed School of the Americas, among them
   Argentine dictators Leopoldo Galtieri and Roberto Viola. Economic
   problems, charges of corruption, public revulsion in the face of human
   rights abuses and, finally, the country's 1982 defeat by the British in
   the Falklands War discredited the Argentine military regime.

   Democracy was restored in 1983. Raúl Alfonsín's Radical government took
   steps to account for the "disappeared", established civilian control of
   the armed forces, and consolidated democratic institutions. The members
   of the three military juntas were prosecuted and sentenced to life
   terms. Failure to resolve endemic economic problems and an inability to
   maintain public confidence led to Alfonsín's early departure six months
   before his term was to be completed.

   President Carlos Menem imposed a peso-dollar fixed exchange rate in
   1991 to stop hyperinflation and adopted far-reaching market-based
   policies, dismantling protectionist barriers and business regulations,
   and implementing a privatization program. These reforms contributed to
   significant increases in investment and growth with stable prices
   through most of the 1990s.
   Protest against the corralito (2002)
   Enlarge
   Protest against the corralito (2002)

   The Menem and de la Rúa administrations faced diminished
   competitiveness of exports, massive imports which damaged national
   industry and reduced employment, chronic fiscal and trade deficits, and
   the contagion of several economic crises. The Asian financial crisis in
   1998 precipitated an outflow of capital that mushroomed into a
   recession, and culminated in a financial panic in November of 2001. The
   next month, amidst bloody riots, President de la Rúa finally resigned.

   In two weeks, several presidents followed in quick succession,
   culminating in Eduardo Duhalde being appointed interim President of
   Argentina by the Legislative Assembly on 2 January 2002. Argentina
   defaulted on its international debt obligations. The peso's almost
   11-year-old linkage to the U.S. dollar was abandoned, resulting in
   major depreciation of the peso and a spike in inflation.

   With a more competitive and flexible exchange rate, the country started
   implementing new policies based on re-industrialization, import
   substitution, increased exports, and consistent fiscal and trade
   surpluses. By the end of 2002, the economy began to stabilize. In 2003,
   Néstor Kirchner was elected president. During Kirchner's presidency,
   Argentina restructured its defaulted debt with a steep discount (about
   75 percent) on most bonds, paid off outstanding debts with the
   International Monetary Fund, renegotiated contracts with utilities, and
   nationalized some previously privatized industries. Currently,
   Argentina is enjoying a period of high economic growth and increased
   political stability.

Politics

Government

   Congress building in Buenos Aires
   Enlarge
   Congress building in Buenos Aires

   Argentina's political framework is a federal presidential
   representative democratic republic, in which the President of Argentina
   is both head of state and head of government, complemented by a
   pluriform multi-party system. Argentina's current president (2006) is
   Néstor Kirchner, with Daniel Scioli as vice president. The Argentine
   Constitution of 1853 mandates a separation of powers into executive,
   legislative, and judicial branches at the national and provincial
   level.

   Executive power resides in the President and his cabinet. The President
   and Vice President are directly elected to 4-year terms, limited to two
   consecutive terms, and the cabinet ministers are appointed by the
   president.

   Legislative power is vested in the bicameral National Congress or
   Congreso de la Nación, consisting of a Senate ( Senado) of 72 seats,
   and a Chamber of Deputies ( Cámara de Diputados) of 257 members.
   Senators serve 6-year terms, with one-third standing for reelection
   every 2 years. Members of the Chamber of Deputies are directly elected
   to 4-year term via a system of proportional representation, with half
   of the members of the lower house being elected every 2 years. A third
   of the candidates presented by the parties must be women.

   The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. The
   Argentine Supreme Court of Justice has 9 members who are appointed by
   the President in consultation with the Senate. The rest of the judges
   are appointed by the Council of Magistrates of the Nation, a
   secretariat composed of representatives of judges, lawyers, the
   Congress, and the executive. (see also law of Argentina)

Foreign relations

   Argentina is a member of Mercosur, an international bloc which has some
   legislative supranational functions. Mercosur is composed of five full
   members: Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, and Venezuela. It has
   five associate members without full voting rights: Bolivia, Chile,
   Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru.
   Current and Former Presidents of Brazil and Argentina on the 20th
   anniversary of the Mercosur.
   Enlarge
   Current and Former Presidents of Brazil and Argentina on the 20th
   anniversary of the Mercosur.

   Argentina was the only country from Latin America to participate in the
   1991 Gulf War under mandate of the United Nations, and in every phase
   of the Haiti operation. It has also contributed worldwide in
   peacekeeping operations, including in El Salvador-Honduras-Nicaragua,
   Guatemala, Ecuador-Peru, Western Sahara, Angola, Kuwait, Cyprus,
   Croatia, Kosovo, Bosnia and Timor Leste. In recognition of its
   contributions to international security, U.S. President Bill Clinton
   designated Argentina as a major non-NATO ally in January 1998. In 2005,
   it was elected as a temporary member of the UN Security Council.

   In 2005, on November 4 and November 5, the Argentine city of Mar del
   Plata hosted the Fourth Summit of the Americas. This summit was marked
   by a number of anti-U.S. protests. As of 2006, Argentina has been
   emphasizing Mercosur as its first international priority; by contrast,
   during the 1990s, it relied more heavily on its relationship with the
   United States.

   Argentina has long claimed sovereignty over the Falkland/Malvinas
   Islands, the South Shetland Islands, the South Sandwich Islands and
   almost 1 million km² in Antarctica, between the 25°W and the 74°W
   meridians and the 60°S parallel. This slice of the continent is known
   as Argentine Antarctica, which Argentina considers part of the national
   territory. For more than a century, there has been an Argentine
   presence at the Orcadas Base.

   Argentina is a founding signatory and permanent consulting member of
   the Antarctic Treaty System and the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat is
   established in Buenos Aires

Military

   The President is the Commander-in-Chief, and the military is under the
   control of the Defense Ministry. Argentina's military establishement
   has historically been one of the best equipped in the region (for
   example, developing its own advanced jet fighters as early as the
   1950s), but has faced expenditure cutbacks in comparison to other
   regional militaries. The age of allowable military service is 18 years;
   there is no obligatory military service and currently no conscription.

   The military is composed of a traditional Army, Navy, and Air Force.
   Controlled by a separate ministry (the Interior Ministry), Argentine
   territorial waters are patrolled by the Naval Prefecture, and the
   border regions by the National Gendarmerie; both branches however
   maintain liasions with the Defense Ministry. They mostly perform
   patrols against organized crime, drug smuggling, and rescue operations
   of civilians in distress. Argentina's Armed Forces are currently
   performing major operations in Haiti and Cyprus, in accordance to
   specified UN mandates.

Administrative divisions

   Provinces of Argentina. Argentina claims control of the Falkland
   Islands (Islas Malvinas) and a slice of Antarctica, both of which it
   considers a part of its Tierra del Fuego Province (23).
   Enlarge
   Provinces of Argentina. Argentina claims control of the Falkland
   Islands (Islas Malvinas) and a slice of Antarctica, both of which it
   considers a part of its Tierra del Fuego Province (23).

   Argentina is divided into 23 provinces (provincias; singular:
   provincia), and 1 autonomous city (commonly known as capital federal
   but constitutionally: "Capital de la República" or "Capital de la
   Nación"), marked with an asterisk:
    1. Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires^*
    2. Buenos Aires (Province)
    3. Catamarca
    4. Chaco
    5. Chubut
    6. Córdoba
    7. Corrientes
    8. Entre Ríos
    9. Formosa
   10. Jujuy
   11. La Pampa
   12. La Rioja

                                         13. Mendoza
                                         14. Misiones
                                         15. Neuquén
                                         16. Río Negro
                                         17. Salta
                                         18. San Juan
                                         19. San Luis
                                         20. Santa Cruz
                                         21. Santa Fe
                                         22. Santiago del Estero
                                         23. Tierra del Fuego
                                         24. Tucumán

   ^* The current official name for the federal district is Ciudad
   Autónoma de Buenos Aires.

   Buenos Aires has been the capital of Argentina since its unification,
   but there have been projects to move the administrative centre
   elsewhere. During the presidency of Raúl Alfonsín a law was passed
   ordering the transfer of the federal capital to Viedma, a city in the
   Patagonian province of Río Negro. Studies were underway when economic
   problems killed the project in 1989. Though the law was never formally
   repealed, it has become a mere historical relic, and the project has
   been forgotten.

   Provinces are divided into smaller secondary units called
   departamentos, or departments. There are 376 departments. The province
   of Buenos Aires has 134 similar divisions known as partidos.
   Departamentos and partidos are further subdivided into municipalities
   or districts.

   In descending order by number of inhabitants, the major cities in
   Argentina are Buenos Aires, Córdoba, Rosario, Mendoza, Tucumán, La
   Plata, Mar del Plata, Salta, Santa Fe, San Juan, Resistencia, and
   Neuquén.

Geography

   Topographic map of Argentina (Including some territorial claims)
   Enlarge
   Topographic map of Argentina (Including some territorial claims)

Main features

   The total surface area of Argentina (not including the Antarctic
   claim), is as follows:
     * Total: 2,766,890 km²
     * Land: 2,736,691 km²
     * Water: 30,200 km²

   Argentina is nearly 3,700 km long from north to south, and 1,400 km
   from east to west (maximum values). It can roughly be divided into four
   parts: the fertile plains of the Pampas in the centre the country, the
   source of Argentina's agricultural wealth; the flat to rolling,
   oil-rich plateau of Patagonia in the southern half down to Tierra del
   Fuego; the subtropical flats of the Gran Chaco in the north, and the
   rugged Andes mountain range along the western border with Chile.

   The highest point above sea level in Argentina is located in Mendoza.
   Cerro Aconcagua, at 6,962 meters (22,834 feet), is the highest mountain
   in the Americas, the Southern, and Western Hemisphere. The lowest point
   is Laguna del Carbón in Santa Cruz, −105 meters (−344 feet) below sea
   level. This is also the lowest point on the South American continent.
   The geographic centre of the country is located in south-central La
   Pampa province.

   The country has a territorial claim over a portion of Antarctica, where
   it has maintained a constant occupied presence for more than a century,
   starting in 1904.

Geographic regions

   The country is traditionally divided into several major geographically
   distinct regions:
     * Pampas: The plains west and south from Buenos Aires are some of the
       most fertile in the world. Called the Humid Pampa, they cover most
       of the provinces of Buenos Aires and Córdoba, and big portions of
       the provinces of Santa Fe and La Pampa. The western part of La
       Pampa and the province San Luis also have plains (the Dry Pampa),
       but they are drier and used mainly for grazing. The Sierra de
       Córdoba in the homonymous province (extending into San Luis), is
       the most important geographical feature of the pampas.
     * Gran Chaco: The Gran Chaco region in the north of the country is
       seasonal dry/wet, mainly cotton growing and livestock raising. It
       covers the provinces of Chaco and Formosa. It is dotted with
       subtropical forests, scrubland, and some wetlands, home to a large
       number of plant and animal species. The province of Santiago del
       Estero lies in the drier region of the Gran Chaco.
     * Mesopotamia: The land between the Paraná and Uruguay rivers is
       called Mesopotamia and it is shared by the provinces of Corrientes
       and Entre Ríos. It features flatland apt for grazing and plant
       growing, and the Iberá Wetlands in central Corrientes. Misiones
       province is more tropical and belongs within the Brazilian
       Highlands geographic feature. It features subtropical rainforests
       and the Iguazú Falls.
     * Patagonia: The steppes of Patagonia, in the provinces of Neuquén,
       Río Negro, Chubut and Santa Cruz, are of Tertiary origin. Most of
       the region is semiarid in the north to cold and arid in the far
       south, but forests grow in its western fringes which are dotted
       with several large lakes. Tierra del Fuego is cool and wet,
       moderated by oceanic influences. Northern Patagonia (roughly Río
       Negro south of the homonymous river, and Neuquén) can also be
       referred as the Comahue region (not commonly in use).
     * Cuyo: West-central Argentina is dominated by the imposing Andes
       Mountains. To their east is the arid region known as Cuyo. Melting
       waters from high in the mountains form the backbone of irrigated
       lowland oasis, at the centre of a rich fruit and wine growing
       region in Mendoza and San Juan provinces. Further north the region
       gets hotter and drier with more geographical accidents in La Rioja
       province.
     * NOA or Noroeste: This region is the highest in average elevation.
       Several parallel mountain ranges, several of which have peaks
       higher than 20,000 feet, dominate the area. These ranges grow wider
       in geographic extent towards the north. They are cut by fertile
       river valleys, the most important being the Calchaquí Valleys in
       the provinces of Catamarca, Tucumán, and Salta. Farther north the
       province of Jujuy near Bolivia lies mainly within the Altiplano
       plateau of the Central Andes. The Tropic of Capricorn goes through
       the far north of the region.

Rivers and lakes

   Espejo Lake, in Neuquén
   Enlarge
   Espejo Lake, in Neuquén

   Major rivers in Argentina include the Pilcomayo, Paraguay, Bermejo,
   Colorado, Río Negro, Salado, Uruguay and the largest river, the Paraná.
   The latter two flow together before meeting the Atlantic Ocean, forming
   the estuary of the Río de la Plata. Regionally important rivers are the
   Atuel and Mendoza in the homonymous province, the Chubut in Patagonia,
   the Río Grande in Jujuy, and the San Francisco River in Salta.

   There are several large lakes in Argentina, many of them in Patagonia.
   Among these are lakes Argentino and Viedma in Santa Cruz, Nahuel Huapi
   in Río Negro and Fagnano in Tierra del Fuego, and Colhué Huapi and
   Musters in Chubut. Lake Buenos Aires and O'Higgins/San Martín Lake are
   shared with Chile. Mar Chiquita, Córdoba, is the largest salt water
   lake in the country. There are numerous reservoirs created by dams.
   Argentina features various hot springs, such as those at Termas de Río
   Hondo with temperatures between 30°C and 65°C.

Coastal areas and seas

   Argentina has 2,665 kilometers (1,656mi) of coastline. The continental
   platform is unusually wide; in Argentina this shallow area of the
   Atlantic Ocean is called Mar Argentino. The waters are rich in
   fisheries and suspected of holding important hydrocarbon energy
   resources. Argentina's coastline varies between areas of sand dunes and
   cliffs. The two major ocean currents affecting the coast are the warm
   Brazil Current and the cold Falkland Current (Spanish: corriente
   Antártica). Because of the uneveness of the coastal landmass, the two
   currents alternate in their influence on climate and do not allow
   temperatures to fall evenly with higher latitude. The southern coast of
   Tierra del Fuego forms the north shore of the Drake Passage.

Climate

   Calchaquí Valleys in the province of Salta
   Enlarge
   Calchaquí Valleys in the province of Salta

   Because of longitudinal and elevation amplitudes, Argentina is subject
   to a variety of climates. As a rule, the climate is predominantly
   temperate with extremes ranging from subtropical in the north to
   subpolar in the far south. The north of the country is characterized by
   very hot, humid summers with mild drier winters, and is subject to
   periodic droughts. Central Argentina has hot summers with thunderstorms
   (in western Argentina producing some of the world's largest hail), and
   cool winters. The southern regions have warm summers and cold winters
   with heavy snowfall, specially in mountainous zones. Higher elevations
   at all latitudes experience cooler conditions.

   The hottest and coldest temperature extremes recorded in South America
   have occurred in Argentina. A record high temperature of 48.8  °C (120
   °F), was recorded at Rivadavia, Salta on December 11, 1905. The lowest
   temperature recorded was −32.7 °C (−27 °F) at Sarmiento, Chubut, June
   1st, 1907.

   Major winds in Argentina include the cool Pampero blowing on the flat
   plains of Patagonia and the Pampas after a cold front; the Viento
   Norte, a warm wind that can blow from the north in mid and late winter
   creating mild conditions; and the Zonda, a hot and dry wind ( see Föhn
   wind), affecting west-central Argentina. Squeezed of all moisture
   during the 6,000 meter descent from the Andes, Zonda winds can blow for
   hours with gusts up to 120 km/h, fueling wildfires and causing damage.
   When the Zonda blows (June-November), snowstorms and blizzard (viento
   blanco) conditions usually affect the higher elevations.

   The Sudestada (literally "southeaster") could be considered similar to
   the Noreaster, though snowfall is rarely involved (but is not
   unprecedented). Both are associated with a deep winter low pressure
   system. The sudestada usually moderates cold temperatures but brings
   very heavy rains, rough seas, and coastal flooding. It is most common
   in late autumn and winter along the coasts of central Argentina and in
   the Río de la Plata estuary.

   The southern regions, particularly the far south, experience long
   periods of daylight from November to February (up to 19 hours), and
   extended nights from May to August. All of Argentina uses UTC-3 time
   zone. The country does not observe daylight savings.

Extreme points

   Argentina's eastermost continental point is northeast of the town of
   Bernardo de Irigoyen, Misiones ( 26°15′S 53°38′W), the westernmost in
   the Mariano Moreno Range in Santa Cruz ( 49°33′S 73°35′W). The
   northermost point is located at the confluence of the Grande de San
   Juan and Mojinete rivers, Jujuy ( 21°46′S 66°13′W), and the
   southernmost is Cape San Pío in Tierra del Fuego ( 55°03′S 66°31′W).

Enclaves and exclaves

   There is one Argentine exclave, the Martín García Island (co-ordinates
   34°11′S 58°15′W). It is near the confluence of the Paraná and Uruguay
   rivers, a kilometre (0.62 mi) inside Uruguayan waters, and 3.5
   kilometres (2.1 mi) from the Uruguayan coastline near the small town of
   Martín Chico (itself halfway between Nueva Palmira and Colonia del
   Sacramento).

   An agreement reached by Argentina and Uruguay in 1973 reaffirmed
   Argentine jurisdiction over the island, ending a century-old dispute.
   Under the terms of the agreement, Martín García is to be devoted
   exclusively as a natural preserve. Its area is about 2 square
   kilometres (500  acres), and its population is about 200 people.

Flora and fauna

Vegetation

   Ceibo is Argentina's national flower
   Enlarge
   Ceibo is Argentina's national flower

   Subtropical plants dominate the north, part of the Gran Chaco region of
   South America. The genus Dalbergia of trees is well disseminated with
   representatives like the Brazilian Rosewood and the quebracho tree;
   also predominant are white and black algarrobo trees ( prosopis alba
   and prosopis nigra). Savannah-like areas exist in the drier regions
   nearer the Andes. Acquatic plants thrive in the wetlands dotting the
   region.

   In central Argentina the humid pampas are a true tallgrass prairie
   ecosystem. The original pampa had virtually no trees; today along roads
   or in towns and country estates (estancias), some imported species like
   the American sycamore or eucalyptus are present. The only tree-like
   plant native to the pampa is the ombú, an evergreen. The surface soils
   of the pampa are a deep black colour, primarily humus, known commonly
   as compost. It is this which makes the region one of the most
   agriculturaly productive on Earth. However, this is also responsible
   for decimating much of the original ecosystem, to make way for
   commercial agriculture. The western pampas receive less rainfall, this
   dry pampa is a plain of short grasses or steppe.

   Most of Patagonia in the south lies within a rain shade of the Andes.
   The plantlife, shrubby bushes and plants, is well suited to withstand
   dry conditions. The soil is hard and rocky making large-scale farming
   impossible except along river valleys. Coniferous forests grow in far
   western Patagonia and on the island of Tierra del Fuego. Conifers
   native to the region include alerce (Fitzroya cupressoides), ciprés de
   la cordillera (Austrocedrus chilensis), ciprés de las guaitecas
   (Pilgerodendron uviferum), huililahuán (Podocarpus nubigenus), lleuque
   (Prumnopitys andina), mañío hembra (Saxegothaea conspicua), and pehuén
   (Araucaria araucana), while native broadleaf trees include several
   species of Nothofagus including coigüe or coihue, lenga (Nothofagus
   pumilio), ñire (Nothofagus antarctica). Other introduced trees present
   in forestry plantations include spruce, cypress, and pine. Common
   plants are the copihue and colihue ( Chusquea coleou).

   In Cuyo, semiarid thorny bushes and other xerophile plants abound.
   Along the many river oasis, grasses and trees grow in significant
   numbers. The area presents optimal conditions for the large scale
   growth of grape vines. In the northwest of Argentina there are many
   species of cactii. In the highest elevations (often above 4,000mts), no
   vegetation grows due to the extreme altitude, and the soils are
   virtually devoid of any plant life.

   The ceibo flower (belonging to the tree Erythrina crista-galli), is the
   national flower of Argentina.

Animal life

   Many species live in the subtropical north. Big cats like the jaguar,
   puma, and ocelot; primates ( howler monkey); large reptiles (
   crocodiles), and a species of caiman. Other animals include the tapir,
   capybara, anteater, ferret, raccoon, and various species of turtle and
   tortoise. There are many birds, notably hummingbirds, flamingos,
   toucans, and parrots.
   The Condor in flight
   Enlarge
   The Condor in flight

   The central grasslands are populated by the armadillo, pampas cat, and
   the rhea (ñandú), a flightless bird. Hawks, falcons, herons, partridges
   inhabit the region. There are also deer and foxes. Some of these
   species extend into Patagonia.

   The western mountains are home to different animals. These include the
   llama, guanaco, vicuña, among the most recognizable species of South
   America. Also in this region are the jackal, andean cat, and the
   largest flying bird in the New World, the condor.

   Southern Argentina is home to the puma, huemul, pudú (the world's
   smallest deer), and wild boar. The coast of Patagonia is rich in animal
   life: elephant seals, fur seals, sea lions, and species of penguin. The
   far south is populated by cormorant birds.

   The territorial waters of Argentina have abundant ocean life; mammals
   such as dolphins, orcas, and whales like the southern right whale, a
   major tourist draw for naturalists. Sea fish include sardines,
   argentine hakes, dolphinfish, salmon, and sharks; also present are
   squid and spider crab (centolla) in Tierra del Fuego. Rivers and
   streams in Argentina have many species of trout and the South American
   dorado fish. Outstanding snake species inhabiting Argentina include boa
   constrictors, and the very venomous yacará pit viper and south American
   rattle snake.

   The Hornero was elected the National Bird after a survey in 1928.

Economy

Recent developments

   Current Argentine peso bills
   Enlarge
   Current Argentine peso bills

   Argentina benefits from rich natural resources, a highly literate
   population, an export-oriented agricultural sector, and a diversified
   industrial base. The country historically had a large middle class
   compared to other Latin American countries, but this segment of the
   population was decimated by a succession of economic crises. Today,
   while a significant segment of the population is still financially
   well-off, they stand in sharp contrast with millions who have seen
   their purchasing power drastically reduced. Since 2002, there has been
   an improvement in the situation of the poorer sectors and a strong
   rebound of the middle class.

   Since the late 1970s, the country piled up public debt and was plagued
   by bouts of high inflation. In 1991, the government pegged the peso to
   the U.S. dollar and limited the growth in the monetary base. The
   government then embarked on a path of trade liberalization,
   deregulation, and privatization. Inflation dropped and the gross
   domestic product grew, but external economic shocks and failures of the
   system diluted its benefits, causing it to crumble in slow motion, from
   1995 and up to the collapse in 2001.

   By 2002, Argentina had defaulted on its debt, its GDP had shrunk,
   unemployment was more than 25%, and the peso had depreciated 75% after
   being devalued and floated. However, careful spending control and heavy
   taxes on now-soaring exports gave the state the tools to regain
   resources and conduct monetary policy.
   Hilton Hotel to the right of River View Towers, Buenos Aires
   Enlarge
   Hilton Hotel to the right of River View Towers, Buenos Aires

   In 2003, import substitution policies and soaring exports coupled with
   lower inflation and expansive economic measures, triggered a surge in
   the GDP. It was repeated in 2004 and 2005, creating millions of jobs
   and encouraging internal consumption. Capital flight decreased, and
   foreign investment slowly returned. The influx of foreign currency from
   exports created a huge trade surplus. The Central Bank was forced to
   buy dollars from the market, and continues to do a various times today
   to be accumulated as reserves. It does this to prevent the argentine
   peso from appreciating significantly and cutting competitiveness.

   The situation by 2006 was further improved, the year is on track to
   match the large GDP growth of the last three (predictions are between
   8.5% and 9.0%), though inflation, estimated at around 10 to 12%, has
   become an issue again, and income distribution is still considerably
   unequal. In a variety of reports, internationals organizations
   criticize Argentina for remaining a somewhat closed economy.

   Even as the effects of the crisis have abated but not disappeared,
   Argentina remains one of the most developed countries in Latin America.
   Even though the income distribution is an important pending problem, it
   boasts the highest GDP per capita based on purchasing power parity, and
   the 3rd highest in US$ (nominal) GDP. The country enjoys the highest
   levels of education measured by university attendance, and a reasonable
   infrastructure that in many aspects equals that found in fully
   industrialized nations.

   In 2002, 57,5% of the population was below the poverty line, but the
   last report of August 2006 showed a 31,4% poverty level. Similarly,
   unemployment was more than 25 percent, by July 2006 it was 10.2
   percent. GDP per capita has surpassed the previous pre-recession peak
   of 1998 in PPP, but still lags in nominal GDP, mostly due to an
   undervalued currency. The economy grew 8.9 percent in 2003, 9.0 percent
   in 2004, and 9.2 percent in 2005. As of 2006 foreign debt stands at 68
   percent of GDP and is slowly decreasing.

Sectors

   Calatrava's Women's Bridge in Puerto Madero
   Enlarge
   Calatrava's Women's Bridge in Puerto Madero

   In 2004, agricultural output accounted for 11% of GDP, and one third of
   all exports. Soy and vegetable oils are major export commodities at 24%
   of exports. Wheat, maize, oats, sorghum, and sunflower seeds totalled
   8%. Cattle is also a major industry. Beef, milk, leather products, and
   cheese were 6% of total exports. Sheep and wool industries are
   important in Patagonia, pigs and caprines elsewhere.

   Fruits and vegetables made up 3% of exports: apples and pears in the
   Río Negro valley; oranges and other citrus in the northwest and
   Mesopotamia; grapes and strawberries in Cuyo, and berries in the far
   south. Cotton and yerba mate are major crops in the Gran Chaco,
   sugarcane and tobacco in the northwest, and olives and garlic in Cuyo.
   Bananas ( Formosa), tomatoes ( Salta), and peaches (Mendoza) are grown
   for domestic consumption. Argentina is the world's 5th wine producer,
   and fine wine production has taken major leaps in quality. A growing
   export, total viticulture potential is far from met. Mendoza is the
   largest wine region, followed by San Juan.

   Industrial petrochemicals, oil, and natural gas are Argentina's 2nd
   group of exports, 20% of totals. The most important oil fields lie in
   Patagonia and Cuyo. An impressive network of pipelines send raw product
   to Bahia Blanca, centre of the petrochemical industry, and to the La
   Plata- Rosario industrial belt. Coal is also mined.

   Mining is a rising industry. The northwest and San Juan Province are
   main regions of activity. Metals mined include gold, silver, zinc,
   magnesium, copper, sulfur, tungsten and uranium. In only ten years
   exports soared from US$ 200 million to 1.2 billion in 2004, 3% of
   total.. Estimates for 2006 are US$ 2bn, a 10 fold rise from 1996.

   In fisheries, argentine hake accounts for 50% of catches, pollack and
   squid follow. Forestry has expanded in Mesopotamia; elm for cellulose,
   pine and eucalyptus for furniture, timber and paper products. Both
   sectors account for 2% of exports each.
   The Yaciretá Dam hydroelectric complex is the 2nd largest in the world
   Enlarge
   The Yaciretá Dam hydroelectric complex is the 2nd largest in the world

   Manufacturing is the nation's leading single sector in GDP output, with
   35% of the share. Leading sectors are motor vehicles, auto parts, and
   transportation and farming equipment (7% of exports), iron and steel
   (3%), foodstuffs and textiles (2%). Other manufactures include cement,
   industrial chemicals, home appliances, and processed wood. The biggest
   industrial centers are Buenos Aires, Rosario and Córdoba.

   The service sector is the biggest contributor to total GDP. Argentina
   produces energy in large part through well developed hydroelectric
   resources; nuclear energy is also of high importance. The country is
   one of the largest producers and exporters (with Canada and Russia) of
   Cobalt-60, a radioactive isotope widely used in cancer therapy.
   Telecommunications are extremely strong, with an important penetration
   of mobile telephony (75% of population) and internet (30%), broadband
   services (3%) are expanding rapidly. Regular telephone (85% of
   households) and mail are robust. Construction has led employment
   creation in the current economic expansion, and is 5% of GDP.

   Tourism is increasingly important, now providing 7% of economic output.
   Argentines are travelling more within their borders, and foreign
   arrivals are flocking to a country seen as affordable, safe, and
   incredibly diverse: Cosmopolitan Buenos Aires and Rosario, incomparable
   Iguazu Falls and colonial Salta. From native amerindian Jujuy Province
   to fun filled Córdoba, the wineries of Mendoza; skiing in scenic
   Bariloche to the beaches of Pinamar, and Perito Moreno Glacier to
   legendary Tierra del Fuego. 3.7 million tourists visited in 2005.

Transportation

   A cargo ship in front of the Rosario-Victoria Bridge
   Enlarge
   A cargo ship in front of the Rosario-Victoria Bridge

   Argentina's highway system is well developed and paved roads reach all
   corners of the country. There are nearly 640,000 kilometers of highways
   and roads. Multilane highways now connect several main cities and more
   are now under construction.

   The railway network was one of the largest in the world, at over 40,000
   kilometers of tracks. After decades of decaying service and lack of
   maintenance, most passenger services shut down in 1992 when the rail
   company was privatized, and thousands of kilometers of track are now in
   disrepair. Currently, railway services are being reactivated between
   several cities, along with upgrades in the system. A high-speed train
   project between Buenos Aires and Rosario is due to break ground in
   2007.

   The country has around 3,000 kilometers of waterways, most significant
   among these the Río de la Plata, Paraná, Uruguay, and Paraguay rivers.

Population

Current figures

   The National Institute of Statistics and Census of Argentina (INDEC)
   2001 census showed the population of Argentina was 36,260,130. It ranks
   3rd in South America in total population and 30th globally. The 2005
   estimate is for a population of 38,747,000. Argentina's population
   density is 14 inhabitants per square kilometer. However, the population
   is not evenly distributed: areas of the city of Buenos Aires have a
   population density of over 14,000 inhab./km², while Santa Cruz province
   has less than 1 inhab./km². Argentina is the only nation in Latin
   America with a net positive migration rate, of about +0.6 persons.

Cities and metropolitan areas

   The 15 largest metropolitan areas of Argentina as of 2005 are as
   follows:
   Oroño Boulevard, Rosario
   Enlarge
   Oroño Boulevard, Rosario
   Córdoba is Argentina's 2nd largest city
   Enlarge
   Córdoba is Argentina's 2nd largest city
   Rank City Province Population Region
   01 Buenos Aires Buenos Aires city and province 14,673,738 Pampean
   02 Córdoba Córdoba 1,513,200 Pampean
   03 Rosario Santa Fe 1,295,100 Pampean
   04 Mendoza Mendoza 1,009,100 Cuyo
   05 La Plata Buenos Aires 857,800 Pampean
   06 San Miguel de Tucumán Tucumán 833,100 NOA (northwest)
   07 Mar del Plata Buenos Aires 699,600 Pampean
   08 Salta Salta 531,400 NOA (northwest)
   09 Santa Fe Santa Fe 524,300 Pampean
   10 San Juan San Juan 456,400 Cuyo
   11 Resistencia Chaco 399,800 Gran Chaco
   12 Neuquén Neuquén 391,600 Patagonian
   13 Santiago del Estero Santiago del Estero 389,200 Gran Chaco
   14 Corrientes Corrientes 332,400 Gran Chaco
   15 Bahía Blanca Buenos Aires 310,200 Pampean

Demographics

   Queen and Princesses of the 2004 National Immigrants' Festival, Oberá,
   Misiones.
   Enlarge
   Queen and Princesses of the 2004 National Immigrants' Festival, Oberá,
   Misiones.

   More than any other Latin American country, Argentina's population is
   of European origin. Most of the population is made up of descendants of
   Spanish, Italian, and other European settlers.

Europeans

   After the regimented Spanish colonists, waves of European immigrants
   settled in Argentina from the late 19th to mid 20th centuries. Major
   contributors include Italy (notably Campania, Piedmont, Calabria,
   Veneto, Lombardy), Spain (foremost among them ethnic Galicians and
   Basques), and France (mostly to Buenos Aires and Mendoza). Smaller but
   significant numbers of immigrants came from Germany and Switzerland (in
   the so-called Lakes Region of Patagonia; and in Córdoba), Scandinavia
   (Denmark, Norway and Sweden), the United Kingdom and Ireland (to Buenos
   Aires, Santa Fé, and Patagonia), and Portugal. Eastern Europeans were
   also numerous, from Poland, Russia, Ukraine, Romania and Lithuania, as
   well as Balkan countries (Croatia and Serbia, particularly in Chaco).
   Smaller waves of settlers from Australia, South Africa and the United
   States are recorded in Argentine immigration records. There is a large
   Armenian community, and the patagonian Chubut Valley has a significant
   Welsh-descended population. The majority of Argentina's Jewish
   community (the largest in Latin America and fifth worldwide) derives
   from immigrants of north and eastern European origin ( Ashkenazi Jews),
   and about 15-20% from Sephardic groups from Spain or Muslim nations.
   Many Syrians and Lebanese chose to emigrate to Argentina, which prior
   to 1924 were recorded as arrivals from the Ottoman Empire.

Minorities

   The largest ethnic minority is the Mestizo (European/Amerindian)
   population, especially in the northern provinces. Estimates range from
   3 to 15%. In recent decades, especially during the 1990s, there has
   been an influx of immigrants from neighboring countries, principally
   Paraguay, Bolivia, and Peru; but some Mexican and Central American
   immigration took place.
   Argentine Gaucho
   Enlarge
   Argentine Gaucho

   Small but growing numbers of people from East Asia have also settled
   Argentina, mainly in Buenos Aires. The first Asian-Argentines were of
   Japanese descent; Koreans, Vietnamese, and Chinese followed. The
   Chinese population alone has risen dramatically, now at over 60,000.
   Argentina is home to a significant refugee population from Laos.

   Argentina has a large Arabic community, made up mostly of immigrants
   from Syria and Lebanon. Many have gained prominent status in national
   business and politics, including former president Carlos Menem, the son
   of Syrian settlers from the province of La Rioja. Most of the Arab
   Argentines are Christian of the Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic
   Churches, other than Muslims who represent a small portion of Arab
   Argentines.

   The officially recognized indigenous population in the country,
   according to the 2005 Complementary Survey of Indigenous Peoples,
   stands at approximately 318,700 people (0.8 percent of the total
   population), who are either members or first-generation descendants of
   a recognized indigenous community. These parameters may imply an
   under-count, as most indigenous Argentines are no longer tribally
   affiliated; in some circumstances they have not been for several
   generations.

Illegal immigrants

   Illegal immigration has been a relatively important population factor
   in recent Argentine demographics. Most illegal immigrants come from
   Bolivia and Paraguay, countries which border Argentina to the north.
   Smaller numbers arrive from Peru, Ecuador, Romania, and the People's
   Republic of China. The number of stowaways inside incoming ships from
   West Africa have increased in recent times. The Argentine government
   estimates 750,000 are undocumented and has launched a program called
   Patria Grande ("Greater Homeland"), to encourage illegal immigrants to
   regularize their status; so far some 200,000 applications have been
   processed under the program. Other unofficial estimates suggest that
   over one million people reside in Argentina illegally.

Urbanization

   Government house of Tucumán
   Enlarge
   Government house of Tucumán
   Beach on the Atlantic Ocean, Mar del Plata
   Enlarge
   Beach on the Atlantic Ocean, Mar del Plata

   Argentina's population is very highly urbanized. About 2.7 million
   people live in the autonomous city of Buenos Aires, and 11.5 million in
   Greater Buenos Aires (2001), making it one of the largest urban
   conglomerates in the world. Together with their respective metropolitan
   areas, the second- and third-largest cities in Argentina, Córdoba and
   Rosario, comprise about 1.3 and 1.1 million inhabitants respectively.

   Most European immigrants to Argentina settled in the cities, which
   offered jobs, education, and other opportunities that enabled newcomers
   to enter the middle class. Many also settled in the growing small towns
   along the expanding railway system. Since the 1930s, many rural workers
   have moved to the big cities.

   The 1990s saw many rural towns become ghost towns when train services
   ceased and local products manufactured on a small scale were replaced
   by massive amounts of cheap imported goods. Many slums ( villas
   miseria) sprouted in the outskirts of the largest cities, inhabited by
   impoverished lower-class urban dwellers, migrants from smaller towns in
   the interior, and also a large number of immigrants from neighbouring
   countries that came during the time of the convertibility and did not
   leave after the 2001 crisis.

   Argentina's urban areas have a European look, reflecting the influence
   of European settlers. Many cities are built in a Spanish-grid style
   around a main square called a plaza. A cathedral and important
   government buildings often face the plaza. The general layout of the
   cities is called a damero, or checkerboard, since it is based on a
   pattern of square blocks, though modern developments sometimes depart
   from it (the city of La Plata, built at the end of the 19th century, is
   organized as a checkerboard plus diagonal avenues at fixed intervals).
   The El Faro Towers, show the modern architecture for urbanization.

Culture

   European and modern styles in Buenos Aires
   Enlarge
   European and modern styles in Buenos Aires

   Argentine culture has been primarily informed and influenced by its
   European roots. Buenos Aires, considered by many its cultural capital,
   is often said to be the most European city in South America, due both
   to the prevalence of people of European descent and to conscious
   imitation of European styles in art forms such as its architecture. The
   other big influence on the development of a national identity is the
   culture of the gauchos and their traditional country lifestyle of
   self-reliance. Finally, indigenous American traditions (like mate tea
   drinking) have been absorbed into the greater cultural realm.

Literature

   Argentina has a rich history of world-renowned literature, including
   one of 20th century's most critically acclaimed writers, Jorge Luis
   Borges. The country has been a leader in Latin American literature
   since becoming a fully united entity in the 1850s, with a strong
   constitution and a defined nation-building plan. The struggle between
   the Unitarians (who favored a loose confederation of provinces based on
   rural conservatism) and the Federalists (pro-liberalism and advocates
   of a strong federal government that would encourage European
   immigration), set the tone for Argentine literature of the time.
   José Hernández was the author of the epic tale The Gaucho Martín Fierro
   Enlarge
   José Hernández was the author of the epic tale The Gaucho Martín Fierro

   The ideological divide between gaucho epic Martín Fierro by José
   Hernández, and Facundo by Domingo Faustino Sarmiento, is a great
   example. Hernández favored the pastoral lifestyle of early Argentina
   and vehemently opposed European immigration. Sarmiento wrote
   immigration was the only way to save Argentina from becoming subject to
   the rule of a small number of dictatorial caudillo families, arguing
   such immigrants would make Argentina more modern and enlightened to
   Western European thought, and therefore a more prosperous society.

   Argentine literature of that period was fiercely nationalist. It was
   followed by the modernist movement, which emerged in France in the late
   19th century, and this period in turn was followed by vanguardism, with
   Ricardo Güiraldes as an important reference. Jorge Luis Borges is
   Argentina's most acclaimed writer. Borges found new ways of looking at
   the modern world in metaphor and philosophical debate, and his
   influence has extended to writers all over the globe. Borges is most
   famous for his works in short stories such as Ficciones and The Aleph.

   Argentina has produced many more internationally noted writers, poets,
   and intellectuals: Juan Bautista Alberdi, Roberto Arlt, Enrique Banchs,
   Adolfo Bioy Cásares, Eugenio Cambaceres, Julio Cortázar, Esteban
   Echeverria, Leopoldo Lugones, Eduardo Mallea, Ezequiel Martínez
   Estrada, Tomás Eloy Martínez, Victoria Ocampo, Manuel Puig, Ernesto
   Sabato, Osvaldo Soriano, Alfonsina Storni, and María Elena Walsh. The
   one and only Quino (born Joaquin Salvador Lavado), has entertained
   readers the world over, while dipping into the events of modern times,
   with soup-hating Mafalda and her comic strip gang.

Film and theatre

   The Nueve de Julio Avenue, the world's widest street. Its name honors
   Argentine Independence Day (July 9, 1816).
   Enlarge
   The Nueve de Julio Avenue, the world's widest street. Its name honours
   Argentine Independence Day (July 9, 1816).

   Argentina is a major producer of motion pictures. The world's first
   animated films were made and released in Argentina, by cartoonist
   Quirino Cristiani. Argentine cinema enjoyed a 'golden age' in the 1930s
   through the 1950s with scores of productions, many now considered
   classics of Spanish-language film. More recent films have achieved
   worldwide recognition, such as The Official Story (La Historia Oficial)
   , Nine Queens (Nueve Reinas) , Man Facing Southeast, Son of the Bride,
   The Motorcycle Diaries (Diarios de Motocicleta) , or Iluminados por el
   Fuego. Although rarely rivaling Hollywood-type movies in popularity,
   local films are released weekly and widely followed in Argentina and
   internationally. Even low-budget films have earned prizes in cinema
   festivals (such as Cannes). The city of Mar del Plata organizes its own
   film festival, while Buenos Aires has its independent cinema
   counterpart. The per capita number of screens is one of the highest in
   Latin America, and viewing per capita is the highest in the region. A
   new generation of Argentine directors has caught the attention of
   critics worldwide.

   Buenos Aires is one of the great capitals of theatre. Besides the
   Teatro Colón ( Colón Theatre, one of the great opera houses of the
   world), with its program of national and international caliber, Calle
   Corrientes, or Corrientes Avenue, is synonymous with the art. It is
   dubbed 'the street that never sleeps', and sometimes referred to as the
   Broadway of Buenos Aires. Many great careers in acting, music, and film
   have begun in its many theaters. The Teatro General San Martín is one
   of the most prestigious along Corrientes Avenue; the Teatro Nacional
   Cervantes is designated the national theater of Argentina. Another
   important theatre is the Independencia in Mendoza. Florencio Sanchez
   and Griselda Gambaro are famous argentine playwrights. Julio Bocca is
   one of the great ballet dancers of the modern era.

Painting and sculpture

   Día de Sol (Sunny Day) by Benito Quinquela Martín. (1958)
   Enlarge
   Día de Sol (Sunny Day) by Benito Quinquela Martín. ( 1958)

   Perhaps one of the most enigmatic figures of argentine culture is Oscar
   Agustín Alejandro Schulz Solari, aka Xul Solar, whose watercolour syle
   and unorthodox painting media draws large crowds at museums worldwide;
   he also 'invented' two imaginary languages. The works of Candido Lopez
   (in Naïve art style), Emilio Pettoruti ( cubist), Antonio Berni (
   neo-figurative style), Fernando Fader, and Guillermo Kuitca are
   appreciated internationally.

   Benito Quinquela Martín is considered to be the quintesennial 'port'
   painter, to which the city of Buenos Aires and particularly the working
   class and immigrant-bound La Boca neighbourhood, was excellently suited
   for. Lucio Fontana and Leon Ferrari are acclaimed scuptors and
   conceptual artists.

Food and drink

   Asado
   Enlarge
   Asado

   Argentine food is influenced by cuisine from Spain, Italy, Germany,
   France and other European countries, and many foods from those
   countries such as pasta, sausages, and desserts are common in the
   nation's diet. Argentina has a wide variety of staple foods, which
   include empanadas, a stuffed pastry; locro, a mixture of corn, beans,
   meat, bacon, onion, and gourd; and chorizo, a meat-based spicy sausage.
   The Argentine barbecue, asado, is one of the most famous in the world
   and includes various types of meats, among them chorizo, sweetbread,
   chitterlings, and blood sausage. Thin sandwiches, sandwiches de miga,
   are also popular. Being an important wine producer, the yearly
   consumption is among the highest worldwide ( Malbec has become a
   representative variety from Argentina). Also, a common custom among
   Argentines is drinking mate. Dulce de Leche is a famous sweet caramel
   spread.

Sports

   The stadium for Boca Juniors football club, currently the team with the
   most international championships (16)
   Enlarge
   The stadium for Boca Juniors football club, currently the team with the
   most international championships (16)

   Argentina is a world power in team sports. Football (soccer) is the
   most popular sport in Argentina, whose national team is twice FIFA
   World Cup Champion and one-time Olympic Gold medalist (also 14 times
   Copa América winners). Yet the national sport of the country is pato,
   played with a six-handle ball on horseback. Also popular are volleyball
   and basketball; a number of basketball players participate in the NBA
   and European leagues, and the national team won Olypmpic Gold in the
   Athens Olympics. Argentina has one of the top ranking teams in rugby
   union (see Los Pumas). Argentine tennis is very competitive on the
   world stage, with dozens of players male and female in active tour.
   Other popular sports include field hockey (the top female sport), golf,
   and sailing. Argentina has a number of highly-ranked polo players and
   the national squad has historically been the world's strongest. Cricket
   and baseball are played in a limited fashion.

   Motorsports are well represented in Argentina, with Turismo Carretera
   and TC 2000 being the most popular car racing formats. People all over
   the country enjoy the races, but it is most fervently followed in small
   towns and rural Argentina, attracting a rather similar demographic as
   NASCAR in the United States. The Rally Argentina is part of the World
   Rally Championship (currently held in Córdoba Province).

   World famous Argentines in sport include football superstar Diego
   Maradona and five time Formula 1 champion Juan Manuel Fangio. Other
   great sporting figures are Alfredo Di Stéfano, Amadeo Carrizo and
   Gabriel Batistuta in football (soccer); Guillermo Vilas, Gabriela
   Sabatini, and David Nalbandian in tennis; Roberto DeVicenzo and Ángel
   Cabrera for golf; Manu Ginobili and Andres Nocioni in basketball;
   Luciana Aymar in field hockey; Hugo Porta and Agustin Pichot in rugby
   union, boxers Pascual Pérez and Carlos Monzón; the Heguy Family of Polo
   players, and many more.

Music

   The major genres of popular music in Argentina are folclore (folk
   music), tango, rock, tropical music ( cumbia), and dance- electronica.

   Tango, the music and lyrics (often sung in a form of slang called
   lunfardo), is Argentina's musical symbol. The Milonga dance was a
   predecessor, slowly evolving into mordern tango. By the 1930s, tango
   had changed from a dance focused music to one of lyric and poetry, with
   singers like Carlos Gardel, Roberto Goyeneche, Hugo del Carril, Tita
   Merello, and Edmundo Rivero. The golden age of tango (1930 to
   mid-1950s) mirrored that of Jazz and Swing in the United States,
   featuring large orchestral groups too, like the bands of Osvaldo
   Pugliese, Anibal Troilo, Francisco Canaro, and Juan D'Arienzo. After
   1955 tango turned more intellectual and listener-oriented, led by Astor
   Piazzolla. Today tango has worldwide popularity, and the rise of
   neo-tango is a global phenomenon with groups like Tanghetto, Bajofondo
   and Gotan Project.

   Argentine rock is the most popular music among youth. Arguably the most
   listened form of Spanish-language rock, its influence and success
   internationally owes to a rich, uninterrupted evolution. Bands such as
   Soda Stereo or Sumo, and composers like Charly García, Luis Alberto
   Spinetta, and Fito Páez are referents of national culture. Mid 1960s
   Buenos Aires and Rosario were craddles of the music, and by 1970
   argentine rock was established among middle class youth (see Almendra,
   Sui Generis, Pappo, Crucis). Seru Giran bridged the gap into the 1980s,
   when Argentine bands became popular across Latin America and elsewhere
   ( Enanitos Verdes, Fabulosos Cadillacs, Virus, Andres Calamaro). There
   are many sub-genres: underground, pop oriented, and some associated
   with the working class ( La Renga, Attaque 77, Divididos, Los
   Redonditos). Current popular bands include: Babasonicos, Rata Blanca,
   El Otro Yo, Attaque 77, Bersuit, Los Piojos, Intoxicados, and Miranda!.

   "Tropical" music, a mixture of cumbia, local folk, and Caribbean syles,
   made it to Buenos Aires with South American migrants. This along with
   Cuarteto ( Córdoba, where artist La Mona Jiménez has inmense
   popularity) and chamamé ( Corrientes), gave rise to cumbia villera. The
   preferred musical style in the villa miseria (slums), its lyrics can
   parallel those of U.S. gangsta rap (poverty, drugs and crime). Cumbia
   villera is increasingly accepted within the middle class, particularly
   bands with ties to football idols (popular bands: Yerba Brava, Pibes
   Chorros, Damas Gratis, Nestor en Bloque). Rodrigo Bueno, simply known
   as Rodrigo, was a surging cuarteto star until his untimely death in
   2000.

   Buenos Aires has a major techno and electronica scene in Latin America,
   hosting a variety of events like local raves, the South American Music
   Conference, and Creamfields (which has the world record of 65,000
   people). European DJs tour Buenos Aires to perform at clubs or in
   festivals. The city has its own form of house music, and is home to
   many successful electronic tango groups. Famous DJs from Argentina
   include Hernan Cattaneo and DJ Dero. Mar del Plata and Bariloche are
   other important dance and club-oriented cities.

   European classical music is well represented in Argentina. Buenos Aires
   is home to the world-renowned Colón Theatre. Classical musicians, such
   as Martha Argerich, Lalo Schiffrin, Daniel Barenboim, Eduardo
   Alonso-Crespo, and classical composers like Alberto Ginastera are
   internationally acclaimed. All major cities in Argentina have
   impressive theaters or opera houses, and provincial or city orchestras.

   Argentine folk music is uniquely vast. Beyond dozens of regional
   dances, a national folk style emerged in the 1930s. Perón's Argentina
   would give rise to Nueva Canción, as artists began expressing in their
   music objections to political themes. Atahualpa Yupanqui, the greatest
   argentine folk musician, and Mercedes Sosa would be defining figures in
   shaping Nueva Canción, gaining worldwide popularity in the process. The
   style found a huge reception in Chile, where it took off in the 1970s
   and went on to influence the entirety of Latin American music. Today,
   Chango Spasiuk and Soledad Pastorutti have brought folk back to younger
   generations. Leon Gieco's folk-rock bridged the gap between argentine
   folklore and argentine rock, introducing both styles to millions
   overseas in successive tours.

   Other notable musicians include Gato Barbieri with his seductive
   saxophone and free jazz compositions, and Jaime Torres and his spacious
   andean music.

Religion

   Cathedral of Córdoba (dating back to the 17th century).
   Enlarge
   Cathedral of Córdoba (dating back to the 17th century).

   Argentinians are predominantly religious. Around 80% declare themselves
   Roman Catholic according to different surveys, though most are not
   practising; the Church estimates an affiliation of 70%. Catholicism is
   supported by the state and endorsed in the Constitution. Evangelical
   churches have gained a foothold in Argentina since the 1980s, and their
   followers now number more than 3.5 million, about 10% of the total
   population. Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
   (Mormons) number over 330,300, the seventh-largest concentration in the
   world. Traditional Protestant communities are also present.

   The country also hosts the largest Jewish population in Latin America,
   about 2 percent of the population. It is also home to one of the
   largest mosques in Latin America, serving Argentina's Muslim community,
   estimated at 500,000–600,000 (93% Sunni).

Language

   A film poster in Buenos Aires. The title exemplifies the phenomenon of
   voseo.
   Enlarge
   A film poster in Buenos Aires. The title exemplifies the phenomenon of
   voseo.

   The only national official language of Argentina is Spanish (which the
   Argentines call "Castellano" or Castilian), though the Amerindian
   language Guaraní also holds official status in the province of
   Corrientes. Quechua is spoken in Santiago del Estero, Buenos Aires, and
   the Capital City and has 850.000 speakers of South Bolivian Quechua and
   66,000 speakers of Santiago del Estero Quichua nationwide . There are
   100,000 Mapudungun speaking Mapuches in the provinces of Neuquen, Río
   Negro, Chubut, Buenos Aires, and La Pampa.

   Some immigrants and indigenous communities have retained their original
   languages. For example, Patagonia has many Welsh-speaking towns, and
   there are a number of German-speaking neighborhoods in Córdoba, Entre
   Ríos, Buenos Aires and again in Patagonia. Italian, English and French
   are widely spoken, and other languages such as Japanese, Chinese,
   Korean and Russian are easily found in Buenos Aires. Aymara is spoken
   by members of the Bolivian community who migrated to Argentina from
   remote rural areas in Bolivia.

   Argentines are the only large Spanish-speaking society that universally
   employ what is known as voseo (the use of the pronoun vos instead of tú
   (you), which occasions the use of alternate verb forms as well). The
   most prevalent dialect is Rioplatense, whose speakers are primarily
   located in the basin of the Río de la Plata.

   A phonetic study conducted by the Laboratory for Sensory Investigations
   of CONICET and the University of Toronto showed that the accent of the
   inhabitants of Buenos Aires (known as Porteños) is closer to the
   Neapolitan dialect of Italian than any other spoken language. This
   immigration of Italians had a profound influence on Lunfardo, the
   famous slang spoken in Buenos Aires and elsewhere in the Río de la
   Plata region, permeating the vernacular vocabulary of other regions as
   well.

          See also: List of indigenous languages in Argentina and also for
          a more complete report see Languages of Argentina

Education

   After independence, Argentina rapidly constructed a national public
   education system in comparison to other nations, placing the country
   high up in the rankings of global literacy. Today the country has a
   literacy rate of 97.5%, comparable to other developed nations.
   The ubiquitous white uniform of Argentine school children; it is a
   national symbol of learning
   Enlarge
   The ubiquitous white uniform of Argentine school children; it is a
   national symbol of learning

   School attendance is compulsory between the ages of 6 and 14. The
   Argentine school system consists of a primary or lower school level
   lasting six or seven years, and a secondary or high school level of
   between 3-5 years. In the 1990s, the system was split into different
   types of high school instruction, called Educacion Secundaria and the
   Polimodal. Some provinces adopted the Polimodal while others did not.
   There is a project in the Executive to repeal this measure and return
   to a more classic secondary level system of five years. President
   Domingo Faustino Sarmiento is overwhelmingly credited in pushing and
   implementing a free, modern education system in Argentina. The 1918
   University reform shaped the current tripartite representation of most
   public Universities.

   Education is free at all levels except for graduate studies. There are
   many private school institutions in the primary, secondary and
   university levels. Around 11.1 million people were enrolled in formal
   education of some kind:
     * 9,551,728 people attended either kindergarten, primary (lower
       school), or secondary (high school) establishements
     * 494,461 people attended non-university level establishements (such
       as training or technical schools)
     * 1,125,257 people attended colleges or universities

   There are 35 public universities across the contry, as well as several
   private. The Universities of Buenos Aires, Córdoba, La Plata, UTN
   (Technology University) , and Cuyo (Mendoza), are among the most
   important. Terciary (university) attendance is very high for global
   standards. Public universities faced cutbacks in spending during the
   1980s and 1990s, which led to a decline in overall quality.

Holidays

   Public holidays include most of the Catholic holidays, though holidays
   of other faiths are respected. The main historic holidays include the
   anniversaries of the May Revolution (May 25), the Independence Day
   (July 9), National Flag day (June 20), and the death of national hero
   José de San Martín (August 17).

Science and technology

   Argentina has contributed to the world many distinguished doctors,
   scientists, and inventors.
   Luis Federico Leloir won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1970
   Enlarge
   Luis Federico Leloir won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1970

   Argentines have been responsible for major breakthroughs in world
   medicine. René Favaloro developed the tecniques and performed the
   world's first ever coronary bypass surgery, and Francisco de Pedro
   invented a more reliable artificial cardiac pacemaker. Bernardo Houssay
   discovered the role of pituitary hormones in regulating glucose in
   animals; César Milstein did extensive research in antibodies; Luis
   Leloir discovered how organisms store energy coverting glucose into
   glycogen, and the compounds which are fundamental in metabolizing
   carbohydrates. Luis Agote performed one of the first two blood
   transfusions with pre-stored blood in history. Enrique Finochietto
   designed operating table tools such as the surgical scissors that bear
   his name ("Finochietto scissors"), and a rib-spreader. Roberto Zaldívar
   is a pioneer in laser-eye procedures and research. Argentine research
   has led to advancement in wound-healing therapies, heart disease, and
   in several forms of cancer.

   Argentina's nuclear program is highly advanced. Argentina developed its
   nuclear program without being overly dependent on foreign technology.
   Nuclear facilities with Argentine technology have been built in Peru,
   Algeria, Australia, and Egypt. In 1983, the country admitted having the
   capability of producing weapon-grade uranium, a major step to assemble
   nuclear weapons. Since then Argentina has pledged to use nuclear power
   only for peaceful purposes.

   In other areas, Juan Vucetich is the father of modern dactiloscopy (see
   fingerprint), Raúl Pateras de Pescara demonstrated the world's first
   flight of a helicopter, Hungarian-Argentine László Bíró mass-produced
   the first modern ball point pens, and Eduardo Taurozzi developed the
   more efficient pendular combustion engine. Juan Maldacena, an
   Argentine-American scientist, is a leading figure in string theory.

Communications

Print

   The printed media in Argentina is highly developed and independent.
   There are over 200 newspapers in the country, influential in their home
   cities and regions. The major national newspapers are from Buenos
   Aires, including the centrist Clarín, one of the best selling daily in
   the Spanish speaking world. Other national papers are La Nación
   (centre-right), Página/12 (centre-left), Ámbito Financiero (business
   conservative), Argentinisches Tageblatt in German, Le Monde
   Diplomatique in Spanish and French and Crónica (populist). Regional
   papers of importance include La Capital ( Rosario), Los Andes (
   Mendoza), La Voz del Interior ( Córdoba), and El Tribuno ( Salta). The
   Buenos Aires Herald is a well-respected English language daily.

   The Argentine publishing industry is together with those in Spain and
   Mexico the most important in the Spanish-speaking world. Argentina
   features the largest bookstore chains in Latin America, the El Ateneo
   and Yenny bookstores; numerous well-stocked independent stores abound.
   A number carry titles in English and other languages. There are
   hundreds of magazine publications covering a plethora of issues and
   hobbies, which are sold in kiosks on city sidewalks and in bookstores.

Radio and television

   Argentina was a pioneering nation in radio broadcasting. At 9 PM on
   August 27, 1920, Sociedad Radio Argentina announced: "We now bring to
   your homes a live performance of Richard Wagner's Parsifal opera from
   the Coliseo Theatre in downtown Buenos Aires"; only about twenty homes
   in the city had a receiver to tune in. The world's first radio station
   was the only one in the country until 1922, when Radio Cultura went on
   the air. By 1925, there were twelve stations in Buenos Aires and ten in
   other cities. The 1930s were the "golden age" of radio in Argentina,
   with live variety, news, soap opera, and sport shows.

   At present there are more than 1,500 radio stations licensed in
   Argentina; 260 are AM broadcasting and 1150 FM broadcasting. Radio
   remains an important medium in Argentina. Music and youth variety
   programs dominate FM formats; news, debate, and sports are AM radio's
   primary broadcasts. Amateur radio is widespread in the country. Radio
   still serves a vital service of information, entertainment and even
   life saving in the most remote communities.

   The Argentine television industry is large and diverse, widely viewed
   in Latin America, and its productions seen around the world. Many local
   programs are broadcast by networks in other countries, and others have
   their rights purchased by foreign producers for adaptations in their
   own markets. Argentina has five major networks. All provincial capitals
   and other large cities have at least one local station. Argentina
   boasts the highest penetration of cable and satellite television in
   Latin America, similar to percentages in North America. Many cable
   networks operate from Argentina and serve the Spanish-speaking world,
   including Utilísima Satelital, TyC Sports, Fox Sports en Español (with
   the United States and México), MTV Argentina, Cosmopolitan TV, and the
   news network Todo Noticias.

Trivia on Argentina

     * Argentina was the first independent nation state in the Southern
       Hemisphere.
     * The Universidad Nacional de Córdoba is the second oldest university
       in South America.
     * Five different Argentines have won the Nobel Prize (for Chemistry,
       Medicine and Peace)
     * The city of La Plata was the first in Latin America with electric
       street illumination.
     * The Buenos Aires Subway was the first built in the Southern
       Hemisphere.
     * The city of Mendoza is one of the eight wine capitals of the world.
     * Argentines have the highest consumption in the world of red meat.
     * The first person to be born on the continent of Antarctica was
       Emilio Palma, an Argentine citizen, at Esperanza Base

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argentina"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
