   #copyright

Armenia

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; European
Countries

   SOS Children works in Armenia. For more information see SOS Children in
   Armenia
   Հայաստանի Հանրապետություն
   Hayastani Hanrapetutyun
   Republic of Armenia

   Flag of Armenia Coat of arms of Armenia
   Flag            Coat of arms
   Motto: Armenian: Մեկ Ազգ , Մեկ Մշակույթ
   Transliteration: Mek Azg, Mek Mshakouyt
   "One Nation, One Culture"
   Anthem: Mer Hayrenik
   ("Our Fatherland")
   Patron saint:
   St. Bartholomew the Apostle
   St. Jude Thaddeus the Apostle
   Location of Armenia
   Capital   Yerevan^1
   40°16′N 44°34′E
   Largest city Yerevan
   Official languages Armenian
   Government Unitary republic
    - President Robert Kocharian
    - Prime Minister Andranik Markaryan
   Independence from the USSR
    - Declared August 23, 1990
    - Recognized September 21, 1991
    - Finalized December 25, 1991
    - Traditional foundation
       of the Armenian nation August 11, 2492 BC
    - Kingdom of Urartu established 1000 BC
    - Kingdom of Armenia formed 600 BC
    - Christianity officially adopted 301 AD
    - Democratic Republic
       of Armenia established May 28, 1918
   Area
    - Total 29,800 km² ( 141st)
   11,506 sq mi
    - Water (%) 4.71
   Population
    - 2005 estimate 3,215,800 ( 136th^2)
    - 2001 census 3,002,594
    - Density 101/km² ( 98th)
   262/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total $14.17 billion ( 127th)
    - Per capita $4,270 ( 115th)
   HDI  (2004) 0.768 (medium) ( 80th)
   Currency Dram ( AMD)
   Time zone UTC ( UTC+4)
    - Summer ( DST) DST ( UTC+5)
   Internet TLD .am
   Calling code +374
   ^1 Alternatively spelled as "Erevan", "Jerevan", or "Erivan".
   ^2 Rank based on 2005 UN estimate of de facto population.

   Armenia ( Armenian: Հայաստան Hayastan, Հայք Hayq), officially the
   Republic of Armenia, is a landlocked mountainous country in Eurasia
   between the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea, located in the Southern
   Caucasus. It shares borders with Turkey to the west, Georgia to the
   north, Azerbaijan to the east, and Iran and the Nakhichevan exclave of
   Azerbaijan to the south. A former republic of the Soviet Union, Armenia
   is a unitary, multiparty, democratic nation-state and one of the oldest
   and most historic civilizations in the world with a rich cultural
   heritage, as well as the first nation to adopt Christianity as its
   official religion. Although Armenia is constitutionally a secular
   state, the Christian faith plays a major role in both its history and
   the identification of the Armenian people.

   Culturally, historically, and politically, Armenia is considered to be
   part of Europe. However, its location in the southern Caucasus means
   that it can also be considered to be at the arbitrary border between
   Europe and Asia: in other words, a transcontinental nation. However,
   both these classifications are entirely arbitrary, as there is no
   easily definable geographic difference between Asia and Europe.

   Armenia is currently a member of more than 35 different international
   organizations including the United Nations, the Council of Europe,
   Asian Development Bank, the Commonwealth of Independent States, World
   Trade Organization and Organization of the Black Sea Economic
   Cooperation. It is a Partnership for Peace ( PfP) member of the North
   Atlantic Treaty Organisation and in a military alliance of CSTO. It is
   also an observer member of the Eurasian Economic Community, La
   Francophonie, and the Non-Aligned Movement. Armenian is also active in
   the international sports community with full membership in the Union of
   European Football Associations and International Ice Hockey Federation.
   The country is an emerging democracy and because of its strategic
   location, it lies among both the Russian and American spheres of
   influence.

Etymology

   The modern Armenian name for the country was Hayq, later Hayastan.
   Hayasa, combined with the Persian suffix ' -stan' (land). Haik was one
   of the great Armenian leaders after whom the The Land of Haik was
   named. According to legend, Haik was a great-great-grandson of Noah
   (son of Togarmah, who was a son of Gomer, who was a son of Japheth, who
   was a son of Noah), and according to an ancient Armenian tradition, a
   forefather of all Armenians. He is said to have settled at the foot of
   Mount Ararat, travelled to assist in building the Tower of Babel, and,
   after his return, defeated the Babylonian king Bel (believed by some
   researchers to be Nimrod) in 2492 BC near the mountains of Lake Van, in
   the southwestern part of historic Armenia (present-day eastern Turkey).

   Hayq was given the name Armenia by the surrounding states, presumably
   as it was the name of the strongest tribe living in the historic
   Armenian lands, who called themselves Armens who were of
   Proto-Indo-European descent. It is traditionally derived from Armenak
   or Aram (the great-grandson of Haik's great-grandson, and another
   leader who is, according to Armenian tradition, the ancestor of all
   Armenians). Some Jewish and Christian scholars write that the name
   'Armenia' was derived from Har-Minni, that is 'Mountains of Minni' (or
   Mannai). Pre-Christian accounts suggest that Nairi, meaning land of
   rivers, used to be an ancient name for the country's mountainous
   region, first used by Assyrians around 1200 BC; while the first
   recorded inscription bearing the name Armenia, namely the Behistun
   Inscription in Iran, dates from 521 BC.

History

   The Kingdom of Urartu during the time of Sarduris II in 743 BC.
   Enlarge
   The Kingdom of Urartu during the time of Sarduris II in 743 BC.

Antiquity

   Armenia has been populated since prehistoric times, and has been
   proposed as the site of the Biblical Garden of Eden. Armenia lies in
   the highlands surrounding the Biblical mountains of Ararat, upon which,
   as tradition states, Noah's Ark came to rest after the flood. (Gen.
   8:4). Archeologists continue to uncover evidence that the Armenia and
   Armenian Highlands were among the earliest sites of human civilization.
   From 4000 BC to 1000 BC, tools and trinkets of copper, bronze and iron
   were commonly produced in Armenia and traded in neighbouring lands
   where those metals were less abundant. During the ancient period of
   Armenia's history, several states flourished on its territory,
   including Aratta (3rd millennium BC), Mitanni and Hayasa-Azzi (15th -
   12th cc BC), Nairi (12th - 9th cc BC), and the Kingdom of Urartu (9th -
   6th cc BC), each participating in the ethnogenesis of the Armenian
   people. The Urartian language was closely related to the earlier
   Hurrian language of Syria and Anatolia, but it had no other certain
   relatives, and is not in the same language family as Armenian, which is
   in the Indo-European family. Yerevan, the modern capital of Armenia,
   was founded in 782 BC by the Urartian king Argishti I.
   Kingdom of Armenia at its greatest extent under Tigranes the Great.
   Enlarge
   Kingdom of Armenia at its greatest extent under Tigranes the Great.

   Around 600 BC, the Kingdom of Armenia was established under the Orontid
   Dynasty, which existed under several local dynasties till AD 428. The
   kingdom reached its height between 95 - 66 BC under Tigranes the Great,
   becoming one of the most powerful kingdoms of its time. Throughout its
   history, the kingdom of Armenia enjoyed periods of independence
   intermitted with periods of autonomy subject to contemporary empires.
   Armenia's strategic location between two continents has subjected it to
   invasions by many peoples, including the Assyrians, Greeks, Romans,
   Byzantines, Arabs, Mongols, Persians, Ottoman Turks and Russians.
   St. Gregory the Illuminator's influence led to the adoption of
   Christianity in Armenia in the year 301. He is the patron saint of the
   Armenian Apostolic Church.
   Enlarge
   St. Gregory the Illuminator's influence led to the adoption of
   Christianity in Armenia in the year 301. He is the patron saint of the
   Armenian Apostolic Church.

   In 301, Armenia became the first country in the world to adopt
   Christianity as its official state religion. There had been various
   pagan communities before Christianity, but they were converted by an
   influx of Christian missionaries. Tiridates III (AD 238-314) was the
   first ruler to officially Christianize his people, his conversion ten
   years before the Roman Empire granted Christianity official toleration
   under Galerius, and 36 years before Constantine was baptised.

   After the fall of the Armenian kingdom in 428, most of Armenia was
   incorporated as a marzpanate within the Sassanid Empire, ruled by a
   marzpan. Following an Armenian rebellion in 451, Christian Armenians
   maintained their religions freedom, while Armenia gained autonomy and
   the right to be ruled by an Armenian marzpan unlike other territories
   of the empire where the marzpan was a Persian. The Marzpanate of
   Armenia lasted till 630s, when Sassanid Persia was destroyed by Arab
   Caliphate.

   After the marzpanate period (428-636), Armenia emerged as an autonomous
   principality within the Arabic Empire, reuniting Armenian lands
   previously taken by the Byzantine Empire as well. The principality was
   ruled by the Prince of Armenia, recognized by the Caliph and the
   Byzantine Emperor. It was part of the administrative division/emirate
   Arminiyya created by the Arabs, which also included parts of Georgia
   and Caucasian Albania, and had its centre in the Armenian city Dvin.
   The Principality of Armenia lasted till 884, when it regained its
   independence from the weakened Arabic Empire.

Medieval

   The reemerged Armenian kingdom was ruled by the Bagratuni dynasty, and
   lasted till 1045. In time, several areas of the Bagratid Armenia
   separated as independent kingdoms and principalities such as the
   Kingdom of Vaspurakan ruled by the House of Artsruni, while still
   recognizing the supremacy of the Bagratid kings.
   Coat of Arms of the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia, given to Leo II of
   Armenia of the Rubenid Dynasty by Pope Celestine III of Rome
   Enlarge
   Coat of Arms of the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia, given to Leo II of
   Armenia of the Rubenid Dynasty by Pope Celestine III of Rome

   In 1045, the Byzantine Empire conquered Bagratid Armenia. Soon, the
   other Armenian states fell under Byzantine control as well. The
   Byzantine rule was short lived, as in 1071 Seljuk Turks defeated the
   Byzantines and conquered Armenia at the Battle of Manzikert,
   establishing the Seljuk Empire. To escape death or servitude at the
   hands of those who had assassinated his relative, Gagik II, King of
   Ani, an Armenian named Roupen with some of his countrymen went into the
   gorges of the Taurus Mountains and then into Tarsus of Cilicia. Here
   the Byzantine governor of the place gave them shelter where the
   Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia was eventually established.

   The Seljuk Empire soon started to collapse. In the early 1100's,
   Armenian princes of the Zakarid noble family established a
   semi-independent Armenian principality in Northern and Eastern Armenia,
   known as Zakarid Armenia. The noble family of Orbelians shared control
   with the Zakarids in various parts of the country, especially in Vayots
   Dzor and Syunik. Southern parts of Armenia remained under control of
   Kurdish dynasties of Shaddadids and Ayyubids.

Foreign rule

   In 1230's Mongol Ilkhanate conquered the Zakaryan Principality, as well
   as the rest of Armenia. The Mongolian invasions were soon followed by
   those of other Central Asian tribes, which continued from 1200's till
   1400's. After incessant invasions, each bringing destruction to the
   country, Armenia in time became weakened. In 1500s, the Ottoman Empire
   and Safavid Persia divided Armenia among themselves. The Russian Empire
   later incorporated Eastern Armenia (consisting of the Erivan and
   Karabakh khanates within Persia) in 1813 and 1828.
   The United States contributed a significant amount of aid to the
   Armenians during the Armenian Genocide. Shown here is a poster for the
   American Committee for Relief in the Near East vowing that they (the
   Armenians) "shall not perish."
   Enlarge
   The United States contributed a significant amount of aid to the
   Armenians during the Armenian Genocide. Shown here is a poster for the
   American Committee for Relief in the Near East vowing that they (the
   Armenians) "shall not perish."

   Under Ottoman rule, the Armenians were granted considerable autonomy
   within their own enclaves and lived in relative harmony with other
   groups in the empire (including the ruling Turks). However, as
   Christians under a strict Muslim social system, Armenians faced
   pervasive discrimination. When they began pushing for more rights
   within the Ottoman Empire, Sultan ‘Abdu’l-Hamid II, in response,
   organized state-sponsored massacres against the Armenians between 1894
   and 1896, resulting in an estimated death toll of 80,000 to 300,000
   people. The Hamidian massacres, as they came to be known, gave Hamid
   international infamy as the "Red Sultan" or "Bloody Sultan."

World War I

   As the empire began to collapse, the Young Turks overthrew the
   government of Sultan Hamid. Armenians living in the empire hoped that
   the Young Turk revolution would change their second-class status.
   However, with onslaught of World War I and the Ottoman Empire's assault
   on the Russian Empire, the new government began to look on the
   Armenians with distrust and suspicion. This was due to the fact that
   the Russian army contained a contingent of Armenian troops. On April
   24, 1915, Armenian intellectuals were arrested by Ottoman authorities
   and eventually a large proportion of Armenians living in Anatolia
   perished as a result of the Armenian Genocide. The events of 1915 to
   1917 are regarded by Armenians and the vast majority of Western
   historians to have been state-sponsored mass killings, or genocide.
   Despite overwhelming evidence of genocidal intent, Turkish authorities
   maintain that the deaths were the result of a civil war coupled with
   disease and famine, with casualties incurred by both sides. Most
   estimates for the number of Armenians killed range from 650,000 to 1.5
   million. Armenia and the Armenian diaspora have been campaigning for
   official recognition of the events as genocide for over 30 years. These
   events are traditionally commemorated yearly on April 24, the Armenian
   Christian Martyr Day, or the Day of the Armenian Genocide.

   Although the Russian army succeeded in gaining most of Ottoman Armenia
   during World War I, their gains were lost with the Russian Revolution
   of 1917. At this time, Russian-controlled Eastern Armenia, Georgia, and
   Azerbaijan attempted to bound together in the Transcaucasian Democratic
   Federative Republic. This federation, however, only lasted from
   February to May 1918, when all three parties decided to dissolve it. As
   a result, Eastern Armenia became independent as the Democratic Republic
   of Armenia (DRA) on May 28. Unfortunately, the DRA's short-lived
   independence was fraught with war, territorial disputes, a mass influx
   of refugees from Ottoman Armenia, spreading disease, and starvation.
   Still, the Entente Powers, appalled by the actions of the Ottoman
   government, sought to help the newly-found Armenian state through
   relief funds and other forms of support.

   At the end of the war, it was decided to divide up the Ottoman Empire.
   Signed between the Allied and Associated Powers and Ottoman Empire at
   Sèvres on August 10, 1920, the Treaty of Sèvres promised to maintain
   the existence of the DRA and to attach the former territories of
   Ottoman Armenia to it. Because the new borders of Armenia were to be
   drawn by United States President Woodrow Wilson, Ottoman Armenia is
   also "referred to as "Wilsonian Armenia." There was even consideration
   of possibly making Armenia a mandate under the protection of the United
   States. The treaty, however, was rejected by the Turkish National
   Movement, and never came into effect. The movement, under Mustafa Kemal
   Atatürk, used the treaty as the occasion to declare itself the rightful
   government of Turkey, replacing the monarchy based in Istanbul with a
   republic based in Ankara.

Soviet Armenia

   The Coat of Arms of Soviet Armenia.
   Enlarge
   The Coat of Arms of Soviet Armenia.

   In 1920, Armenia and Turkey engaged in the Turkish-Armenian War, a
   violent conflict that ended with the Treaty of Alexandropol in which
   the Armenians surrendered the bulk of their weapons and land to the
   Turks. Simultaneously, Armenia was invaded by the Red Army, which led
   to establishment of Soviet rule in Armenia in December of 1920. The
   treaty of Alexandropol, signed by deposed former Armenian officials
   after the establishment of Soviet rule, was never ratified by the new
   Communist government. In 1922, the country was incorporated into the
   Soviet Union as part of the short-lived Transcaucasian SFSR along with
   Georgia and Azerbaijan. The Treaty of Alexandropol was then superseded
   by the Treaty of Kars, between Turkey and the Soviet Union. In it,
   Turkey ceded the province of Ajara to the Soviet Union in return for
   sovereignty over the territories of Kars, Ardahan, and Iğdır. Because
   the Armenians did not have a say in the treaty, Armenia, to this day,
   does not recognize the treaty as legitimate and still holds claims to
   those provinces.
   Armenian soldiers firing against Azerbaijani forces from trenches in
   Nagorno-Karabakh.
   Enlarge
   Armenian soldiers firing against Azerbaijani forces from trenches in
   Nagorno-Karabakh.

   The TSFR existed from 1922 to 1936, when it was divided up into three
   separate entities ( Armenian SSR, Azerbaijan SSR, and Georgian SSR).
   Armenians enjoyed a period of relative stability under Soviet rule.
   They received medicine, food, and other provisions from Moscow, and
   communist rule proved to be a soothing balm in contrast to the
   turbulent final years of the Ottoman Empire. The situation was
   difficult for the church, which struggled under Soviet rule. After the
   death of Vladimir Lenin, Joseph Stalin took the reins of power and
   began an era of renewed fear and terror for Armenians. As with various
   other ethnic minorities who lived in the Soviet Union during Stalin's
   Great Purge, tens of thousands of innocent Armenians were either
   executed or deported. Fears decreased when Stalin died in 1953 and
   Nikita Khruschev emerged as the country's new leader.

Independence

   In the Gorbachev era of the 1980s, tension developed between Armenia
   and Azerbaijan over the region of Nagorno-Karabakh. In the same decade,
   Soviet Armenia suffered the devastating 1988 Leninakan Earthquake. In
   1991, the Soviet Union broke apart and Armenia re-established its
   independence. Unfortunately, the early years of Armenia's independence
   were marred by the continued confrontation with Azerbaijan over
   Nagorno-Karabakh. A Russian-brokered cease-fire was put in place in
   1994. Since then, Armenia and her neighbour have held peace talks,
   mediated by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
   (or OSCE). The status over Karabakh has yet to be determined and the
   economies of both countries have been hurt in the absence of a complete
   resolution. Still, despite high unemployment, Armenia has managed to
   make some economic improvements. It has made a full switch to a market
   economy and as of 2006, remains the 27th most economically free nation
   in the world. Its relations with Europe, the Middle East, and the CIS
   states have allowed Armenia to increase trade. Gas, oil, and other
   supplies come through two vital routes: Iran and Georgia, both of whom
   Armenia has been maintaining cordial relations with

Politics

   The façade of the National Assembly of Armenia in downtown Yerevan.
   Enlarge
   The façade of the National Assembly of Armenia in downtown Yerevan.

   Politics of Armenia takes place in a framework of a presidential
   representative democratic republic, whereby the President is the head
   of government, and of a pluriform multi-party system. Executive power
   is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the
   government and parliament. The unicameral parliament (also called the
   National Assembly) is controlled by a coalition of three political
   parties: the conservative Republican party, the Armenian Revolutionary
   Federation, and the Country of Law party. The main opposition is
   composed of several smaller parties joined in the Justice Bloc. Robert
   Kocharian is the republic's current president.

   The Armenian government's stated aim is to build a Western-style
   parliamentary democracy as the basis of its form of government.
   However, international observers have questioned the fairness of
   Armenia's parliamentary and presidential elections and constitutional
   referenda since 1995, citing polling deficiencies, lack of cooperation
   by the Electoral Commission, and poor maintenance of electoral lists
   and polling places. For the most part however, Armenia is considered
   one of the more pro-democratic nations in the Commonwealth of
   Independent States. It has universal suffrage above the age of
   eighteen.

Administrative divisions

   Map of the administrative divisions of Armenia.
   Enlarge
   Map of the administrative divisions of Armenia.

   Armenia is divided into 10 marzes ( regions, sing. - marz) with the
   city of Yerevan (Երևան) having special administrative status as the
   country's capital. The chief executive in each of 10 marzes is the
   marzpet (marz governor), appointed by the government of Armenia. In
   Yerevan, the chief executive is the mayor, appointed by the president.
    1. Aragatsotn (Արագածոտն)
    2. Ararat (Արարատ)
    3. Armavir (Արմավիր)
    4. Gegharkunik (Գեղարքունիք)
    5. Kotayk (Կոտայք)
    6. Lori (Լոռի)
    7. Shirak (Շիրակ)
    8. Syunik (Սյունիք)
    9. Tavush (Տավուշ)
   10. Vayots Dzor (Վայոց Ձոր)
   11. Yerevan (Երևան; special administrative status)

Geography

   Map of Armenia
   Enlarge
   Map of Armenia

Topography

   Armenia is a landlocked country in the southern Caucasus. Located
   between the Black and Caspian Seas, the country is bordered on the
   north and east by Georgia and Azerbaijan, and on the south and west by
   Iran and Turkey. The Republic of Armenia, covering an area of 30 000
   square kilometres (11,600  sq. mi), is located in the north-east of the
   Armenian Highland (covering 400 000 km² or 154,000 sq. mi), otherwise
   known as historic Armenia and considered as the original homeland of
   Armenians.

   The terrain is mostly mountainous, with fast flowing rivers and few
   forests. The climate is highland continental: hot summers and cold
   winters. The land rises to 4095 metres (13,435  ft) above sea-level at
   Mount Aragats, and no point is below 400 metres (1,312 ft) above sea
   level. Mount Ararat, regarded by the Armenians as a symbol of their
   land, is the highest mountain in the region and used to be part of
   Armenia until around 1915, when it was given to Turkey under the Treaty
   of Kars.
   Satellite image of Eastern part of the Armenian Highland (photo NASA,
   USA)
   Enlarge
   Satellite image of Eastern part of the Armenian Highland (photo NASA,
   USA)

Environmental problems

   Armenia is trying to address its environmental problems. It has
   established a Ministry of Nature Protection and introduced taxes for
   air and water pollution and solid waste disposal, whose revenues are
   used for environmental protection activities. Armenia is interested in
   cooperating with other members of the Commonwealth of Independent
   States (CIS, a group of 11 former Soviet republics) and with members of
   the international community on environmental issues. The Armenian
   Government is working toward closing its Nuclear Power Plant at
   Medzamor near Yerevan as soon as alternative energy sources are
   identified.

Climate

   The climate in Armenia is markedly continental. Summers are dry and
   sunny, lasting from June to mid-September. The temperature fluctuates
   between 22° and 36°C. However, the low humidity level mitigates the
   effect of high temperatures. Evening breezes blowing down the mountains
   provide a welcome refreshing and cooling effect. Springs are short,
   while falls are long. Autumns are known for their vibrant and colorful
   foliage. Winters are quite cold with plenty of snow, with temperatures
   ranging between -5° and -10°C. Winter sports enthusiasts enjoy skiing
   down the hills of Tsakhkadzor, located 30 minutes outside of Yerevan.
   Lake Sevan nestled up in the Armenian highlands, is the second largest
   lake in the world relative to its altitude, 1,900 meters above sea
   level.

Economy

   Until independence, Armenia's economy was largely industry-based –
   chemicals, electronics, machinery, processed food, synthetic rubber,
   and textile – and highly dependent on outside resources. Agriculture
   contributed only 20% of net material product and 10% of employment
   before the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991. The republic had
   developed a modern industrial sector, supplying machine tools,
   textiles, and other manufactured goods to sister republics in exchange
   for raw materials and energy.

   Armenian mines produce copper, zinc, gold, and lead. The vast majority
   of energy is produced with fuel imported from Russia, including gas and
   nuclear fuel (for its one nuclear power plant); the main domestic
   energy source is hydroelectric. Small amounts of coal, gas, and
   petroleum have not yet been developed.
   Downtown Yerevan in 2005. An ongoing construction boom has kept
   Armenia’s economic growth in double digits.
   Enlarge
   Downtown Yerevan in 2005. An ongoing construction boom has kept
   Armenia’s economic growth in double digits.

   Like other newly independent states of the former Soviet Union,
   Armenia's economy suffers from the legacy of a centrally planned
   economy and the breakdown of former Soviet trading patterns. Soviet
   investment in and support of Armenian industry has virtually
   disappeared, so that few major enterprises are still able to function.
   In addition, the effects of the 1988 Spitak Earthquake, which killed
   more than 25,000 people and made 500,000 homeless, are still being
   felt. The conflict with Azerbaijan over Nagorno-Karabakh has not been
   resolved. The closure of Azerbaijani and Turkish borders has devastated
   the economy, because Armenia depends on outside supplies of energy and
   most raw materials. Land routes through Georgia and Iran are inadequate
   or unreliable. GDP fell nearly 60% from 1989 until 1992– 1993. The
   national currency, the dram, suffered hyperinflation for the first
   years after its introduction in 1993.

   Nevertheless, the government was able to make wide-ranging economic
   reforms that paid off in dramatically lower inflation and steady
   growth. The 1994 cease-fire in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict has also
   helped the economy. Armenia has had strong economic growth since 1995,
   building on the turnaround that began the previous year, and inflation
   has been negligible for the past several years. New sectors, such as
   precious stone processing and jewelry making, information and
   communication technology, and even tourism are beginning to supplement
   more traditional sectors in the economy, such as agriculture.

   This steady economic progress has earned Armenia increasing support
   from international institutions. The International Monetary Fund (IMF),
   World Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD),
   and other international financial institutions (IFIs) and foreign
   countries are extending considerable grants and loans. Loans to Armenia
   since 1993 exceed $1.1 billion. These loans are targeted at reducing
   the budget deficit, stabilizing the currency; developing private
   businesses; energy; the agriculture, food processing, transportation,
   and health and education sectors; and ongoing rehabilitation in the
   earthquake zone. The government joined the World Trade Organization on
   February 5, 2003. But one of the main sources of foreign direct
   investments remains the Armenian diaspora, which finances major parts
   of the reconstruction of infrastructure and other public projects.
   Being a growing democratic state, Armenia also hopes to get more
   financial aid from the Western World.

   A liberal foreign investment law was approved in June 1994, and a Law
   on Privatization was adopted in 1997, as well as a program on state
   property privatization. Continued progress will depend on the ability
   of the government to strengthen its macroeconomic management, including
   increasing revenue collection, improving the investment climate, and
   making strides against corruption.

   In the 2005 Transparency International CPI ( Corruption Perception
   Index) chart, Armenia ranked 88 (in a range of 1 through 158),
   continuing to remain as one of the least corrupt states among former
   Soviet Republics. According to the 2005 UN Human Development Report,
   Armenia has a Human Development Index ( HDI) of 83 (from a range of 1
   through 177), the highest among the Transcaucasian republics. In the
   2006 Index of Economic Freedom, Armenia ranked 27th best, tied with
   Japan and ahead of countries like Norway, Spain, Portugal and Italy.
   The rank puts Armenia in the category of "Mostly Free" countries,
   making it the most economically free state in the Commonwealth of
   Independent States.

Demographics

   Engraving of an Armenian couple.
   Enlarge
   Engraving of an Armenian couple.

   Armenia has a population of 3,215,800 (April 2006 est.) and is the
   second most densely populated of the former Soviet republics. There has
   been a problem of population decline due to elevated levels of
   emigration after the break-up of the USSR. The rates of emigration and
   population decline, however, have decreased drastically in the recent
   years, and a moderate influx of Armenians returning to Armenia have
   been the main reasons for the trend, which is expected to continue. In
   fact Armenia is expected to resume its positive population growth by
   2010.

   Ethnic Armenians make up 97.9% of the population. Yazidi Kurds make up
   1.3%, and Russians 0.5%. There are smaller communities of Assyrians,
   Georgians, Greeks and Ukrainians. Most Azerbaijanis, once a sizable
   population, have left their homes since Armenia's independence.
   Ethnic groups of Armenia and the South Caucasus in 1995. (See entire
   map)
   Enlarge
   Ethnic groups of Armenia and the South Caucasus in 1995. ( See entire
   map)

   Armenia has a very large diaspora (8 million by some estimates, greatly
   exceeding the 3 million population of Armenia itself), with communities
   existing across the globe, including France, Russia, Iran, Lebanon, and
   America. Approximately 120,000 Armenians now live in the disputed
   Nagorno-Karabakh region.

   The predominant religion in Armenia is Christianity. The roots of the
   Armenian Church go back to the 1st century. According to tradition, the
   Armenian Church was founded by two of Jesus' twelve apostles --
   Thaddaeus and Bartholomew -- who preached Christianity in Armenia
   between 40-60 AD. Because of these two founding apostles, the official
   name of the Armenian Church is Armenian Apostolic Church. Armenia was
   the first nation to adopt Christianity as a state religion, in 301.
   Over 93% of Armenian Christians belong to the Armenian Apostolic
   Church, a form of Oriental (Non- Chalcedonian) Orthodoxy, which is a
   very ritualistic, conservative church, roughly comparable to the Coptic
   and Syriac churches. Armenia also has a population of Catholics (both
   Roman and Mekhitarist - Armenian Uniate (180,000)), evangelical
   Protestants and followers of the Armenian traditional religion. The
   Yazidi Kurds, who live in the western part of the country, practise
   Yazidism. The Armenian Catholic Church is headquartered in Bzoummar,
   Lebanon.

   Ethnic Azeris and Kurds who lived in the country before the Karabakh
   conflict practised Islam, but most Azeris fled out of Armenia into
   Azerbaijan between 1988 and 1991 at the beginning of the conflict.
   During the same period, a large number of Armenians fled from
   Azerbaijan to Armenia.

Culture

   Carved ivory binding, front cover in five sections of Echmiadzin
   Gospel, Virgin and Child with scenes from her life, 6th century
   Enlarge
   Carved ivory binding, front cover in five sections of Echmiadzin
   Gospel, Virgin and Child with scenes from her life, 6th century
   Mother Armenia (Mayr Hayastan) statue, located near Victory Park, in
   Yerevan.
   Enlarge
   Mother Armenia (Mayr Hayastan) statue, located near Victory Park, in
   Yerevan.

   Armenians have their own highly distinctive alphabet and language. The
   letters were invented by Mesrop Mashtots and consists of 36 letters.
   96% of the people in the country speak Armenian, while 75.8% of the
   population additionally speaks Russian as a result of the Soviet
   language policy. The adult literacy rate in Armenia is 99%. Most adults
   in Yerevan can communicate in Russian, while English is increasing in
   popularity.

   Armenian hospitality is legendary and stems from ancient tradition.
   Social gatherings focused around sumptuous presentations of course
   after course of elaborately prepared, well-seasoned (but not spicy-hot)
   food. The hosts will often put morsels on a guest's plate whenever it
   is empty or fill his or her glass when it gets low. After a helping or
   two it is acceptable to refuse politely or, more simply, just leave a
   little uneaten food. Alcohol such as cognac, vodka, and red wine are
   usually served during meals and gatherings. It is considered rare and
   unusual for one to go inside an Armenian household and not be offered
   coffee, pastry, food, or even water.
   Although located in Turkey, Mount Ararat, here seen from Yerevan, is
   the national symbol of Armenia.
   Enlarge
   Although located in Turkey, Mount Ararat, here seen from Yerevan, is
   the national symbol of Armenia.

   The weddings are usually quite elaborate and regal. The process begins
   by the man and woman becoming "promised". The man's immediate family
   (Parents, Grandparents, and often the Uncles and Aunts) go over to the
   woman's house to ask for permission from the woman's father for the
   relationship to continue and hopefully prosper. Once permission is
   granted by the father, the man gives the woman a "promise ring" to make
   it official. To celebrate the mutual family agreement, the woman's
   family opens a bottle of Armenian cognac. After being promised, most
   families elect to have a semi-large engagement party as well. The
   girl's family is the one who plans, organizes and pays for the party.
   There is very little involvement by the man's family. At the party, a
   priest is summoned to pray for the soon husband and wife to be and give
   his blessings. Once the words of prayer have concluded, the couple
   slide wedding bands on each other's right hands (the ring is moved to
   the left hand once a formal marriage ceremony is conducted by the
   Armenian church). The customary time to wait for the marriage is about
   one year. Unlike other cultures, the man and his family pay for the
   wedding. The planning and organization process is usually done by the
   bride and groom to be.

   The National Art Gallery in Yerevan has more than 16,000 works that
   date back to the Middle Ages. It houses paintings by many European
   masters. The Modern Art Museum, the Children’s Picture Gallery, and the
   Martiros Saryan Museum are only a few of the other noteworthy
   collections of fine art on display in Yerevan. Moreover, many private
   galleries are in operation, with many more opening each year. They
   feature rotating exhibitions and sales.
   Yerevan Opera House
   Enlarge
   Yerevan Opera House

   The world-class Armenian Philharmonic Orchestra performs at the
   beautifully refurbished city Opera House, where you can also attend a
   full season of opera. In addition, several chamber ensembles are highly
   regarded for their musicianship, including the National Chamber
   Orchestra of Armenia and the Serenade Orchestra. Classical music can
   also be heard at one of several smaller venues, including the State
   Music Conservatory and the Chamber Orchestra Hall. Jazz is popular,
   especially in the summer when live performances are a regular
   occurrence at one of the city’s many outdoor cafés.

   Yerevan’s Vernisage (arts and crafts market), close to Republic Square,
   bustles with hundreds of vendors selling a variety of crafts, many of
   superb workmanship, on weekends and Wednesdays (though the selection is
   much reduced mid-week). The market offers woodcarving, antiques, fine
   lace, and the hand-knotted wool carpets and kilims that are a Caucasus
   specialty. Obsidian, which is found locally, is crafted into an amazing
   assortment of jewelry and ornamental objects. Armenian gold smithery
   enjoys a long and distinguished tradition, populating one corner of the
   market with a selection of gold items. Soviet relics and souvenirs of
   recent Russian manufacture—nesting dolls, watches, enamel boxes and so
   on, are also available at the Vernisage.

   Across from the Opera House, a popular art market fills another city
   park on the weekends. Armenia’s long history as a crossroads of the
   ancient world has resulted in a landscape with innumerable fascinating
   archaeological sites to explore. Medieval, Iron Age, Bronze Age and
   even Stone Age sites are all within a few hours drive from the city.
   All but the most spectacular remain virtually undiscovered, allowing
   visitors to view churches and fortresses in their original settings.

   The American University of Armenia has graduate programs in Business
   and Law, among others. The institution owes its existence to the
   combined efforts of the Government of Armenia, the Armenian General
   Benevolent Union, USAID, and the Boalt Hall School of Law at the
   University of California, Berkeley.

   The extension programs and the library at AUA form a new focal point
   for English-language intellectual life in the city. Many of the
   country’s most successful young entrepreneurs are graduates of this
   institution.

Photo Gallery

                            Noravank, Vayots Dzor

   A beach at Lake Sevan in Gegharkunik

            Gyumri, Shirak is the second largest city in Armenia.

                         Mount Aragats in Aragatsotn

   Etchmiadzin Cathedral in Echmiadzin

      Statue of Alexander Tamanian and the "Kaskad" monument in Yerevan

                                Garni, Kotayk

                               Geghard, Kotayk

    Statue of Saint Mesrop Mashtots, founder of the Armenian alphabet, in
                                   Yerevan

   Haghartsin Monastery in Dilijan, Tavush

                    Armenian Khachkars at Geghard, Kotayk

                  Ruins of the Zvartnots Temple in Armavir

     The Sourb Arakelots (Ss Apostles) church and the Sourb Astvatsatsin
                 (Holy Bearer-of-God) church near Lake Sevan

     St. Gregory the Illuminator Cathedral in Yerevan. The Cathedral was
    completed in September 2001 in time for the celebration of the 1700th
                   anniversary of Christianity in Armenia.

      View of Mount Ararat from the Khor Virap monastery in the Ararat
                                  Province

   Thousands of Armenians commemorate the Armenian Genocide on April 24 at
                  the Armenian Genocide Memorial in Yerevan

External Data links

     * Doing Business in Armenia
     * Enterprise Surveys: Armenia
     * Privatization Database: Armenia
     * Infrastructure Projects: Armenia
     * HyeTad - The Online Armenian Cause In English and Spanish

Neighbouring countries

   Flag of Georgia (country)  Georgia
   Flag of Turkey  Turkey North Flag of Azerbaijan  Azerbaijan
   West    Flag of Armenia  Armenia     East
   South
   Flag of Iran  Iran
   Armenia Flag

                                     International ties of Armenia

                                                     Armenia Flag
          Geographical and geopolitical: Europe | Eurasia ( Caucasus) | Asia (
   Western Asia)
   International organisations: ADB • BSEC • CE • CIS • CSTO • EAPC • EBRD
   • ECE • EAEC (observer) • ESCAP • FAO • IAEA • IBRD • ICAO • ICFTU •
   ICRM • IDA • IFAD • IFC • IFRCS • ILO • IMF • Interpol • IOC • IOM •
   ISO • ITU • LF (observer) • NACC • NAM (observer) • OPCW • OSCE • PACE
   • PFP • UN • UNCTAD • UNESCO • UNIDO • UPU • UNWTO • WHO • WIPO • WMO •
   WTO
   World Heritage Sites in Armenia
   Flag of Armenia

   Monasteries of Haghpat and Sanahin · Cathedrals of Echmiadzin and
   Zvartnots · Geghard
   Administrative divisions of Armenia
   Flag of Armenia

   Capital: Yerevan

   Provinces (marzer - մարզէր): Aragatsotn • Ararat • Armavir •
   Gegharkunik • Kotayk • Lori • Shirak • Syunik • Tavush • Vayots Dzor
   Historical regions of Armenia
   Flag of Armenia

   The traditional 15 provinces of Historic Armenia:

   1. Upper Armenia • 2. Sophene • 3. Aghdznik • 4. Turuberan • 5. Moxoene
   • 6. Corduene • 7. Parskahayk •
   8. Vaspurakan • 9. Syunik • 10. Artsakh • 11. Paytakaran • 12. Utik •
   13. Gugark • 14. Tayk • 15. Ayrarat

   Other historical regions of Armenia:

   Karin • Taron • Commagene • Armenian Mesopotamia • Norshirakan • Lesser
   Armenia • Cilicia
   Countries of Europe

   Albania · Andorra · Armenia^1 · Austria · Azerbaijan^2 · Belarus ·
   Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus^1 ·
   Czech Republic · Denmark · Estonia · Finland · France · Georgia^2 ·
   Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy · Kazakhstan^2 ·
   Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Republic of Macedonia
   · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands · Norway · Poland
   · Portugal · Romania · Russia^2 · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia ·
   Slovenia · Spain · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey^2 · Ukraine · United
   Kingdom · Vatican City

   (1) Entirely in Asia but having socio-political connections with
   Europe. (2) Has significant territory in Asia.
   Countries of Asia

   Afghanistan • Armenia • Azerbaijan ^1 • Bahrain • Bangladesh • Bhutan •
   Brunei • Cambodia • People's Republic of China ^2 • Cyprus • East Timor
   ^3 • Georgia ^1 • India • Indonesia ^3 • Iran • Iraq • Israel • Japan •
   Jordan • Kazakhstan ^1 • Kuwait • Kyrgyzstan • Laos • Lebanon •
   Malaysia • Maldives • Mongolia • Myanmar • Nepal • North Korea • Oman •
   Pakistan • Philippines • Qatar • Russia ^1 • Saudi Arabia • Singapore •
   South Korea • Sri Lanka • Syria • Tajikistan • Thailand • Turkey ^1 •
   Turkmenistan • United Arab Emirates • Uzbekistan • Vietnam • Yemen

   For dependent and other territories, see Dependent territory and List
   of unrecognized countries.

   ^1 Partly in Europe. ^2 The Republic of China (Taiwan) not officially
   recognized by the United Nations; see Political status of Taiwan.
   ^3 Partly or wholly reckoned in Oceania.
   Countries in Southwest Asia

   Armenia • Azerbaijan • Bahrain • Cyprus • Georgia • Iran • Iraq •
   Israel • Jordan • Kuwait Lebanon • Oman • Qatar • Saudi Arabia • Syria
   • Turkey • United Arab Emirates • Yemen
   Black Sea Economic Cooperation

   Albania • Armenia • Azerbaijan • Bulgaria • Georgia • Greece • Moldova
   • Romania • Russia • Serbia • Turkey • Ukraine
   Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)

   Armenia • Azerbaijan • Belarus • Georgia • Kazakhstan • Kyrgyzstan •
   Moldova • Russia • Tajikistan • Ukraine • Uzbekistan

   Associate Member: Turkmenistan
   Francophonie
   Members: Belgium • Benin • Bulgaria • Burkina Faso • Burundi • Cambodia
   • Cameroon • Canada • New Brunswick • Quebec • Ontario • Cape Verde •
   Central African Republic • Chad • Comoros • Côte d'Ivoire • Cyprus •
   Democratic Republic of the Congo • Djibouti • Dominica • Egypt •
   Equatorial Guinea • France • French Guiana • Gabon • Ghana • Guadeloupe
   • Guinea • Guinea-Bissau • Haiti • Laos • Lebanon • Madagascar • Mali •
   Martinique • Mauritania • Mauritius • Morocco • Niger • Republic of the
   Congo • Romania • Rwanda • Saint Lucia • São Tomé and Príncipe •
   Senegal • Seychelles • Saint-Pierre and Miquelon • Switzerland • Togo •
   Tunisia • Ukraine • Vanuatu • Vietnam

   Observers: Armenia • Austria • Croatia • Czech Republic • Georgia •
   Hungary • Lithuania • Mozambique • Poland • Serbia • Slovakia •
   Slovenia • Ukraine

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Armenia"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
