   #copyright

Arnold Schwarzenegger

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Producers, directors and
media figures

   Arnold Schwarzenegger

                        38^th Governor of California

          Term of office:
   November 17, 2003 – present

   Lieutenant Governor: Cruz Bustamante (2003- present)
                        John Garamendi (elected)
       Predecessor:     Gray Davis
        Successor:      Incumbent
          Born:         July 30, 1947 (age 59)
                        Thal bei Graz, Steiermark, Austria
     Political party:   Republican
       Profession:      Body Builder, Actor
         Spouse:        Maria Shriver
        Religion:       Roman Catholic

   Arnold Alois Schwarzenegger (German pronunciation ( IPA): [aɐnɔlt aloʏs
   ʃvaɐtsənɛgɐ]) (born on July 30, 1947) is an Austrian-American
   bodybuilder, actor and Republican politician, currently serving as the
   38th Governor of California. He was elected on October 7, 2003 in a
   special recall election to replace then-Governor Gray Davis.
   Schwarzenegger was sworn in on November 17, 2003, to serve the
   remainder of Davis' term, which lasts until January 8, 2007. On
   September 16, 2005 he officially announced a re-election campaign to a
   full term in California's 2006 gubernatorial election — resulting in a
   re-election to another term on November 7, 2006.

   Nicknamed "The Austrian Oak" in his body building days, and more
   recently "The Governator" (a portmanteau of Governor and Terminator,
   after the blockbuster film roles), Schwarzenegger as a young man gained
   widespread attention as a highly successful bodybuilder, and later
   gained worldwide fame as a Hollywood action film star. Perhaps his most
   famous film is The Terminator, with other famous movies including
   Predator, Terminator 2: Judgment Day, Terminator 3: Rise of the
   Machines, True Lies, Kindergarten Cop, Total Recall, Junior, Jingle All
   The Way, Last Action Hero, and his Hollywood breakthrough film Conan
   the Barbarian.

Early life

Infancy and History

   Schwarzenegger was born in Thal, Austria, a town bordering the Styrian
   capital, Graz, and christened Arnold Alois Schwarzenegger. His parents
   were the local police chief Gustav Schwarzenegger (1907 – 1972), and
   his wife, the former Aurelia Jadrny (1922 – 1998), who had been married
   on October 20, 1945, when he was 38 and she was a 23-year-old widow.
   Arnold had a good relationship with his mother and kept in touch with
   her until her death.

   Gustav was a strict and demanding father, who generally favored the
   elder of his two sons, Meinhard. Meinhard died in a car accident in
   1971, and Gustav died the following year. In Pumping Iron,
   Schwarzenegger claimed his reason for not attending his father's
   funeral was that he was training for a bodybuilding contest, although
   both he and the film's producer later stated that this story was taken
   from another bodybuilder, for the purpose of showing the extremes that
   some would go to for their sport. Also to make himself more cold and
   machine like person, to help drum up the controversy for the film.

Life as Boy

   As a boy, Schwarzenegger played many sports, but discovered his passion
   for bodybuilding when in his mid-teens, his soccer coach took the team
   for weight training. He attended a gym in Graz, where he also
   frequented the local cinemas, viewing his idols such as musclemen Reg
   Park, Steve Reeves, and Johnny Weissmuller on the big screen. He was so
   dedicated as a youngster that he was known to break into the local gym
   so that he could train on weekends when it was usually closed.

Early Adulthood

   Schwarzenegger served in the Austrian army in 1965, to fulfill the
   one-year service requirement expected at the time of all 18 year old
   Austrian males. During this year he sneaked off the base to compete in
   his first bodybuilding competition, the Mr. Junior Europe, where he won
   first place. He was punished for sneaking off, but the respect he
   gained from his superiors was obvious: his drill sergeant once yelled
   at a group of soldiers, "Why don't you be more like Schwarzenegger!"

   Schwarzenegger made his first plane trip in 1966, attending the NABBA
   Mr. Universe competition being held in London. He arrived in the United
   Kingdom knowing little English, and it was here he first started being
   referred to as "The Austrian Oak" (or "The Styrian Oak"), due to his
   large build and the story of him performing chin ups from the limb of
   an Oak tree on the banks of the river Thalersee, the lake of his
   hometown. He would come in second in the competition, but would win the
   title the next year, becoming the youngest ever Mr. Universe (at age
   20).

Going to US

   Schwarzenegger moved to the United States in September of 1968, with
   little money or knowledge of the English language, and trained at
   Gold's Gym in Santa Monica under the patronage of Joe Weider. It is
   here where Schwarzenegger became good friends with professional
   wrestler, "Superstar" Billy Graham.

Bodybuilding career

Early On

   Schwarzenegger first gained fame as a bodybuilder. One of the first
   competitions he won was Junior Mr. Europe in 1965. He would go on to
   compete in and win many bodybuilding (as well as some powerlifting)
   contests, including 5 Mr. Universe (4 - NABBA (England), 1 - IFBB
   (USA)) wins and 7 Mr. Olympia wins, a record which would remain until
   Lee Haney won his eighth straight Mr. Olympia title in 1991.

   In 1967 Schwarzenegger won the Munich stone lifting contest in which a
   stone weighing 508 German pounds (254kg/560lbs) is lifted between the
   legs while standing on two foot rests. He broke the existing record,
   winning the contest.

Mr. Olympia

   Schwarzenegger's goal was to become the greatest bodybuilder in the
   world, which meant becoming Mr. Olympia. His first attempt was in 1969
   where he lost to three-time champion Sergio Oliva. However
   Schwarzenegger came back in 1970 and convincingly won the competition.

   Schwarzenegger continued his winning streak in the 1971, 1972, and 1973
   competitions. In 1974, Schwarzenegger was once again in top form and
   won the title for the fifth consecutive time, besting Lou Ferrigno.
   After the 1974 Olympia, Schwarzenegger announced his retirement from
   professional bodybuilding.

   However, George Butler and Charles Gaines convinced him to compete one
   more time so they could make the bodybuilding documentary called
   Pumping Iron. Schwarzenegger had only three months to prepare for the
   competition after losing significant weight to appear in the film Stay
   Hungry with Jeff Bridges. Ferrigno proved not to be a threat, and a
   lighter than usual Schwarzenegger convincingly won the 1975 Olympia.
   After being declared Mr. Olympia for a sixth consecutive time
   Schwarzenegger once again retired from competition. Pictures from this
   event were re-interpreted by prolific realism artist Luke Barabe.

   Schwarzenegger came out of retirement once more to compete in the 1980
   Mr. Olympia. Schwarzenegger was a late entry and won with only eight
   weeks of preparation. At the time, this lead to some controversy, some
   claiming that the Olympia had become a "popularity contest" rather than
   an objectively judged competition.

   Schwarzenegger is considered among the most important figures in the
   history of bodybuilding, and his legacy is commemorated in the Arnold
   Classic annual bodybuilding competition. Schwarzenegger has remained a
   prominent face in the bodybuilding sport long after his retirement, in
   part due to his ownership of gyms and fitness magazines. He has
   presided over numerous contests and awards shows. For many years he
   wrote a monthly column for the bodybuilding magazines Muscle & Fitness
   and Flex. Shortly after being elected Governor, he was appointed
   executive editor of both magazines in a largely symbolic capacity. The
   magazines agreed to donate $250,000 a year to the Governor's various
   physical fitness initiatives. The magazine MuscleMag International has
   a monthly two page article on him and refers to him as "The King".

Stats

     * Nicknames: The Oak, The Austrian Oak, The Olympian, Oak, The King,
       Champ, Arnie, Schwazzie, Arnold Strong, Ahnuld
     * Height: 6'2"
     * Arms: 22"
     * Chest: 57"
     * Waist: 34"
     * Thighs: 28.5"
     * Calves: 20"
     * Off Season Weight: Around 260 lbs.
     * Competition Weight: Around 235 lbs.

Steroid use

   It has been claimed that Schwarzenegger won his first of seven Mr.
   Olympia titles in 1970 with the help of Dianabol . He has admitted to
   using performance-enhancing anabolic steroids while they were legal,
   writing in 1977 that "steroids were helpful to me in maintaining muscle
   size while on a strict diet in preparation for a contest. I did not use
   them for muscle growth, but rather for muscle maintenance when cutting
   up." However, some bodybuilders who used the same steroid cocktails as
   Schwarzenegger in the 1970s dispute the notion that they were used
   merely for "muscle maintenance". Even Schwarzenegger has called the
   drugs "tissue building."

   As recently as 2005, Schwarzenegger has been accused of tacit
   endorsement of steroid use, because the Arnold Classic competition to
   which he lends his name does not require testing of contestants. Most
   if not all contestants in the bodybuilding portion of the Arnold
   Classic display muscle mass that is not likely to occurr without
   chemical assistance.

   In 1999, Schwarzenegger sued Dr. Willi Heepe, a German doctor who
   publicly predicted an early death for the bodybuilder based on a link
   between steroid use and later heart problems. Because the doctor had
   never examined him personally, Schwarzenegger collected a DM 20,000
   ($12,000 USD) libel judgment against him in a German court. In 1999
   Schwarzenegger also sued and settled with The Globe, a U.S. tabloid
   which had made similar predictions about the bodybuilder's future
   health. As late as 1996, a year before open heart surgery to replace an
   aortic valve, Schwarzenegger publicly defended his use of anabolic
   steroids during his bodybuilding career.

   Schwarzenegger was born with a bicuspid aortic valve; a normal aorta
   has three leaflets. According to a spokesperson, Schwarzenegger has not
   used anabolic steroids since 1990 when they were made illegal.

Acting career

   Arnold Schwarzenegger
   Birth name    Arnold Alois Schwarzenegger
   Born          July 30, 1947 (age 59)
                 Austria Thal, Austria
   Height        6'2' (188 cm)
   Official site schwarzenegger.com
   Notable roles The Terminator in
                 The Terminator
                 Detective John Kimble in
                 Kindergarten Cop

   Arnold Schwarzenegger had long planned to move from bodybuilding into a
   career in acting, as had done many of his idols, such as Reg Park.
   Initially he had trouble breaking into films due to his long surname,
   "overly" large muscles, and foreign accent, but was eventually chosen
   to play the role of Hercules (as both Reg Park and Steve Reeves had
   done) in Hercules in New York (1970).

   Credited under the name "Arnold Strong", his accent in the film was so
   thick that his lines had to be dubbed after production. His second film
   appearance was as a deaf and mute hitman for the mob in director Robert
   Altman's The Long Goodbye (1973), which was followed by a much more
   significant part in the film Stay Hungry (1976), for which he was
   awarded a Golden Globe for Best New Male Star.

   Schwarzenegger came to the attention of more people in the documentary
   Pumping Iron (1977), elements of which were dramatized. In 1991,
   Schwarzenegger purchased the rights to this film, its outtakes, and
   associated still photography.

   Arnold also appeared with Kirk Douglas and Ann Margaret in the comedy,
   The Villain (1979). Schwarzenegger's breakthrough film was Conan the
   Barbarian (1982), and this was cemented by a sequel, Conan the
   Destroyer (1984). As an actor, he is best-known as the title character
   of director James Cameron's cyborg thriller The Terminator (1984).
   Schwarzenegger's acting ability (described by one critic as having an
   emotional range that "stretches from A almost to B") has long been the
   butt of many jokes; he retains a strong Austrian accent in his speech
   at all times.

   He also made a mark for injecting his films with a droll, often
   self-deprecating sense of humor, setting him apart from more serious
   action heroes such as Sylvester Stallone. (As an aside, his
   alternative-universe comedy/thriller Last Action Hero featured a poster
   of the movie Terminator 2: Judgment Day which, in that alternate
   universe, had Sylvester Stallone as its star; a similar in-joke in
   Twins suggested that the two actors might one day co-star, something
   which has yet to come to pass).

   Following his arrival as a Hollywood superstar, he made a number of
   successful films: Commando (1985), Raw Deal (1986), The Running Man
   (1987), and Red Heat (1988). In Predator (1987), another successful
   film, Schwarzenegger led a cast which included future Minnesota
   Governor Jesse Ventura (Ventura also appears in Running Man as well as
   in the film "Batman and Robin" which Schwarzenegger also starred in)
   and future Kentucky Gubernatorial Candidate Sonny Landham. Twins,
   (1988) a comedy with Danny DeVito, was a change of pace. Total Recall
   (1990), at that time the most expensive film ever, netted
   Schwarzenegger $10 million and 15% of the gross, and was, although
   violent, a widely praised, thought-provoking science-fiction script
   (based on the Phillip K Dick short story We Can Remember It for You
   Wholesale) behind his usual violent action. Kindergarten Cop (1990) was
   another comedy.

   Schwarzenegger had a brief foray into directing, first with a 1990
   episode of the TV series Tales from the Crypt, entitled The Switch, and
   then with the 1992 telemovie Christmas in Connecticut. He has not
   directed since.

   Schwarzenegger's critical and commercial high-water mark was Terminator
   2: Judgment Day (1991). His next film project, the self-aware action
   comedy Last Action Hero, (1993), had the misfortune to be released
   opposite Jurassic Park, and suffered accordingly. Schwarzenegger's
   career never again achieved quite the same prominence, his aura of
   box-office invincibility suffering, although True Lies (1994) was a
   highly popular sendup of spy films, and saw Schwarzenegger reunited
   with director James Cameron, whose own career had taken off with The
   Terminator.

   Shortly thereafter came Junior, which brought Schwarzenegger his second
   Golden Globe nomination, this time for Best Actor - Musical or Comedy.
   It was followed by the popular, albeit by-the-numbers Eraser (1996),
   and Batman & Robin (1997), his final film before taking time to
   recuperate from a back injury. Following the failure of Batman & Robin
   Schwarzenegger's film career and box office prominence went into
   decline.

   Several film projects were announced with Schwarzenegger attached to
   star including the remake of Planet of the Apes, a new film version of
   I Am Legend and a World War II film scripted by Quentin Tarantino that
   would have seen Schwarzenegger finally play an Austrian.

   Instead he returned with End of Days (1999) - an unsuccessful and
   atypically dark attempt to broaden his acting range - The 6th Day
   (2000) and Collateral Damage (2002), none of which came close to
   recapturing his former prominence. In 2003 he reprised his role as the
   cyborg in Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines, which went on to earn
   over $150 million domestically, but it still wasn't enough to revive
   his acting career.

   His latest film appearances included a cameo appearance in The Rundown
   with The Rock and the 2004 remake of Around the World in 80 Days,
   notable for featuring him onscreen with action star Jackie Chan for the
   first time. His latest appearance was a cameo as "The Governator", a
   Hummer H1, in the 2006 Pixar film Cars.

   Arnold Schwarzenegger has stated in many interviews he never regrets
   doing a role and he feels really bad when he turns down a role. There
   are however conflicting reports that Schwarzenegger will be starring in
   the next Terminator installment - Terminator 4 .

Political career

   Vice President Dick Cheney meets with Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger for
   the first time at the White House.
   Enlarge
   Vice President Dick Cheney meets with Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger for
   the first time at the White House.

   Schwarzenegger is a registered Republican. His first political
   appointment was to the President's Council on Physical Fitness and
   Sports, on which he served from 1990 to 1993. He was nominated by
   George H. W. Bush, who dubbed him " Conan the Republican". He later
   served as Chairman for the California Governor's Council on Physical
   Fitness and Sports under Governor Pete Wilson.

   Schwarzenegger announced his candidacy in the 2003 California recall
   election for Governor of California on the August 6, 2003 episode of
   The Tonight Show with Jay Leno. As a candidate in the recall election,
   Schwarzenegger had the most name recognition in a crowded field of
   candidates, but he had never held public office and his political views
   were unknown to most Californians. His candidacy was immediate national
   and international news, with media outlets dubbing him the "Governator"
   (referring to The Terminator movies, see above) and "The Running Man"
   (the name of another of his movies), and calling the recall election
   "Total Recall" (ditto) and "Terminator 4: Rise of the Candidate"
   (referring to his movie Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines).

   On October 7, 2003, the recall election resulted in Governor Gray Davis
   being removed from office with 55.4% of the Yes vote in favour of a
   recall. Schwarzenegger was elected Governor of California under the
   second question on the ballot with 48.6% of the vote to choose a
   successor to Davis. Schwarzenegger defeated Democrat Cruz Bustamante,
   fellow Republican Tom McClintock, and others. In total, Schwarzenegger
   won the election by about 1.3 million votes. Under the regulations of
   the California Constitution, no runoff election was required.

   Schwarzenegger's initial days in office were heady, infused with a
   number of faux pas statements that many attribute to his sense of
   overconfidence stemming from his entertainment industry clout. When
   asked whether he would seek bipartisan cooperation from the democrats
   in the State Senate, Schwarzenegger quipped that he saw no reason to
   "talk with losers". Building on a catch phrase from a Saturday Night
   Live sketch partly parodying his bodybuilding career, Schwarzenegger
   called the Democratic State politicians " girlie men," a reference from
   a Saturday Night Live skit called " Hans and Franz", in which
   Schwarzenegger guest-starred once.

   Schwarzenegger later began to feel the backlash when powerful state
   unions began to oppose his various initiatives. Key among his reckoning
   with hubris was a special election he called in November 2005, in which
   four ballot measures he sponsored were defeated.

   Schwarzenegger then bucked the advice of fellow Republican strategists
   and appointed a Democrat, Susan Kennedy, a lesbian, as his Chief of
   Staff. Schwarzenegger scrambled toward the political middle, determined
   to build a winning legacy with only a short time to go until the next
   gubernatorial election.

   Schwarzenegger ran for re-election against Democrat Phil Angelides, the
   California State Treasurer, in the 2006 elections, held on November 7,
   2006. Despite a poor year nationally for the Republican party,
   Schwarzenegger won re-election with 56.0% of the vote compared with
   38.9% for Phil Angelides, a margin of well over one million votes. The
   election cemented his credentials as a bona fide politician.
   Schwarzenegger is seen here with one of the only same gender couples
   who were a part of the "Californians for Schwarzenegger" team, Kevin
   Norte & Don Norte at the Log Cabin Republicans "The Courage To Lead"
   Dinner on June 29, 2006 in Hollywood, California. Since 2003, the
   Governor signed 21 GLBT friendly bills. Raw exit polling date indicated
   that the Governor suffered no voter erosion in that community &
   maintianed his 32% GLBT voter support in 2006 (the same as 2003).
   Enlarge
   Schwarzenegger is seen here with one of the only same gender couples
   who were a part of the "Californians for Schwarzenegger" team, Kevin
   Norte & Don Norte at the Log Cabin Republicans "The Courage To Lead"
   Dinner on June 29, 2006 in Hollywood, California. Since 2003, the
   Governor signed 21 GLBT friendly bills. Raw exit polling date indicated
   that the Governor suffered no voter erosion in that community &
   maintianed his 32% GLBT voter support in 2006 (the same as 2003).

Other aspects of Schwarzenegger's life

Personal life

   In 1977, Schwarzenegger's autobiography Arnold: The Education of a
   Bodybuilder was published. Also in 1977, Arnold Schwarzenegger
   declared, "Milk is for babies, when you grow up you drink beer" in
   Pumping Iron, the documentary about bodybuilders that launched the
   Austrian’s superstar career. He earned a B.A. from the University of
   Wisconsin-Superior, where he graduated with degrees in international
   marketing of fitness and business administration in 1979.

   Schwarzenegger became a U.S. citizen in 1983, although he also retains
   his Austrian citizenship.

   In 1986, Schwarzenegger married TV journalist Maria Shriver, niece of
   the past President of the United States John F. Kennedy. The couple
   have four children: daughters Katherine (born December 13, 1989) and
   Christina (b. July 23, 1991), and sons Patrick (b. September 18, 1993)
   and Christopher (b. September 27, 1997).

Business career

   By the age of 30, Schwarzenegger was a millionaire, well before his
   career in Hollywood. His financial independence came from a series of
   successful business ventures and investments:

   In 1968, Schwarzenegger and fellow bodybuilder Franco Columbu started a
   bricklaying business. The business flourished both because of the
   pair's marketing savvy and increased demand following a major Los
   Angeles earthquake in 1971.

   Schwarzenegger and Columbu used profits from their bricklaying venture
   to start a mail order business, selling bodybuilding and
   fitness-related equipment and instructional tapes.

   Schwarzenegger rolled profits from the mail order business and his
   bodybuilding competition winnings into his first real estate venture:
   an apartment building he purchased for $10,000. He would go on to
   invest in a number of real estate holding companies.

Planet Hollywood

   Arnold Schwarzenegger was a founding "celebrity investor" in the Planet
   Hollywood chain of international theme restaurants (modeled after the
   Hard Rock Cafe) along with Bruce Willis, Sylvester Stallone and Demi
   Moore. Schwarzenegger severed his financial ties with the business in
   2000.

Net worth

   Schwarzenegger's net worth has been under-estimated by conservatively
   using the usual $100,000,000-$200,000,000 (USD) estimate.

   However, over the years, he invested his bodybuilding and movie
   earnings in an array of stocks, bonds, privately controlled companies
   and real estate holdings in the US and worldwide, so his fortune is
   actually estimated at $800,000,000 (USD).

Allegations of sexual and personal misconduct

   During his initial campaign for Governor, allegations of sexual and
   personal misconduct were raised against Schwarzenegger (see Gropegate).
   Within the last five days before the election, news reports appeared in
   the Los Angeles Times recounting allegations of sexual misconduct from
   several individual women, sixteen of whom eventually came forward with
   their personal stories.

   Chronologically, they ranged from Elaine Stockton, who claimed that
   Schwarzenegger groped her breast at a Gold's Gym in 1975 (she was 19 at
   the time), to a 51 year old woman who said that he pinned her to his
   chest and spanked her shortly after she met him in connection with
   production of his film, The Sixth Day, in 2000.

   Schwarzenegger admitted that he has "behaved badly sometimes" and
   apologized, but also stated that "a lot of (what) you see in the
   stories is not true". This came after an interview in adult magazine
   Oui from 1977 surfaced, in which Schwarzenegger discussed attending
   sexual orgies and indulging in drugs like marijuana. Schwarzenegger is
   shown smoking a marijuana cigarette after winning Mr. Olympia in the
   1977 documentary film Pumping Iron.

   British television personality Anna Ryder Richardson settled a libel
   lawsuit in August 2006 against Schwarzenegger and two of his top aides,
   Sean Walsh and publicist Sheryl Main. Richardson alleges that the
   California governor had groped her breast during a 2000 interview in
   London, England, to promote The Sixth Day, in which he had starred as
   an actor. Although, during his 2003 election campaign, Schwarzenegger
   had promised to respond to the allegations of sexual harassment by
   Richardson and several other women, he failed to do so after being
   elected. The groping followed Richardson's remark to Schwarzenegger
   that her breasts were "real", rather than the results of surgical
   breast augmentation. Main recalls the incident somewhat differently,
   claiming that she cupped one of her breasts and asked the
   actor-become-governor what he thought about them. According to
   information that Schwarzenegger has publicized, he has spent $600,000
   in his legal defenses of himself and his aides against libel. .

Allegations of Nazi admiration and support of Kurt Waldheim

   Allegations printed on the front page of The Los Angeles Times, based
   on selective quotation, which Schwarzenegger claimed not to recall,
   were also made that he at one time admired Adolf Hitler and had praised
   him as a great propagandist. However, the full text of the statement
   from which the quotation was taken significantly reduces the
   credibility of the allegations. Although Schwarzenegger's parents were
   members of the Nazi party (his father, Gustav Schwarzenegger, was also
   a member of the Sturmabteilung or SA), Schwarzenegger has been a strong
   supporter of various Jewish groups, and has denounced the principles of
   the fascist German regime, saying "I have always despised everything
   that Hitler stands for and what my history of my country stood for".

   A March 1992 Spy Magazine article mentions a story confirmed by "a
   businessman and longtime friend of Schwarzenegger's" -- that in the
   '70s Arnold "enjoyed playing and giving away records of Hitler's
   speeches".

   Schwarzenegger supported the campaign of his friend, Kurt Waldheim,
   former UN chief and a former Austrian politician who was accused of war
   crimes during World War II in Yugoslavia, which resulted in both
   Waldheim, and his wife, Elisabeth, both of whom belonged to the Nazi
   Party, being excluded from entering the United States. Schwarzenegger's
   name remained on Waldheim's campaign posters, even after allegations of
   Waldheim's war crimes were brought to light. Waldheim was also invited
   to Arnold's wedding with Maria Shriver, but wisely declined. According
   to Wendy Leigh, author of "Arnold: An Unauthorized Biography",
   Schwarzenegger was said to have made a toast to his friend which that
   he would later regret, and which shocked many who were present: "My
   friends don't want me to mention Kurt's name because of all the recent
   Nazi stuff ... but I love him, and Maria does, too, and so thank you,
   Kurt."

   These allegations were brought up mainly in the context of his
   campaign, but they continue to be occasionally used by some critics.
   Garry Trudeau, the cartoonist behind the comic strip Doonesbury,
   combined the allegations by nicknaming Schwarzenegger "Herr
   Gröpenführer" (after the early paramilitary Nazi rank Gruppenführer)
   and depicting Schwarzenegger as a huge, groping hand in his artwork
   (Trudeau has a tradition of depicting prominent real-world politicians
   using symbolism, such as showing President George H.W. Bush as nothing,
   Vice President Dan Quayle as a feather, and President Bill Clinton as a
   "waffle(r)".

Foreshadowing his political life?

   The 1993 Sylvester Stallone film Demolition Man jokingly referenced
   Schwarzenegger as President of the United States. In the film, a future
   America passed a constitutional amendment to allow naturalized
   Americans like Schwarzenegger to become President of the United States,
   and that film referenced a "Schwarzenegger Presidential Library".

   In addition, the official strategy guide for the 2000 video game
   Perfect Dark includes a comic which points to Schwarzenegger as being a
   U.S. Senator and Presidential candidate in the year 2025.

Trivia

     * On January 8, 2006, while riding his Harley Davidson motorcycle,
       with his son in the sidecar, another driver backed into the street
       he was riding on causing him and his son to collide with the car at
       a low speed. While his son and the other driver were unharmed, the
       governor sustained a minor injury to his lip, forcing him to get 15
       sutures. "No citations were issued" said officer Jason Lee, a
       police spokesman. Schwarzenegger, who famously rode motorcycles in
       the Terminator movies, has never actually obtained an M-1 or M-2
       endorsement on his California driver's license that would allow him
       to legally ride one on the street. Sunday morning, December 9,
       2001, he broke six ribs and was hospitalised for four days after
       another motorcycle crash in L.A.

     * In honour of its most famous son, Schwarzenegger's home town of
       Graz had named its soccer stadium after him. The Arnold
       Schwarzenegger Stadium, now officially titled UPC-Arena, is the
       home of both Grazer AK and Sturm Graz. Following the Stanley Tookie
       Williams execution and after street protests in his home town,
       several local politicians began a campaign to remove
       Schwarzenegger's name from the stadium. Schwarzenegger responded,
       saying that "to spare the responsible politicians of the city of
       Graz further concern, I withdraw from them as of this day the right
       to use my name in association with the Liebenauer Stadium", and set
       a tight deadline of just a couple of days to remove his name. Graz
       officials removed Schwarzenegger's name from the stadium in
       December 2005.

     * In tribute to Schwarzenegger in 2002, Forum Stadtpark, a local
       cultural association, proposed plans to build a 25-metre (82 foot)
       tall Terminator statue in a park in central Graz. Schwarzenegger
       reportedly said he was flattered, but thought the money would be
       better spent on social projects and the Special Olympics.

     * In 2005 Peter Pilz from the Austrian Green Party in parliament
       demanded to revoke Schwarzenegger's Austrian citizenship. This
       demand was based on article 33 of the Austrian citizenship act that
       states: A citizen, who is in the public service of a foreign
       country, shall be deprived of his citizenship, if he heavily
       damages the reputation or the interests of the Austrian Republic.

          Pilz claimed that Schwarzenegger's actions in support of the
          death penalty (prohibited in Austria under Protocol 13 of the
          European Convention on Human Rights) had indeed done heavy
          damage to Austria's reputation. Schwarzenegger justified his
          actions by referring to the fact that his only duty as Governor
          of California was to prevent an error in the judicial system.
          "Schwarzenegger has a lot of muscles, but apparently not much
          heart," said Julien Dray, spokesman for the Socialist Party in
          France, where the death penalty was abolished in 1981.

     * Because Schwarzenegger opted in 1997 for a replacement heart valve
       made of his own transplanted tissue, medical experts predict he
       will require repeated heart valve replacement surgery in the next
       two to eight years (as his current valve degrades). Schwarzenegger
       apparently opted against a mechanical valve, the only permanent
       solution available at the time of his surgery, because it would
       have sharply limited his physical activity and capacity to
       exercise.

     * He bought the first Hummer manufactured for civilian use in 1992, a
       model so large, 6,300 lb (2900 kg) and 7 feet (2.1 m) wide that it
       is classified as a large truck and U.S. fuel economy regulations do
       not apply to it. During the Gubernatorial Recall campaign he
       announced that he would convert one of his Hummers to burn
       hydrogen. The conversion was reported to have cost about $21,000
       (USD). After the election, he signed an executive order to
       jumpstart the building of hydrogen refueling plants called the
       "California Hydrogen Highway Network", and gained a DOE grant to
       help pay for its projected $91,000,000 (USD) cost. California took
       delivery of the first H2H (Hydrogen Hummer) in October 2004.

     * His fellow bodybuilder and actor, Sven-Ole Thorsen, has
       collaborated with him in 15 movies so far.

     * He has appeared alongside his fellow actor from Around the World in
       80 Days, Jackie Chan, in a government advert to combat piracy.

     * In the spring of 2002, Chapman University awarded Schwarzenegger an
       honorary doctoral degree. The degree, Doctor of Humane Letters, is
       conferred upon individuals who have distinguished themselves
       through their accomplishments in or contributions to academia,
       community service, business and industry, or performance in the
       arts.

     * Schwarzenegger's official height has usually been reported as 6'2",
       though some observers debit him two inches. While campaigning for
       George W. Bush in Ohio in 2004, he appeared only about an inch
       taller than the 5'11" Bush. Schwarzenegger's weight while competing
       was in the 245 pound range; he now carries about 210 pounds. His
       height has been debated to such a high degree on internet message
       boards, that there is a now a website dedicated to it.
       Schwarzenegger himself maintains that this is his true height,
       remarking that most people do have to look "up" at him.

     * The name "Schwarzenegger" in German means, approximately, "Black
       Ploughman" or "Ploughman of the Black Earth" ("Schwarz" = "black",
       "Egge" = "plow" or "harrow").

     * Even though Schwarzenegger speaks German as his mother-tongue, all
       of his movies are dubbed by the German Thomas Danneberg for the
       German speaking markets in Central Europe - partly because
       Schwarzenegger's German shows a strong Austrian accent that doesn't
       fit with the type of most of his roles.

     * In 1985, Schwarzenegger appeared in Stop the Madness,an anti-drug
       music video sponsored by the Reagan administration.

     * Mahathir on Arnold Schwarzenegger's election as governor of
       California, despite allegations about his past: "I think he had
       every right to contest. People do not grow up to think that, 'Ah,
       I'm going to be the next governor and therefore I must deny myself
       all the pleasures of life'." October 2003

     * Appeared on WWF (WWE)'s Smackdown! in 1999 where was bestowed a
       replica of the "Attitude" era belt. He was involved in a segment
       handing a chair to "Stone Cold" Steve Austin and eventually beating
       up Triple H.

     * JibJab made a parody about Schwarzenegger's campaign to run for
       governor, "Ahnuld for Governor", during which he adresses himself
       as "Ahnuld" and talks of his plans to terminate Gray Davis, and
       trim the fat from the budgets "the same way I do from my rock hard
       body, every day".

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arnold_Schwarzenegger"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
