   #copyright

Arugula

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Food and agriculture

   Leafy arugula
   Enlarge
   Leafy arugula

   Rocket, also known as arugula, garden rocket, rocket salad, rugola,
   rucola and roquette, is a type of leaf vegetable, and although often
   mistaken for a sort of lettuce, is in fact a herb, being a member of
   the mustard family. It is rich in vitamin C and iron.

   Rocket has been grown as a vegetable in the Mediterranean area since
   Roman times, and was considered an aphrodisiac. Before the 1990s it was
   usually collected in the wild and was not cultivated on a large scale
   and not scientifically researched until the 1990s. Today, it is
   cultivated in various places, especially in Veneto, and available
   throughout the world.

Varieties

   Scientifically, arugula consists of three species: Eruca sativa,
   Diplotaxis tenuifolia and Diplotaxis muralis.

   Two main forms are found - wild rocket, with smaller, more peppery
   leaves, and wide leaved or cultivated rocket, with a less pronounced
   taste.

Ecology

   Rocket is used as a food plant by the larvae of some Lepidoptera
   species including Garden Carpet.

Usage

   Rocket is generally used in salads but also cooked as a vegetable with
   pastas or meats. In Italy, it is often used in pizzas, added just
   before the baking period ends or immediately afterwards, so that it can
   wilt in the heat. It is sometimes used as an ingredient in pesto,
   either in addition to basil or as a (non-traditional) substitute.

Note

    1. ^ The term arugula (from Italian dialect arigola) is found chiefly
       in the U.S.; both words arugula and rocket ultimately come from
       Latin eruca.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arugula"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
