   #copyright

Athens

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: European Geography

   Coordinates: 38°00′N 23°43′E
   Greece Athens (Αθήνα)
   Seal of Athens
   Seal of Athens
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Coordinates 38°00′ N 23°43′ E
   Country Greece
   Periphery Attica
   Prefecture Attica
   Population 4,200,000 (2001)
   Area 38 km²
   Metropolitan area 427 km²
   Population density 19,619 / km²
   Elevation 70 m
   Postal code 10x xx, 11x xx, 120 xx
   Area code 210, 211, 212
   Licence plate code Yxx, Zxx, Ixx (excluding INx)
   Mayor Nikitas Kaklamanis (by January 1, 2007)
   Website www.cityofathens.gr

   Athens ( Greek: Αθήνα, Athína IPA: /a'θina/) is the capital and largest
   city of Greece. Named after goddess Athena, Athens is a cosmopolitan
   metropolis with a population of 3.7 million people. The Athens
   metropolitan area constitutes the center of economic, financial,
   industrial, cultural and political life in Greece. The city is also
   rapidly becoming a business centre in the European Union.

   Ancient Athens was a powerful polis city-state and a renowned centre of
   learning, home of Plato's Academy and Aristotle's Lyceum. It is often
   referred to as the cradle of Western civilization, largely due to the
   impact of its cultural and political achievements during the 5th and
   4th centuries BC on the rest of the then known European Continent. The
   classical era heritage is still evident in the city, portrayed through
   a number of ancient monuments and artworks, the most famous being the
   Parthenon on the Acropolis. Athens was the host city of the first
   modern-day Olympic Games and, more recently, of the 2004 Summer
   Olympics.

Name

   In ancient Greek, the name of Athens was Ἀθῆναι-Athenai, plural of
   Ἀθηνά-Athene, the Attic name of the Goddess Athena. The city's name may
   have been plural, like those of Θῆβαι-Thebai ( Thebes) and
   Μυκῆναι-Mykenai ( Mycenae), because it consisted of several parts. In
   the 19th century, this name was formally re-adopted as the city's name.
   Since the official abandonment of Katharevousa Greek in the 1970s,
   however, the popular form Athína has become the city's official name.
   See also a list of alternative names for Athens.

History

   The Parthenon, a landmark of Western Civilization. Lykavittos Hill
   stands in the background (right side).
   Enlarge
   The Parthenon, a landmark of Western Civilization. Lykavittos Hill
   stands in the background (right side).

   Athens was the leading city in Greece during the greatest period of
   Greek civilization during the 1st millennium BC. During the "Golden
   Age" of Greece (roughly 500 BC to 323 BC) it was the world's leading
   cultural and intellectual centre. In 431 B.C, Athens went to war with
   another city-state, Sparta. Athens was defeated by Sparta, and its
   walls were pulled down (however, remnants of the original walls of the
   era are still to be found today, especially in the coastline of
   Piraeus). The schools of philosophy were closed in AD 529 by the
   Christian Byzantine Empire, which disapproved of the schools' pagan
   thinking. Athens gradually lost a great deal of status at this time.
   The Propylaea of the University of Athens, part of the "Trilogy" of
   Theofil Hansen. The building now serves as both a ceremony hall and a
   rectory.
   Enlarge
   The Propylaea of the University of Athens, part of the "Trilogy" of
   Theofil Hansen. The building now serves as both a ceremony hall and a
   rectory.

   During the 11th and 12th centuries the Byzantine city experienced a
   revival. This period is considered the Golden Age of Byzantine art in
   Athens. Almost all of the most important Byzantine churches around
   Athens were built during these two centuries. Meanwhile, together with
   Corinth and Thebes, Athens was enriched by trade, and soon became an
   important and prosperous centre for the production of soaps and dyes.
   However, it faced a crushing blow between the 13th and 15th centuries,
   when the city was fought over by the Greek Byzantines and the 'French'
   and Italian Crusaders. In 1458 the city fell to the Ottoman Empire
   under Sultan Mehmet II the Conqueror. As the Emperor entered the city,
   he was struck by the beauty of its ancient monuments and issued a
   firman (imperial decree) that Athens' ruins not be disturbed, on pain
   of death. The Parthenon was in fact converted into the city's principal
   mosque and therefore preserved.
   View of Syntagma Square and the acropolis in central Athens.
   Enlarge
   View of Syntagma Square and the acropolis in central Athens.

   Despite the Sultan's good intentions to preserve Athens as a model
   Ottoman provincial capital, the city's population went into decline and
   conditions worsened as the Ottoman Empire declined from the late 17th
   Century. As time went by, the Ottoman administration slackened its care
   for Athens' old buildings; the Parthenon (or Mosque) was used as a
   warehouse for ammunition during the Venetian siege of Athens in 1687,
   and consequently the temple was severely damaged when a Venetian shell
   targeted the site and set off several casks of gunpowder stored inside
   the Parthenon. The Ottoman Empire relinquished control of Athens after
   the Greek War of Independence (1821–1831). The city was inhabited by
   just around 5,000 people at the time it was adopted as the capital of
   the newly established Kingdom of Greece on 18 September 1834. During
   the next few decades the city was rebuilt into a modern city adhering
   mainly to the Neoclassic style. In 1896 Athens became the first host
   city of the revived 1896 Summer Olympics.The next large expansion
   occurred in the 1920s when suburbs were created to house Greek refugees
   from Asia Minor. During World War II the city was occupied by Germany
   and fared badly in the war's later years.
   The statue of Theodoros Kolokotronis in Stadiou Street, central Athens.
   The Old Parliament stands tall behind it.
   Enlarge
   The statue of Theodoros Kolokotronis in Stadiou Street, central Athens.
   The Old Parliament stands tall behind it.

   Athens grew rapidly in the years following World War II until ca.1980
   and suffered from overcrowding and traffic congestion. Greek entry into
   the EEC in 1981 brought massive, unprecedented investment into the city
   along with problems of increasingly worsening industrial congestion and
   air pollution. Throughout the 1990s the city's authorities undertook a
   series of decisive measures in order to combat the smog which used to
   form over the city, particularly during the hottest days of the year.
   Those measures proved to be successful and nowadays smog or nefos in
   Greek is much less of an issue for Athens, even when temperatures soar
   above 40 C. The traffic congestion has also significantly improved in
   recent years. Part of this improvement is attributed both to the
   transformation of the once highly problematic Kiffissos Avenue into a
   modern, 8 lane urban motorway that stretches for more than 11 km along
   the ancient Kifissos River, linking many of Athens' western suburbs,
   from Peristeri to the port of Piraeus and to the construction of the
   Attiki Odos motorway.
   The temple of an Olympian god, Zeus, in central Athens.
   Enlarge
   The temple of an Olympian god, Zeus, in central Athens.

Settings and population

   Zappeion Exhibition Hall and conference centre designed by Theofil
   Hansen
   Enlarge
   Zappeion Exhibition Hall and conference centre designed by Theofil
   Hansen
   The Athens Academy, located in central Athens, was designed by Theofil
   Hansen and completed in 1885. It is flanked by the National Library and
   the University of Athens
   Enlarge
   The Athens Academy, located in central Athens, was designed by Theofil
   Hansen and completed in 1885. It is flanked by the National Library and
   the University of Athens
   The restored stoa of Attalus
   Enlarge
   The restored stoa of Attalus

   Athens sprawls across the central plain of Attica, which is bound by
   Mount Aegaleo in the west, Mount Parnitha in the north, Mount Penteli
   in the northeast, Mount Hymettus in the east, and the Saronic Gulf in
   the southwest. Athens has expanded to cover the entire plain making
   future growth difficult. The geomorphology of Athens causes the
   so-called temperature inversion phenomenon, partly responsible for the
   air pollution problems the city has recently faced. (Los Angeles, with
   similar geomorphology, has similar problems). Along with its numerous
   suburbs, Athens has an official population of about 3.2 million. The
   actual population, however, is believed to be quite higher, because
   during census (taking place once every 10 years) some Athenian
   residents travel back to their birthplaces and register as local
   citizens there. Also unaccounted for are an undefined number of
   unregistered immigrants originating mainly from Albania. Therefore it
   is estimated that the actual figure reaches 3.7 million, representing
   approximately one-third of the total population of Greece. The ancient
   site of the city is centered on the rocky hill of the acropolis. In
   ancient times the port of Piraeus was a separate city, but it has now
   been absorbed into greater Athens. The rapid expansion of the city
   initiated in the 50's and 60's continues today, especially towards the
   East and North East (a tendency that is greatly related to the new
   Eleftherios Venizelos International Airport and Attiki Odos, the
   freeway that cuts across Attica). By this process, Athens has engulfed
   many former suburbs and villages in Attica and continues to do so.

Climate

   Athens enjoys a typical Mediterranean climate, with the greatest
   amounts of precipitation mainly occurring from mid-October to
   mid-April. The rest of the year remains largely rainless, making Athens
   one of the sunniest cities in the European continent. Sheltered by
   mountain barriers from the full force of the western, rain-bearing
   winds, Athens has a semi-arid climate and averages less than 500 mm of
   precipitation annually. Winters are generally mild, with comfortable
   daytime temperatures and cool nights, though light frosts may occur on
   infrequent occasions (it has to be noted however, that northern suburbs
   - that stand at a higher elevation - have a somewhat different
   microclimate, with cooler summers and colder winters with quite heavier
   average snowfall). Winter rainfall tends to occur in the form of short
   and sometimes heavy showers. Snow is relatively rare, although the city
   has experienced its share of blizzard-like conditions. The most recent
   examples include the blizzard of January 2002 as well as that of
   February 2004, all dumping heavy amounts of snow that literally
   blanketed the entire metropolitan area for days. Spring and autumn are
   considered ideal seasons for sightseeing and indeed for all kinds of
   outdoor activities. Summers can be particularly hot and at times prone
   to smog and pollution related conditions (admittedly, however, much
   less so compared to the past). The average summer daytime maximum
   temperature is 32 degrees Celsius (90°F). Heatwaves are not too common
   and mostly happen during the months of July and/or August, when hot air
   masses come to Greece from the south or the southwest. It is only on
   such days that temperature maxima shoot over 38°C. The all time high
   temperature for the metropolitan area of Athens is +45.0°C and was
   measured at the Nea Filadelfia suburb (July 2000, HNMS station); the
   equivalent all time low temperature record is -10.8°C and was measured
   at the Votanikos station. During the severe spell of cold weather, in
   February 2004, temperatures in Greater Athens dropped to -10.1°C at the
   Penteli station of the National Observatory of Athens.
   Vertical panorama of part of central Athens from its Acropolis. In the
   background: the picturesque Anafiotika district and the Lykavittos Hill
   Enlarge
   Vertical panorama of part of central Athens from its Acropolis. In the
   background: the picturesque Anafiotika district and the Lykavittos Hill

Tourist attractions

   Athens has been a popular destination for travellers since antiquity.
   Over the past decade, the infrastructure and social amenities of Athens
   have been radically improved, in part due to the city's successful bid
   to stage the 2004 Olympic Games. The Greek state, aided by the E.U.,
   has poured money into major infrastructure projects such as the new,
   state-of-the-art "Eleftherios Venizelos" International Airport, the
   massive expansion of the Metro system, and the new Attiki Odos
   ring-road. Home to a vast number of 5 and 4 star hotels, the city is
   currently the 6th most visited capital in Europe.
   The historical and luxurious Grande Bretagne hotel in Syntagma Square
   Enlarge
   The historical and luxurious Grande Bretagne hotel in Syntagma Square

   Large parts of the city centre have been redeveloped under a masterplan
   called "Unification of Archaeological Sites of Athens" . Notably, the
   famous Dionysiou Aeropagitou street has been pedestrianised, forming a
   scenic route. The route starts from the Temple of Olympian Zeus at
   Vasilissis Olgas Avenue, continues under the southern slopes of its
   acropolis near Plaka and finishes just outside the temple of Hephaestus
   in Theseum. This route provides the visitors views of the Parthenon and
   the Agora (the meeting point of ancient Athenians), away from the busy
   city centre.

   Syntagma Square (Constitution Square) is situated in central Athens and
   it is the site of the former Royal Palace, now the Greek Parliament and
   other 19th-century public buildings. The National Garden behind the
   Parliament and stretching to the Zappeion is a verdant oasis in the
   centre city. Syntagma is the largest square of the city and it is also
   home to a number of luxurious hotels, including the historic Grande
   Bretagne, Athens' first hotel. Syntagma is essentially the tourist core
   of the city, being in the centre of an area where most of the famous
   ancient monuments are located, all within a radius of 2 km. [
   The Greek Parliament, located in Syntagma Square
   Enlarge
   The Greek Parliament, located in Syntagma Square
   Changing of the Guard Evzones in front of the Tomb of the Unknown
   Soldier in Syntagma Square
   Enlarge
   Changing of the Guard
   Evzones in front of the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Syntagma Square

   Near Syntagma Square stands the Kallimarmaro Stadium, the place where
   the first modern Olympic Games took place in 1896. It is a replica of
   the ancient Athens Stadium. It is the only major stadium (60,000
   spectators) made entirely of white marble from Penteli, the same as
   that used for the construction of the Parthenon. Athens features a
   number of hills. Lykavittos is one of the tallest hills of the city
   proper that, according to an ancient legend, was actually a boulder
   thrown down from the sky by the Goddess Athena. Located in the city
   centre, near Alexandras Avenue and Vassilissis Sofias Avenue, it offers
   views of sprawling Athens below. On top of it, stands St. George's
   church. Philopappos Hill is yet another famous hill, located just to
   the southwest of Acropolis.
   The Panathinaiko Kallimarmaro Stadium, site of the 1896 Olympic Games.
   Enlarge
   The Panathinaiko Kallimarmaro Stadium, site of the 1896 Olympic Games.

   The city's classical museums include the National Archaeological Museum
   of Athens at Patission Street (which holds the world's greatest
   collection of Greek art), the Benaki Museum in Pireos Street (including
   its new Islamic Art branch) , the Byzantine Museum and the Museum of
   Cycladic Art in the central Kolonaki district (recommended for its
   collection of elegant white metamodern figures, more than 3,000 years
   old) . Most museums were renovated ahead of the 2004 Olympics. A new
   Acropolis Museum is being built in the Makriyanni district according to
   a design by Swiss-French architect Bernard Tschumi. The Athens
   Planetarium , located in Andrea Syngrou Avenue, is considered to be
   among the world's best.
   National Gardens Designed by Amalia, the first Queen of Greece, it is
   an oasis in Central Athens
   Enlarge
   National Gardens
   Designed by Amalia, the first Queen of Greece, it is an oasis in
   Central Athens

   The old campus of the University of Athens, located in the middle
   section of Panepistimiou Street, is one of the finest buildings in the
   city. This combined with the adjacent National Library and the Athens
   Academy form the imposing "Athens Trilogy", built in the mid-19th
   century. However, most of the university's functions have been moved to
   a much larger, modern campus located in the eastern suburb of Zográfou.
   The second most significant academic institution of the city is the
   Athens Polytechnic School (Ethniko Metsovio Politechnio), located in
   Patission Street. More than 20 students were killed inside the School
   in November 17, 1973 during the Athens Polytechnic Uprising against the
   military junta that ruled the nation from April 21, 1967 until July 23,
   1974.
   View of central Athens from its acropolis. In the foreground: The
   Theatre of Herodes Atticus
   Enlarge
   View of central Athens from its acropolis. In the foreground: The
   Theatre of Herodes Atticus

Entertainment, nightlife and shopping

Central Athens

   The mid-section of the popular pedestrianized Ermou (Greek: Ερμου)
   Street in central Athens.
   Enlarge
   The mid-section of the popular pedestrianized Ermou ( Greek: Ερμου)
   Street in central Athens.

   Athens is home to 148 theatrical stages, more than any other European
   city (including the famous ancient Herodes Atticus Theatre, home to the
   Athens Festival , which takes place from May to October each year). In
   addition to a large number of multiplexes, Athens features many
   romantic, open air garden cinemas. Athens also has a vast number of
   music venues including a state of the art music hall known as the
   "Megaron Moussikis" that attracts world-famous artists all year round.
   The Psirri neighbourhood - aka Athens's "meat packing district" -
   features mainstream and trendy bars making it a hotspot for the city,
   and a number of live music restaurants called "rebetadika", after
   rebetiko, a unique kind of music that blossomed in Syros and Athens
   from the 1920's till the 1960's. Rebetiko is admired by many, therefore
   virtually every night rebetadika get crammed by people of all ages that
   will sing, dance and drink wine until dawn. Plaka remains the
   traditional top tourist destination, with many tavernas featuring
   traditional music, but the food, though exceptionally good, is often
   more expensive compared to other parts of the city. Plaka, lying just
   beneath the Acropolis, is famous for its numerous neoclassic buildings,
   making it one of the most scenic districts of Athens.
   Night view of part of central Athens and the port of Piraeus
   Enlarge
   Night view of part of central Athens and the port of Piraeus

   Nearby Monastiraki, on the other hand, is famous for its string of
   small tourist shops as well as its crowded flea market and the tavernas
   that specialize in souvlaki. Another district notably famous for its
   student-crammed, stylish cafés is Theseum, lying just west of
   Monastiraki. Theseum, or Thission is home to the remarkable ancient
   temple of Hephaestus, standing on top of a small hill. The Gazi area,
   one of the latest in full redevelopment, is located around a historic
   gas factory, that has been converted into the Technopolis (Athens's new
   cultural multiplex) for all the family and has a number of expensive
   small clubs, bars and restaurants, as well as Athens's nascent " gay
   village". The relatively recent and rapid redevelopment of these areas
   has brought the - recently relatively forgotten - city centre back into
   the limelight.
   Plaka by night
   Enlarge
   Plaka by night

   The chic Kolonaki area, near Syntagma Square, is full of boutiques
   catering to well-heeled customers by day and bars and luxurious
   restaurants by night. Ermou Street, an approximately 1 km pedestrian
   road connecting Syntagma Square to Monastiraki, has traditionally been
   considered a consumer paradise for both the Athenians and tourists.
   Full of fashion shops and shopping centres featuring most international
   brands, it has become one of the most expensive roads in Europe. Near
   there, the renovated Army Fund building in Panepistimiou Street
   includes the "Attica" department store and several high-class designer
   stores.

Suburbs

   The Athens Metropolitan Area consists of 54 densely populated
   municipalities, sprawling around the city of Athens to virtually all
   directions. According to their geographic location in relation to the
   city of Athens, the suburbs are divided into four zones namely the
   northern suburbs (including Ekali, Nea Erythrea, Agios Stefanos,
   Drosia, Kryoneri, Attica, Kifissia, Maroussi, Pefki, Vrilissia,
   Melissia, Pendeli, Halandri and Filothei), the southern suburbs
   (including Palaio Faliro, Elliniko, Glyfada, Alimos, Voula and the
   southernmost suburb of Vouliagmeni), the eastern suburbs (including
   Zographou, Vyrona, Kaisariani, Cholargos, Papagou and Aghia Paraskevi)
   and the western suburbs (including Peristeri, Ilion, Egaleo, Petroupoli
   and Nikaia). The northern and most of the southern suburbs are
   particularly affluent districts, resided primarily by middle-to-high
   and high incomers. The western suburbs are primarily resided by middle
   incomers with certain few areas resided by middle-to-low incomers and
   still others resided by middle-to-high incomers. Finally the eastern
   suburbs are primarily resided by middle and middle-to-high incomers.
   Highway intersection in the northern suburb of Maroussi. On the left:
   The OTE headquarters.
   Enlarge
   Highway intersection in the northern suburb of Maroussi. On the left:
   The OTE headquarters.

   The Athens coastline, extending from the major commercial port of
   Piraeus to the southernmost suburb of Vouliagmeni for more than 25 km,
   is also connected to the city centre with a tram (which, although
   modern can be slow during rush hours) and it boasts a series of high
   class restaurants, cafes, exciting music venues and modern sports
   facilities. In addition, Athens is packed with trendy and fashionable
   bars and nightclubs that are literally crowded by the city's youth on a
   daily basis. Especially during the summer time, the southern elegant
   suburbs of Glyfada, Voula and Vouliagmeni become home to countless such
   meeting points, situated all along Poseidonos and Alkyonidon Avenues.
   In the winter time, the focus of the nightlife moves up into the city
   centre, in Piraeus as well as across the northern suburbs. In addition,
   "Bournazi" at the western suburb of Peristeri has also become eminent
   for its intense nightlife, becoming a hotspot, mainly for the residents
   of the western Athenian suburbs. In the northern districts, the classy
   suburb of Kifissia hosts a vast number of expensive restaurants, bars
   and cafés. The Mall Athens is a massive, American-style mall, located
   in the affluent northern suburb of Maroussi, that provides a vast
   number of selections.
   The Athens Olympic Stadium; capacity: 76,000.
   Enlarge
   The Athens Olympic Stadium; capacity: 76,000.
   The Athens Olympic Velodrome, designed by Santiago Calatrava.
   Enlarge
   The Athens Olympic Velodrome, designed by Santiago Calatrava.

   Nearby is the entirely new attraction of the massively upgraded main
   Olympic Complex (known by its Greek acronym OAKA). The whole area has
   been redeveloped under designs by the Spanish architect Santiago
   Calatrava with steel arches, landscaped gardens, fountains, futuristic
   passages and a landmark new blue glass roof which was added to the main
   Stadium. A second Olympic complex, next to the sea at the beach of
   Kallithea (Faliron), also boasts futuristic stadiums, shops and an
   elevated esplanade. Work is underway to transform the grounds of the
   old Athens Airport - named Hellinikon - in the southern suburbs into a
   massive landscaped park (considered to be the largest in Europe when
   ready). The major waste management efforts undertaken in the last
   decade (especially the plant built on the small island of Psytalia)
   have made pollution of the Saronic Gulf a thing of the past and now the
   coastal waters of Athens are a haven for swimmers. Athens has some of
   the cleanest and most pristine beaches in Europe. In fact many of
   Athens' elegant southern suburbs (such as Alimos, Palaio Faliro,
   Elliniko, Voula, Vouliagmeni and Vari) host a number of beautiful,
   sandy beaches, most of which are operated by the Greek National Tourism
   Organization . This means that one has to pay a fee in order to get in.
   Nonetheless, this fee is not expensive in most cases and it includes a
   number of related, convenient services like parking facilities,
   cocktail drinks and umbrellas. These beaches are extremely popular in
   the summer by both Athenians and foreign tourists.

   The city is surrounded by four easily accessible mountains (Parnitha
   and Penteli to the north, Hemmettus to the southeast and Egaleo to the
   west). Mount Parnitha, in particular, is the tallest of all (1,453 m)
   and it has been declared a protected National Park. It has tens of
   well-marked paths, gorges, springs, torrents and caves and you may even
   meet deer or bears while exploring its dense forests. Hiking and
   mountain biking in all four mountains have been and still remain
   popular outdoor activities for many Athenians. Casinos operate on both
   Mount Parnitha, some 30 km from downtown Athens (accessible by car or
   cable car) and the nearby town of Loutraki (accessible by car via the
   Athens - Corinth National Highway or the suburban railway).

   The nearby islands of Salamina, Aigina, Poros, Hydra and Spetses are
   also sites of spectacular natural beauty and historical architecture.
   The Athens municipality maintains a site of tourist interest:
   http://www.cityofathens.gr/

The transportation system

   Lower section of busy Patission Avenue in central Athens.
   Enlarge
   Lower section of busy Patission Avenue in central Athens.
   Athens Suburban Railway.
   Enlarge
   Athens Suburban Railway.

   The Athens Mass Transit System is currently one of the most modern and
   efficient systems in Europe. It consists of a large bus fleet, a
   trolley fleet that mainly serves the downtown area, , the Athens Metro
   ,a tram line connecting the southern suburbs to the city centre and the
   Athens Suburban Railway services. It has to be noted, however, that the
   public transportation system is occasionally disrupted by the striking
   of its public employees. The Athens Metro is one of the most impressive
   underground Mass Transit systems in the world. It currently operates
   four lines, three of which are distinguished by the colors used in the
   relevant maps and signs (green, blue and red). The historic Green Line,
   which is the oldest and for the most part runs on the ground, connects
   the port of Piraeus to the northern suburb of Kifissia. It will be
   extended the next years to Drosia. The line is 25 km long and has 24
   stations. The other two lines were constructed mainly during the 1990s
   and the first sections opened in January 2000. They run entirely
   underground. The Blue Line runs from the central Monastiraki district
   to Doukissis Plakentias avenue, in the eastern suburb of Halandri. The
   Blue Line then ascends on ground level and reaches Eleftherios
   Venizelos International Airport, using the Suburban Railway rails. The
   Red Line runs from Aghios Antonios to Aghios Dimitrios. Extensions to
   both lines are under construction, most notably westwards to Egaleo,
   southwards to the Old Hellinikon Airport East Terminal (future
   Metropolitan Park) and eastwards towards the easternmost suburb of
   Aghia Paraskevi. The fourth line is the Athens Suburban Railway (
   Proastiakós) which connects Eleftherios Venizelos International Airport
   to the city of Corinth, 80 km west of Athens, via the central Larissa
   Train Station. The metro network, Suburban Railway not included, has a
   current length of 91 km and it is expected to reach 124 km (72
   stations) by the year 2009. It is managed by three different companies,
   namely ISAP , Attiko Metro (lines 2 & 3) and Proastiakós (line 4).

   The bus service consists of a huge network of lines operated by normal
   buses, electric buses, and natural gas run buses (the largest fleet of
   natural gas run buses in Europe). There are plenty of bus lines serving
   the entire Athens Metropolitan Area.
   Tramway of Athens.
   Enlarge
   Tramway of Athens.

   The tram runs from Syntagma Square to the southwestern suburb of Palaio
   Faliro, where the line splits in two branches. The first branch runs
   all along the Athens coastline towards the southern suburb of Glyfada
   while the other one heads towards the Piraeus district of Neo Faliro.
   Both Syntagma - Palaio Faliro - Neo Faliro and the Syntagma - Glyfada
   lines opened on 19 July 2004. Further extensions are planned towards
   the major commercial port of Piraeus and the southernmost suburb of
   Vouliagmeni.
   Exhibition of archaeological finds that came to light during the
   construction of the project displayed at the Syntagma Metro station.
   Enlarge
   Exhibition of archaeological finds that came to light during the
   construction of the project displayed at the Syntagma Metro station.

   There are many taxis in Athens. They are quite cheap and during rush
   hours it is even considered normal to flag a taxi even when another
   customer is already in (although, formally, this is forbidden); in that
   case, if the one flagging the taxi happens to go to the approximate
   direction as the customer already using it and the customer does not
   mind (seldom if ever is this an issue), he is also allowed in, and each
   one gives the fare they would normally give as if they were the only
   customer.
   Check-in point in the Eleftherios Venizelos International Airport,
   "European Airport of the Year 2004".
   Enlarge
   Check-in point in the Eleftherios Venizelos International Airport,
   "European Airport of the Year 2004".

   Athens is served, since March 2001, by the ultra modern Eleftherios
   Venizelos International Airport located near the town of Spata, in the
   eastern Mesoghia Plain, some 35 km east of Athens. There is an Express
   Bus service connecting the airport to the metro system and 2 express
   bus services connecting the airport to Piraeus port and the city centre
   respectively. Athens is also the hub of the Greek National Railway
   System. Ferries departing from the port of Piraeus connect the city to
   the Greek islands of the Aegean Sea. , westbound to Elefsina]]There are
   two main highways that travel both to the west, towards the city of
   Patra in Peloponessus ( GR-8A, E94) and to the north, towards Greece's
   second largest city, Thessaloniki ( GR-1, E75). In 2001-2004 a ring
   road toll-expressway ( Attiki Odos) was gradually completed, extending
   from the western industrial city of Elefsina all the way to the Athens
   International Airport, after encircling the city from the north. The
   Ymittos Ringroad is a separate section of Attiki Odos connecting the
   eastern suburb of Kaisariani to the northeastern town of Glyka Nera and
   this is where it meets the main part of the ring-road. The total length
   of Attiki Odos is now approximately 70 km.

Municipality

   Arch of Hadrian in central Athens, with the Acropolis seen in the
   background.
   Enlarge
   Arch of Hadrian in central Athens, with the Acropolis seen in the
   background.

   The modern city of Athens consists of what was formerly a
   conglomeration of distinct towns and villages that gradually expanded
   and merged into a single large metropolis; most of this expansion
   occurred during the second half of the 20th century. The Greater Athens
   area is now divided into 54 municipalities, the largest of which being
   the Municipality of Athens or Dimos Athinaion, with a population of
   approximately 750,000 people. The next largest municipalities are the
   Municipality of Piraeus, the Municipality of Peristeri and the
   Municipality of Kallithea. Athens can therefore refer either to the
   entire metropolitan area or to the Municipality of Athens. Each of
   these municipalities has an elected district council and a directly
   elected mayor. Mrs. Dora Bakoyanni of the conservative New Democracy
   party was the Mayor of Athens from 1 January 2003 until 15 February
   2006, when she joined the Greek Cabinet as the Minister of Foreign
   affairs. She was the 76th Mayor of Athens and the first female ever to
   hold the post in the history of the city. She was replaced by Theodoros
   Behrakis. The next municipal elections are scheduled for October 2006.
   Remains of the West Gate of the agora
   Enlarge
   Remains of the West Gate of the agora
   The Karyatides statues of the Erechtheion on its acropolis
   Enlarge
   The Karyatides statues of the Erechtheion on its acropolis

   The Municipality of Athens is divided into seven municipal districts or
   demotika diamerismata. The 7-district division, however, is mainly used
   for administrative purposes. For Athenians the most popular way of
   dividing the city proper is through its neighbourhoods (usually
   referred to as areas in English), each with its own distinct history
   and characteristics. Those include Pagrati, Ambelokipi, Exarhia, Ano
   and Kato (Upper and Lower) Patissia, Ilissia, Ano and Kato Petralona,
   Mets, Koukaki as well as Kypseli, world's second most densely populated
   urban area. For someone unfamiliar with Athens, getting to know these
   neighbourhoods can often come particularly handy in both exploring and
   understanding the city.
   Its acropolis at dusk
   Enlarge
   Its acropolis at dusk

Sister cities

   Athens has the following sister cities:
     * Yerevan, Armenia

     * United States Los Angeles, California, USA
     * United States Chicago, Illinois, USA
     * United States Washington, DC, USA
     * France Paris, France
     * Canada Montreal, Canada

     * Belgrade, Serbia

     * Chile Santiago, Chile
     * Spain Madrid, Spain
     * Cyprus Nicosia, Cyprus
     * Morocco Rabat, Morocco
     * Peru Cusco, Peru
     * Italy Rome, Italy
     * Bulgaria Sofia, Bulgaria
     * Germany Berlin, Germany
     * Russia Moscow, Russia
     * Czech Republic Prague, Czech Republic
     * Romania Bucharest, Romania
     * Poland Warsaw, Poland
     * Ukraine Kiev, Ukraine
     * United States Boston, USA
     * United States Athens, Georgia USA
     * Albania Tirana, Albania
     * Lebanon Beirut, Lebanon
     * Georgia (country) Tbilisi, Georgia
     * People's Republic of China Xi'an, People's Republic of China
     * Spain Barcelona, Spain
     * Italy Genova, Italy
     * Turkey Istanbul, Turkey
     * Slovenia Ljubljana, Slovenia
     * Cuba Havana, Cuba
     * United States Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
     * Palestinian National Authority Bethlehem, Palestinian Territories

Professional sports

   Club Sport Founded League Venue
   AEK Athens Football 1924 Super League Greece Athens Olympic Stadium
   Olympiacos Football 1925 Super League Greece Karaiskaki Stadium
   Panathinaikos Football 1908 Super League Greece Athens Olympic Stadium
   Panionios Football 1890 Super League Greece Nea Smyrni Stadium
   Ionikos Football 1910 Super League Greece Nikaia Stadium
   Atromitos Football 1950 Super League Greece Peristeri Stadium
   Egaleo FC Football 1930 Super League Greece Egaleo Stadium
   Panathinaikos Basketball 1908 A1 Ethniki Athens Olympic Stadium
   Olympiacos Basketball 1925 A1 Ethniki Peace and Friendship Stadium
   AEK Athens Basketball 1924 A1 Ethniki Galatsi Centre
   Panionios Basketball 1890 A1 Ethniki Helliniko Arena
   Maroussi BC Basketball 1970 A1 Ethniki Maroussi Arena
   Spartakos Glyfadas Baseball 1990 National Baseball League Helliniko
   Baseball Centre
   Maroussi 2004 Baseball 1990 National Baseball League Helliniko Baseball
   Centre
   Athinaikos Handball 1927 National Handball League Helliniko Arena
   Athens Rugby Rugby 1990 National Rugby League Athens Olympic Stadium
   Starbucks Rugby Rugby 1983 National Rugby League Athens Olympic Stadium

   Athens is home to some of the most prestigious clubs in Europe.
   Panathinaikos and AEK Athens which are both multisport clubs and
   Olympiacos in Piraeus. It also home to innumerable other clubs some of
   them listed above. Beach volleyball and windsurfing are both very
   popular in the area. Area beaches are popular with surfers, who have
   created their own subculture. Athens has twice played host to the
   summer Olympic Games: in 1896 and in 2004. The 2004 Summer Olympics
   inspired the creation of the Athens Olympic Stadium, which has been
   called one of the best stadiums in the world. The city has also hosted
   the UEFA Champions League final twice, in 1994 and in 2007 . The Athens
   area contains all kinds of terrain, notably the hills and mountains
   rising around the metropolis (it's the only major city in the Europe
   bisected by a mountain range); four mountain ranges extend into city
   boundaries. Thousands of miles of trails crisscross the city and
   neighboring areas, providing exercise and wilderness access on foot,
   bike, or horse. Across the county a great variety of outdoor activities
   are available, such as skiing, rock climbing, gold panning, hang
   gliding, and windsurfing. Numerous outdoor clubs serve these sports,
   including the Athens Chapter of the Sierra Club, which leads over 4,000
   outings annually in the area. Athens also boasts a number of sports
   venues, most noticeably Athens Olympic Stadium and Karaiskaki Stadium,
   a state-of-the-art sports and entertainment complex that also hosts
   concerts and awards shows such as the Arions.

The 2004 Olympic Games

   The olympic flame at the Opening Ceremony.
   Enlarge
   The olympic flame at the Opening Ceremony.

   Athens was awarded the 2004 Summer Olympics on September 5, 1997 in
   Lausanne, Switzerland, after having lost a previous bid to host the
   1996 Summer Olympics, to Atlanta, USA. It would be the second time
   Athens would have the honour of hosting the Olympic Games, the first
   one being in 1896. After the unsuccessful bid of 1990, the 1997 bid was
   radically improved, and also included an appeal to Olympic history. In
   the last round of voting, Athens defeated Rome with 66 votes to 41.
   Prior to this round, the cities of Buenos Aires, Stockholm and Cape
   Town had already been eliminated from competition after having received
   fewer votes. During the first three years of preparations, the
   International Olympic Committee had repeatedly expressed some concerns
   over the status of progress in construction work of some of the new
   Olympic venues. In the year 2000 the Organising Committee's president
   was replaced by Gianna Angelopoulos-Daskalaki, who was the president of
   the Bidding Committee back in 1997. From that point on, preparations
   continued at a highly accelerated, almost frenzied pace. Although the
   heavy cost was criticized, as is usually the case with most Olympic
   cities, Athens was literally transformed into a more functional city
   that enjoys state-of-the-art technology both in transportation and in
   modern urban development. Some of the finest sporting venues in the
   world were created in the city, almost all of which were fully ready on
   schedule. The 2004 Games were adjudged a huge success, as both security
   and organization were exceptionally good and only a few visitors
   reported minor problems, mainly concerning transportation or
   accommodation issues. Essentially, the only notable problem was a
   somewhat sparse attendance of some preliminary events. Eventually,
   however, a total of more than 3.2 million tickets were sold, which was
   higher than any other Olympics with the exception of Sydney (more than
   5 million tickets were sold there in 2000).

Photo Gallery

   Aerial view of portions of central Athens, the port of Piraeus, and
   some of the city's southern suburbs. The Saronic Gulf lies in the
   background.

   The imposing Greek Parliament on Syntagma Square is the former Royal
   Palace.

   View of part of central Athens and some of the city's southern suburbs
   from Lykavittos Hill

Cities nicknamed "Athens"

     * Athens of the East - Madurai, India
     * Athens of the West - Berkeley, California
     * Athens of the South - Nashville, Tennessee
     * Athens of the North - Edinburgh, Scotland
     * Athens of America - Boston, Massachusetts
     * Spree Athens - Berlin, Germany
     * Athens on the Isar - Munich, Germany
     * Athens of Cuba - Matanzas, Cuba
     * Athens of Latin America - Bogotá, Colombia
     * Athens of Finland - Jyväskylä, Finland
     * Serbian Athens - Novi Sad, Serbia
     * Athens of the Bodrog – Sárospatak, Hungary
     * Lusa Athens - Coimbra, Portugal
     * Brazilian Athens - São Luís, Brazil
     * Athens of Minas Gerais - Juiz de Fora, Brazil
     * Sardinian Athens - Nuoro, Sardinia, Italy

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Athens"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
