   #copyright

Autocracy

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Politics and government

   An autocracy is a form of government in which the political power is
   held by a single person.

   The term autocrat is derived from the Greek word autokratôr (lit.
   "self-ruler", "ruler of one's self"). Compare with oligarchy (rule by a
   minority, by a small group) and democracy (rule by the majority, by the
   people).

   Today it is usually seen as synonymous with despot, tyrant and/or
   dictator, though each of these terms originally had a separate and
   distinct meaning (see their respective articles).

   Autocracy is not synonymous with totalitarianism, as this concept was
   precisely forged to distinguish modern regimes that appeared in the
   1930s from traditional dictatorships. It also isn't synonymous with
   military dictatorship, as these often take the form of "collective
   presidencies" (see the South-American juntas). However, an autocracy
   may be totalitarian or be a military dictatorship.

   The term monarchy differs in that it emphasizes the hereditary
   characteristic, though some Slavic monarchs (see tsar) traditionally
   included the title "autocrat" of part of their official styles. The
   actual power of the monarch may be limited. Historically, many monarchs
   ruled autocratically (see absolute monarchy) but eventually their power
   was diminished and dissolved with the introduction of constitutions
   giving the people the power to make decisions for themselves through
   elected bodies of government.

   The autocrat needs some kind of power structure to rule. Only a boss of
   a street gang or a barbarian chieftain can truly rule with only his
   personal charisma and his fighting skills. Most historical autocrats
   depended on their nobles, the military, the priesthood or others, who
   could turn against the ruler and depose or murder him. The true nature
   of a historical autocracy can be difficult to judge.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autocracy"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
