   #copyright

Bamako

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography

   View of Bamako
   Enlarge
   View of Bamako
   Bamako district
   Enlarge
   Bamako district

   Bamako, population 1,690,471 ( 2006), is the capital of Mali, and is
   the biggest city in the country. It is located on the Niger River, near
   the rapids that divide the Upper and Middle Niger Valleys, in the
   southwestern part of the country. Bamako is the nation's administrative
   centre, as well as a river port and a major regional trade centre.
   Manufactures include textiles, processed meat, and metal goods. There
   is commercial fishing on the Niger River. Bamako is located at 12°39′N
   8°0′W.

Overview

   The area of the city has been continuously inhabited since the
   Palaeolithic, but the legendary founding of Bamako occurred in the
   seventeenth century by Seribadian Niaré and Soumba Coulibaly, or Bamba
   Sanago, before its chiefdom passed to Diaoussadian Niaré. The city was
   an important market town and a leading centre of Muslim learning under
   the Mali Empire, but by the 19th century it had declined. In 1883 the
   region was occupied by French troops, and in 1908, Bamako became the
   capital of the French Sudan. Its population has grown rapidly; in 1960
   Bamako's population was approximately 160,000.
   Location of Bamako in Mali
   Enlarge
   Location of Bamako in Mali

   Notable landmarks in Bamako include the National Library of Mali, Tour
   BCEAO, Bamako Grand Mosque and the Pont du Roi Fahd. It is home to
   Mali's largest international airport, Senou International Airport, as
   well as the Dakar-Niger Railway, to Koulikoro in eastern Mali and Dakar
   in Senegal. Attractions include the Mali National Museum, the Muso
   Kunda Museum, the Bamako Regional Museum, Bamako Zoo, the Bamako
   Botanical Gardens and the Point G hill, containing caves with rock
   paintings. Bamako has hosted the biannual photography festival African
   Photography Encounters since 1994.

   In 1988, Bamako was the location of a WHO conference known as the
   Bamako Initiative that helped reshape health policy of Sub-Saharan
   Africa.

   The yearly held Budapest-Bamako rally has the endpoint in Bamako, with
   the Dakar Rally often passing through Bamako.

Quartiers

   Sotramas in Bamako
   Enlarge
   Sotramas in Bamako
     * Hippodrome
     * Niarela
     * Korofina
     * Badalabougou
     * Torokorobougou
     * Bamako Coura
     * Djicoroni
     * Baco Djicoroni (= behind the river)
     * Missira
     * Médina Coura
     * Bankoni
     * Magnambougou

Sister cities

     * France Angers, France (since 1974)
     * Burkina Faso Bobo Dioulasso, Burkina Faso
     * Senegal Dakar, Senegal
     * Germany Leipzig, Germany
     * United States Rochester, USA (since 1975)
     * Brazil Sao Paulo, Brazil

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bamako"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
