   #copyright

Bangladesh

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Asian Countries;
Countries

   SOS Children works in Bangladesh. For more information see SOS Children
   in Bangladesh
   গণপ্রজাতন্ত্রী বাংলাদেশ
   Gônoprojatontri Bangladesh
   People's Republic of Bangladesh

   Flag of Bangladesh Coat of arms of Bangladesh
   Flag               Coat of arms
   Motto: none
   Anthem: Amar Shonar Bangla
   ("My Golden Bengal")
   Location of Bangladesh
   Capital
   (and largest city) Dhaka
   23°42′N 90°22′E
   Official languages Bengali (Bangla)
   Government Parliamentary republic
    - President Iajuddin Ahmed
    - Prime Minister
    - Chief of Caretaker Govt. Iajuddin Ahmed
   Independence from Pakistan
    - Declared March 26, 1971
    - Victory Day December 16, 1971
   Area
    - Total 144,000 km² ( 94th)
   55 622.487 sq mi
    - Water (%) 7.0
   Population
    - 2006 estimate 147,365,352 ( 7th)
    - 2001 census 129,247,233
    - Density 998.6/km² ( 7th)
   2,639/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total $305.9  billion ( 31st)
    - Per capita $2100 ( 141st)
   HDI  (2004) 0.530 (medium) ( 137th)
   Currency Taka ( BDT)
   Time zone BDT ( UTC+6)
    - Summer ( DST) not observed ( UTC+6)
   Internet TLD .bd
   Calling code +880 - SubCodes

   This is a featured article. Click here for more information.

   Bangladesh, officially the People's Republic of Bangladesh, is a
   country in South Asia. It is surrounded by India on all sides except
   for a small border with Myanmar to the far southeast and the Bay of
   Bengal to the south. Together with the Indian state of West Bengal, it
   makes up the ethno-linguistic region of Bengal. The name Bangladesh
   means "Country of Bengal" and is written as বাংলাদেশ and pronounced
   ['baŋlad̪eʃ] in the official Bengali language.

   The borders of Bangladesh were set by the Partition of India in 1947,
   when it became the eastern wing of Pakistan ( East Pakistan), separated
   from the western wing by 1,600  km (1,000 miles). Despite their common
   religion of Islam, the ethnic and linguistic gulf between the two
   wings, compounded by an apathetic government based in West Pakistan,
   resulted in the independence of Bangladesh under the leadership of
   Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in 1971 after the bloody Bangladesh Liberation
   War, in which it was supported by India. The years following
   independence have been marked by political turmoil, with thirteen
   different heads of government, and at least four military coups.

   The population of Bangladesh ranks seventh in the world, but its area
   of approximately 144,000 km² is ranked ninety-fourth, making it one of
   the most densely populated countries in the world, or the most densely
   populated country if small island nations or city-states are not
   included. It is the third largest Muslim-majority nation, but has a
   slightly smaller Muslim population than the Muslim minority in India.
   Geographically dominated by the fertile Ganges-Brahmaputra Delta, the
   country has annual monsoon floods, and cyclones are frequent.
   Bangladesh is one of the founding members of South Asian Association
   for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), BIMSTEC, and a member of the OIC and
   the D-8.

History

   The Shaheed Minar, which commemorates the Language Movement, is a well
   known landmark in Bangladesh
   Enlarge
   The Shaheed Minar, which commemorates the Language Movement, is a well
   known landmark in Bangladesh

   Remnants of civilization in the greater Bengal region date back 4,000
   years, when the region was settled by Dravidian, Tibeto-Burman, and
   Austro-Asiatic peoples. The exact origin of the word Bangla or Bengal
   is unknown, though it is believed to be derived from the
   Dravidian-speaking tribe Bang that settled in the area around the year
   1000 BCE.

   After the arrival of Indo-Aryans, the kingdom of Gangaridai was formed
   from at least the 7th century BCE, which later united with Bihar under
   the Magadha and Maurya Empires. Bengal was later part of the Gupta
   Empire from the 3rd to the 6th centuries CE. After its collapse, a
   dynamic Bengali named Shashanka founded an impressive yet short-lived
   kingdom. After a period of anarchy, the Buddhist Pala dynasty ruled the
   region for four hundred years, followed by a shorter reign of the Hindu
   Sena dynasty. Islam was introduced to Bengal in the twelfth century by
   Sufi missionaries, and subsequent Muslim conquests helped spread Islam
   throughout the region. Bakhtiar Khilji, a Turkish general, defeated
   Lakshman Sen of the Sena dynasty and conquered large parts of Bengal.
   The region was ruled by dynasties of Sultans and feudal lords for the
   next few hundred years. By the sixteenth century, the Mughal Empire
   controlled Bengal, and Dhaka became an important provincial centre of
   Mughal administration.

   European traders arrived late in the 15th century, and their influence
   grew until the British East India Company gained control of Bengal
   following the Battle of Plassey in 1757. The bloody rebellion of 1857,
   known as the Sepoy Mutiny, resulted in transfer of authority to the
   crown, with a British viceroy running the administration (Baxter,
   pp.30—32). During colonial rule, famine racked the Indian subcontinent
   many times, including the Great Bengal famine of 1943 that claimed 3
   million lives.

   Between 1905 and 1911, an abortive attempt was made to divide the
   province of Bengal into two zones, with Dhaka being the capital of the
   eastern zone. (Baxter, pp. 39—40) When India was partitioned in 1947,
   Bengal was partitioned along religious lines, with the western part
   going to India and the eastern part joining Pakistan as a province
   called East Bengal (later renamed East Pakistan), with its capital at
   Dhaka.

   In 1950, land reform was accomplished in East Bengal with the
   abolishment of the feudal zamindari system. (Baxter, p. 72) However,
   despite the economic and demographic weight of the east, Pakistan's
   government and military were largely dominated by the upper classes
   from the west. The Language Movement of 1952 was the first sign of
   friction between the two wings of Pakistan. (Baxter, pp. 62—63)
   Dissatisfaction with the central government over economic and cultural
   issues continued to rise through the next decade, during which the
   Awami League emerged as the political voice of the Bengali-speaking
   population. It agitated for autonomy in the 1960s, and in 1966, its
   president Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was jailed; he was released in 1969
   after an unprecedented popular uprising.
   Bangladesh - also showing road and rail lines.
   Enlarge
   Bangladesh - also showing road and rail lines.

   In 1970, a massive cyclone devastated the coast of East Pakistan, and
   the central government responded poorly. The Bengali population's anger
   was compounded when Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, whose Awami League won a
   majority in Parliament in the 1970 elections, (Baxter, pp. 78—79) was
   blocked from taking office. After staging compromise talks with Mujib,
   President Yahya Khan arrested him on the night of March 25, 1971, and
   launched Operation Searchlight, a sustained military assault on East
   Pakistan. Yahya's methods were extremely bloody, and the violence of
   the war resulted in many civilian deaths. Chief targets included
   intellectuals and Hindus, and about ten million refugees fled to
   neighbouring India. (LaPorte, p. 103) Estimates of those massacred
   range from three hundred thousand to 3 million. Most of the Awami
   League leaders fled and set up a government-in-exile in Calcutta,
   India. The Bangladesh Liberation War lasted for 9 months. The guerrilla
   Mukti Bahini and Bengali regulars eventually received support from the
   Indian Armed Forces in December 1971. Major Ziaur Rahman declared the
   independence of the country over radio. Under the command of Lt.
   General J.S. Arora, the Indian Army achieved a decisive victory over
   Pakistan on 16 December 1971, taking over 90,000 prisoners of war in
   the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971.

   After its independence, Bangladesh became a parliamentary democracy,
   with Mujib as the Prime Minister. In the 1973 parliamentary elections,
   the Awami League gained an absolute majority. A nationwide famine
   occurred during 1973 and 1974, and in early 1975, Mujib initiated a
   one-party socialist rule with his newly formed BAKSAL. On August 15,
   1975, Mujib and his family were assassinated by mid-level military
   officers.

   A series of bloody coups and counter-coups in the following three
   months culminated in the ascent to power of General Ziaur Rahman, who
   reinstated multi-party politics and founded the Bangladesh Nationalist
   Party (BNP). Zia's rule ended when he was assassinated in 1981 by
   elements of the military. Bangladesh's next major ruler was General
   Hossain Mohammad Ershad, who gained power in a bloodless coup in 1982
   and ruled until 1990, when he was ousted in a popular uprising. Since
   then, Bangladesh has reverted to a parliamentary democracy. Zia's
   widow, Khaleda Zia, led the BNP to parliamentary victories in 1991 and
   2001 and was Prime Minister from 1991 to 1996 and again from 2001 to
   end of 2006. At the present, the caretaker government is in power and
   after a successful election the new government will be formed. Sheikh
   Hasina, one of Mujib's surviving daughters and the head of the Awami
   League, was in power from 1996 to 2001. Although Bangladesh enjoys the
   distinction of having two female politicians leading national politics,
   it continues to suffer from extensive corruption, disorder and
   political violence.

Government and politics

   CAPTION: National symbols of Bangladesh

   Anthem   Amar Shonar Bangla
   Animal   Royal Bengal Tiger
   Bird     Oriental Magpie Robin
   Fish     Hilsa
   Flower   White Water Lily
   Fruit    Jackfruit
   Sport    Kabadi
   Calendar Bengali calendar
   Jatiyo Sangshad Bhaban houses the Parliament of Bangladesh
   Enlarge
   Jatiyo Sangshad Bhaban houses the Parliament of Bangladesh

   Bangladesh is a parliamentary democracy. The President is the head of
   state, a largely ceremonial post. The real power is held by the Prime
   Minister, who is the head of government. The president is elected by
   the legislature every five years and has normally limited powers that
   are substantially expanded during the tenure of a caretaker government,
   mainly in controlling the transition to a new government. Bangladesh
   has instituted a unique system of transfer of power; at the end of the
   tenure of a government, power is handed over to members of a civil
   society for three months, who run the general elections and transfer
   the power to elected representatives. This system was first practiced
   in 1991 and institutionalized in 1996 as the 13th amendment to the
   constitution.

   The prime minister is ceremonially appointed by the president and must
   be a member of parliament ( MP), commanding the confidence of the
   majority of the MPs. The cabinet is composed of ministers selected by
   the prime minister and appointed by the president. The unicameral
   parliament is the 300-members House of the Nation or Jatiyo Sangshad,
   elected by popular vote from single-member constituencies for five-year
   terms of office. There is universal suffrage for all citizens from the
   age of 18.

   The Constitution of Bangladesh was written in 1972 and has undergone
   thirteen amendments. The highest judiciary body is the Supreme Court,
   whose Chief Justices and other judges are appointed by the President.
   The Judiciary is not separate from the administration, which has caused
   much commotion in recent years. Laws are loosely based on English
   common law, but family laws such as marriage and inheritance are based
   on religious scripts, and hence differ from one religious community to
   another.

   The two major parties in Bangladesh are the Bangladesh Nationalist
   Party (BNP) and Bangladesh Awami League. BNP finds its allies among
   Islamist parties like Jamaat-e-Islami Bangladesh and Islami Oikya Jot,
   while Awami League aligns with leftist and secularist parties. Another
   important player is the Jatiya Party, headed by former military ruler
   Ershad. The Awami League-BNP rivalry has been bitter and punctuated by
   protests, violence and murder. Student politics is particularly strong
   in Bangladesh, a legacy from the liberation movement era. Almost all
   parties have highly active student wings, and students have been
   elected to the Parliament.

   Two radical Islamist parties, Jagrata Muslim Janata Bangladesh (JMJB)
   and Jama'atul Mujahideen Bangladesh (JMB), were banned in February
   2005. Bomb attacks taking place since 1999 have been blamed on those
   groups, and hundreds of suspected members have been detained in
   numerous security operations, including the head the of those two
   parties in 2006. The first recorded case of a suicide bomb attack in
   Bangladesh took place in November 2005.

Subdivisions

   The six administrative divisions of Bangladesh
   Enlarge
   The six administrative divisions of Bangladesh

   Bangladesh is divided into six administrative divisions, each named
   after their respective divisional headquarters: Barisal (বরিশাল),
   Chittagong (চট্টগ্রাম), Dhaka (ঢাকা), Khulna (খুলনা), Rajshahi
   (রাজশাহী), and Sylhet (সিলেট).

   Divisions are subdivided into administrative units known as zila, or
   districts. There are 64 districts in Bangladesh, with each district
   further subdivided into thana, or police stations (formerly called
   upa-zila or sub-districts). The area within each police station, except
   for those in metropolitan areas, is divided into several unions, with
   each union consisting of multiple villages. In the metropolitan areas,
   police stations are divided into wards, which are further divided into
   mahallas. There are no elected officials at the divisional, district or
   thana levels, and the administration is composed only of government
   officials. Direct elections are held for each union (or ward), electing
   a chairperson and a number of members. In 1997, a parliamentary act was
   passed to reserve 3 seats (out of 12) in every union for female
   candidates.

   Dhaka is the capital and largest city of Bangladesh. Other major cities
   include Chittagong, Khulna, Rajshahi, Barisal and Sylhet. These
   metropolitan cities have mayoral elections, while other municipalities
   elect a chairperson. Mayors and chairpersons are elected for a span of
   five years.

Geography and climate

   Satellite image presenting physical features of Bangladesh
   Enlarge
   Satellite image presenting physical features of Bangladesh

   Bangladesh is located in the low-lying Ganges- Brahmaputra River Delta
   or Ganges Delta. This delta is formed by the confluence of the Ganges
   (local name Padma or Pôdda), Brahmaputra ( Jamuna or Jomuna), and
   Meghna rivers and their respective tributaries. The alluvial soil
   deposited by these rivers has created some of the most highly fertile
   plains of the world.

   Most parts of Bangladesh are within 10 metres above the sea level, and
   it is believed that about 10% of the land would be flooded if the sea
   level were to rise by 1 metre. The highest point in Bangladesh is in
   Mowdok range at 1,052  m (3,451  ft) in the Chittagong Hill Tracts to
   the southeast of the country. A major part of the coastline comprises a
   marshy jungle, the Sundarbans, the largest mangrove forest in the world
   and home to diverse flora and fauna, including the Royal Bengal Tiger.
   In 1997, this region was declared endangered.

   Straddling the Tropic of Cancer, Bangladeshi climate is tropical with a
   mild winter from October to March, a hot, humid summer from March to
   June. A warm and humid monsoon season lasts from June to October and
   supplies most of the country's rainfall. Natural calamities, such as
   floods, tropical cyclones, tornadoes, and tidal bores occur almost
   every year, combined with the effects of deforestation, soil
   degradation and erosion. Cox's Bazar, south of the city of Chittagong,
   has a beach that stretches uninterrupted over 120 kilometres (75  mi);
   it is the longest unbroken natural sea beach in the world.

Economy

   Fishermen near the town of Cox's Bazaar in southern Bangladesh. Many
   industries in Bangladesh are still primitive by modern standards.
   Enlarge
   Fishermen near the town of Cox's Bazaar in southern Bangladesh. Many
   industries in Bangladesh are still primitive by modern standards.
   Worker in a paddy, a common scene all over Bangladesh.
   Enlarge
   Worker in a paddy, a common scene all over Bangladesh.

   Despite sustained domestic and international efforts to improve
   economic and demographic prospects, Bangladesh remains an
   underdeveloped and overpopulated nation. The per capita income in 2004
   was a low US$440, and many other economic indicators were less than
   impressive. Yet, as the World Bank notes in its July 2005 Country
   Brief, the country has made impressive progress in human development by
   focusing on increasing literacy, achieving gender parity in schooling,
   and reducing population growth.

   Jute was once the economic engine of the country. Its share of the
   world export market peaked in the Second World War and the late 1940s
   at 80% and even in the early 1970s accounted for 70% of its export
   earnings. However, polypropylene products began to substitute jute
   products worldwide and the jute industry started to slow down.
   Bangladesh grows significant quantities of rice, tea and mustard.
   Although two-thirds of Bangladeshis are farmers, more than three
   quarters of Bangladesh’s export earnings come from the garment
   industry, which began attracting foreign investors in the 1980s due to
   cheap labour and low conversion cost. In 2002, the industry exported
   US$5 billion worth of products. The industry now employs more than 3
   million workers, 90% of whom are women. A large part of foreign
   currency earnings also comes from the remittances sent by expatriates
   living in other countries.

   Obstacles to growth include frequent cyclones and floods, inefficient
   state-owned enterprises, mismanaged port facilities, a growth in the
   labour force that has outpaced jobs, inefficient use of energy
   resources (such as natural gas), insufficient power supplies, slow
   implementation of economic reforms, political infighting and
   corruption. According to the World Bank's July 2005 Country Brief:
   "Among Bangladesh’s most significant obstacles to growth are poor
   governance and weak public institutions."

   Since 1990, the country has achieved an average annual growth rate of
   5% according to the World Bank, despite the hurdles. The middle class
   and the consumer industry have seen some growth. In December 2005, four
   years after its report on the emerging " BRIC" economies (Brazil,
   Russia, India, and China), Goldman Sachs named Bangladesh one of the
   "Next Eleven," along with Egypt, Indonesia, Pakistan and several other
   countries. Bangladesh has seen a sharp increase in foreign direct
   investment. A number of multinational corporations, including Unocal
   Corporation and Tata, have made major investments, the natural gas
   sector being a priority. In December 2005, the Central Bank of
   Bangladesh projected GDP growth around 6.5%.

   One significant contributor to the development of the economy has been
   the widespread propagation of microcredit by Muhammad Yunus (awarded
   Nobel peace prize in 2006) through the Grameen Bank. By the late 1990s,
   Grameen Bank had 2.3 million members, along with 2.5 million members of
   other similar organizations.

   In order to enhance economic growth the government set up several
   export processing zones to attract foreign investment. These are
   managed by the Bangladesh Export Processing Zone Authority.

Demographics

   Dhaka is one of the fastest-growing cities in the world.
   Enlarge
   Dhaka is one of the fastest-growing cities in the world.

   Recent estimates of Bangladesh's population range from 142 to 147
   million, making it one of the ten most populous countries in the world.
   With a population similar to Russia's confined to an area of 144,000
   square kilometers, it is very densely populated. Bangladesh's
   population growth was among the highest in the world in the 1960s and
   1970s, when the count grew from 50 to 90 million, but with the
   promotion of birth control in the 1980s, the growth rate slowed. The
   total fertility rate is now 3.2, compared with 6.2 three decades ago.
   The population is relatively young, with the 0–25 age group comprising
   60%, while 3% are 65 or older. Life expectancy is 63 years for both
   males and females.

   Bangladesh is ethnically homogeneous, with Bengalis comprising 98% of
   the population. The remainder are mostly Bihari migrants and indigenous
   tribal groups. There are 13 tribal groups located in the Chittagong
   Hill Tracts, the most populous of the tribes are the Chakmas. The
   region has been a source for ethnic tension since the inception of
   Bangladesh. The largest tribal groups outside the Hill Tracts are the
   Santhals and the Garos (Achiks). Human trafficking has been a lingering
   problem in Bangladesh and illegal immigration has remained a cause of
   friction with Myanmar and India.

   The main language, as in West Bengal, is Bangla (Bengali), an
   Indo-Aryan language of Sanskrit origin and has its own script. Bangla
   is the official language of Bangladesh. English is used as second
   language among the middle and upper classes and in higher education.
   Since a President Order in 1987, Bangla is used for all official
   correspondence except foreign ones.

   Two major religions practised in Bangladesh are Islam (88% US State
   Department est. 2005) and Hinduism (11% US State Dept. 2005). Ethnic
   Biharis are predominantly Shia Muslims. Other religious groups include
   Buddhists, Christians, and Animists.

   Health and education levels have recently improved as poverty levels
   have decreased. Nevertheless, Bangladesh remains among the poorest
   nations in the world. Most Bangladeshis are rural, living on
   subsistence farming. Nearly half of the population lives on less than 1
   USD per day. Health problems abound, ranging from surface water
   contamination, to arsenic in the groundwater, and diseases including
   malaria, leptospirosis and dengue. The literacy rate in Bangladesh is
   approximately 41%. There is gender disparity, though, as literacy rates
   are 50% among men and 31% among women, according to a 2004 UNICEF
   estimate. Literacy has gone up due to many programs introduced in the
   country. Among the most successful ones are the Food for education
   (FFE) program introduced in 1993, and a stipend program for women at
   the primary and secondary levels.

Culture

   Intricate design in a Nakshikatha, a traditional stitched quilt
   Enlarge
   Intricate design in a Nakshikatha, a traditional stitched quilt
   Bagerhat Shat Gambuj Masjid (60 dome mosque), built by Khan Jahan Ali
   Enlarge
   Bagerhat Shat Gambuj Masjid (60 dome mosque), built by Khan Jahan Ali
   Ruins of the ancient Buddhist monastery in Mahasthangarh, Bogra
   Enlarge
   Ruins of the ancient Buddhist monastery in Mahasthangarh, Bogra

   A new state for an old nation, Bangladesh has a culture that
   encompasses elements both old and new. The Bangla language boasts a
   rich literary heritage, which Bangladesh shares with the Indian state
   of West Bengal. The earliest literary text in Bangla is the eighth
   century Charyapada. Bangla literature in the medieval age was often
   either religious (e.g. Chandidas), or adaptations from other languages
   (e.g. Alaol). Bangla literature matured in the nineteenth century. Its
   greatest icons are the poets Rabindranath Tagore and Kazi Nazrul Islam.
   Bangladesh also has a long tradition in folk literature, evidenced by
   Maimansingha Gitika, Thakurmar Jhuli or stories related to Gopal Bhar.

   The musical tradition of Bangladesh is lyrics-based (Baniprodhan), with
   minimal instrumental accompaniment. The Baul tradition is a unique
   heritage of Bangla folk music, and there are numerous other musical
   traditions in Bangladesh, which vary from one region to the other.
   Gombhira, Bhatiali, Bhawaiya are a few of the better-known musical
   forms. Folk music of Bengal is often accompanied by the ektara, an
   instrument with only one string. Other instruments include the dotara,
   dhol, flute, and tabla. Bangladesh also has an active heritage in North
   Indian classical music. Similarly, Bangladeshi dance forms draw from
   folk traditions, especially those of the tribal groups, as well as the
   broader Indian dance tradition. Bangladesh produces about 80 films a
   year. Mainstream Hindi films are also quite popular, as are films from
   Kolkata, which has its own thriving Bengali-language movie industry.
   Around 200 dailies are published in Bangladesh, along with more than
   1800 periodicals. However, regular readership is low, nearly about 15%
   of the population. Bangladeshis listen to a variety of local and
   national radio programmes from Bangladesh Betar, as well as Bangla
   services from the BBC and Voice of America. There is a state-controlled
   television channel, but in the last few years, privately owned channels
   have grown considerably.

   The culinary tradition of Bangladesh has close relations to Indian and
   Middle Eastern cuisine as well as having many unique traits. Rice and
   fish are traditional favourites; leading to a common saying that "fish
   and rice make a Bengali" (machhe bhate bangali). Meat Consumption has
   increased with higher production in recent years. Bangladeshis make
   distinctive sweetmeats from milk products; some common ones are
   Rôshogolla, Chômchôm and Kalojam.

   The sari (shaŗi) is by far the most widely worn dress by Bangladeshi
   women. However, the salwar kameez (shaloar kamiz) is also quite
   popular, and in urban areas some women wear Western attire. Among men,
   European dressing has greater acceptance. Men also use the
   kurta-paejama combination, often on religious occasions. The lungi, a
   kind of long skirt, is widely worn by Bangladesh men.

   The two Eids, Eid ul-Fitr and Eid ul-Adha are the largest festivals in
   the Islamic calendar. The day before Eid ul-Fitr is called Chãd Rat
   (the night of the Moon), and is often marked by firecrackers. Other
   Muslim holidays are also observed. Major Hindu festivals are Durga Puja
   and Saraswati Puja. Buddha Purnima, which marks the birth of Gautama
   Buddha, is one of the most important Buddhist festivals while
   Christmas, called Bôŗodin (Great day) in Bangla is celebrated by the
   minority Christian population. The most important secular festival is
   Nôbobôrsho or Bengali New Year, the beginning of the Bengali calendar.
   Other festivities include Nobanno, Poush parbon (festival of Poush) and
   observance of national days like Shohid Dibosh.

   Cricket is one of the most popular sports in Bangladesh. In 2000, the
   Bangladesh cricket team was granted Test cricket status and joined the
   elite league of national teams permitted by the International Cricket
   Council to play test matches. Other popular sports include football
   (soccer), field hockey, tennis, badminton, handball, volleyball, chess,
   carom, and kabadi, a 7-a-side team-sport played without a ball or any
   other equipment, which is the national sport of Bangladesh. The
   Bangladesh Sports Control Board regulates 29 different sporting
   federations.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bangladesh"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
