   #copyright

Banjul

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography

   Location of Banjul in The Gambia
   Enlarge
   Location of Banjul in The Gambia
   Street in Banjul city
   Enlarge
   Street in Banjul city

   Banjul is the capital of the Gambia. The population of the city proper
   is only 34,828 but the total urban area is many times larger with a
   population of 523,589 (2003 census). It is located on St Mary's Island
   (or Banjul Island) where the Gambia River enters the Atlantic Ocean.
   Banjul is located at 13°28' North, 16°36' West (13.4667, -16.60).

History

   In 1816, the British founded Banjul as a trading post and base for
   suppressing the slave trade. It was first named Bathurst after Henry
   Bathurst, the secretary of the British Colonial Office, but was changed
   to Banjul in 1973.
   Arch 22 at the entrance to Banjul
   Enlarge
   Arch 22 at the entrance to Banjul

   On July 22, 1994, Banjul was the scene of a bloodless military coup
   d'etat in which President Dawda Jawara was overthrown and replaced by
   the country's current (and twice reelected) President Yahya Jammeh. To
   commemorate this event, Arch 22 was built as an entrance portal to the
   capital. The gate is 35 metres tall and the centre of an open square.
   It houses a textile museum.

   Attractions in the city include the Gambian National Museum, the Albert
   Market, Banjul State House, Banjul Court House, two cathedrals and
   several major mosques.

Economy

   Banjul is the main urban area of The Gambia and holds the country's
   economic and administrative centre. As the fourth most densely
   populated country in Africa, The Gambia has more than one urban area.
   Peanut processing is the country's principal industry, but bee's wax,
   palm wood, palm oil, and skins and hides are also shipped from its
   port.

   Ferries sail from Banjul to Barra. Banjul International Airport lies
   near the city.

Districts

   Districts of Banjul
   Enlarge
   Districts of Banjul

   Banjul is divided into 2 districts:
     * Banjul
     * Kanifing

Twin town

   Banjul is twinned with Grimsby in the UK and Newark,NJ in the United
   States.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Banjul"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
