   #copyright

Barbary Macaque

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mammals

                 iBarbary Macaque

                             Conservation status

   Vulnerable (VU)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Mammalia
   Order:   Primates
   Family:  Cercopithecidae
   Genus:   Macaca
   Species: M. sylvanus

                                Binomial name

   Macaca sylvanus
   (Linnaeus, 1758)

   The Barbary Macaque (Macaca sylvanus) is a tail-less macaque. Found in
   the Atlas Mountains of Algeria and Morocco with a small, possibly
   introduced, population in Gibraltar, the Barbary Macaque is one of the
   best-known Old World monkey species. Besides humans, they are the only
   primates that live freely in Europe. Although the species is commonly
   referred to as the "Barbary Ape", the Barbary Macaque is a true monkey,
   not an ape.

   It is yellowish-brown to grey with lighter undersides, growing to a
   maximum size of 75 cm (30 in) and 13 kg (29 lb). Its face is a dark
   pink and its tail is vestigial. The front limbs of this monkey are
   longer than its hind limbs. Females are somewhat smaller than males.

   Dwelling in forests of cedar, pine and oak, the Barbary Macaque may
   frequent elevations of 2,100 m (6,900 ft) or more. It is a diurnal
   animal, dividing its time more or less equally between arboreal and
   terrestrial territory. Mostly herbivorous, this monkey feeds on leaves,
   roots, and fruit, but will also eat insects. By day, the Barbary
   Macaque patrols a territory which may span several square kilometers;
   it peacefully co-exists with other primate species, sharing watering
   holes without incident. The Barbary Macaque moves about energetically
   on all fours, occasionally rising erect on its hind limbs to survey for
   threats.

   The Barbary Macaque is a gregarious monkey, forming mixed groups of
   several females and males; the troop of 10 to 30 individuals is
   matriarchal, with its hierarchy determined by lineage to the lead
   female. Unlike other macaques, the males participate in rearing the
   young; much time is spent playing and grooming with them. In this way,
   a strong social bond is formed between a male and his offspring, both
   the male's own and those of others in the troop. This may be a result
   of selectiveness on the part of the females, who seem to prefer highly
   parental males.
   A Barbary Macaque
   Enlarge
   A Barbary Macaque

   The mating season runs from November through March. After a gestation
   period of 147 to 192 days, typically one baby per female is born; twins
   are a rarity. The monkeys reach maturity at 3 to 4 years of age, and
   may live for 20 years or more.

   The habitat of the Barbary Macaque is under threat from increased
   logging activity; they are listed as vulnerable by the IUCN Red List.
   Local farmers see the monkeys as pests worthy of extermination. Once
   common throughout northern Africa and southern Europe, there are
   estimated to be just 1,200 to 2,000 Barbary Macaques left.

   The last population in Europe is that of Gibraltar, which unlike that
   of North Africa is thriving. At present there are some 300 animals in
   five troops occupying the area of the Upper Rock, though occasional
   forays into the town result in monkey mayhem.

   The Gibraltar population was under the care of the British Army from
   1915 to 1991, who carefully controlled a population that initially
   consisted of a single troop. An officer was appointed to supervise
   their welfare, and a food allowance was included in the budget. Births
   were gazetted in true military fashion, and each new arrival was named.
   Following the withdrawal of the British garrison, the government of
   Gibraltar took over responsibility for the monkeys.

   A popular belief holds that as long as Barbary Macaques exist on
   Gibraltar, the territory will remain under British rule; it is said
   that during World War II, Winston Churchill specifically ordered the
   dwindling population to be replenished for this reason.

   Many of the mistaken ideas about human physiology contained in the
   writings of Galen are apparently due to his use of these animals, the
   anthropoid available to him, in dissections. Strong cultural taboos of
   his era prevented his performing any actual dissections of human
   cadavers, even in his role as physician and teacher of physicians.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barbary_Macaque"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
