   #copyright

Basketball

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Sports

   Sara Giauro shoots a three-point shot, FIBA Europe Cup for Women Finals
   2005.
   Enlarge
   Sara Giauro shoots a three-point shot, FIBA Europe Cup for Women Finals
   2005.

   Basketball is a sport in which two teams of five players each try to
   score points on one another by throwing a ball through a hoop (the
   basket) under organized rules.

   Points are scored by passing the ball through the basket from above;
   the team with more points at the end of the game wins. A regular jump
   shot inside the arch is worth two points, beyond the arch is three
   points, and a free throw is one point. The ball can be advanced on the
   court by bouncing it ( dribbling) or passing it between teammates.
   Disruptive physical contact ( foul) is not permitted and there are
   restrictions on how the ball can be handled ( violations).

   Through time, basketball has developed to involve common techniques of
   shooting, passing and dribbling, as well as players' positions, and
   offensive and defensive structures. While competitive basketball is
   carefully regulated, numerous variations of basketball have developed
   for casual play. Basketball is also a popular spectator sport.

   While competitive basketball is primarily an indoor sport, played on a
   basketball court, less regulated variations have become exceedingly
   popular as an outdoor sport among inner city groups.
   Kids playing basketball
   Enlarge
   Kids playing basketball

History

History of basketball

   In early December 1891, Dr. James Naismith, a Canadian physician of
   McGill University and minister on the faculty of a college for YMCA
   professionals (today, Springfield College) in Springfield,
   Massachusetts, USA, sought a vigorous indoor game to keep his students
   occupied and at proper levels of fitness during the long New England
   winters. After rejecting other ideas as either too rough or poorly
   suited to walled-in gymnasiums, he modified a a childhood game titled
   "Duck on a rock" and wrote the basic rules. He nailed a peach basket
   onto the 10-foot (3.05 m) elevated track. In contrast with modern
   basketball nets, this peach basket retained its bottom. Therefore balls
   scored into the basket had to be poked out with a long dowel each time.
   Women's basketball began in 1892 at Smith College when Senda Berenson,
   a physical education teacher, modified Naismith's rules for women. The
   first official basketball game was played in the YMCA gymnasium on
   January 20, 1892 with nine players, on a court just half the size of a
   present-day National Basketball Association (NBA) court. "Basket ball",
   the name suggested by one of Naismith's students, was popular from the
   beginning.

   Basketball's early adherents were dispatched to YMCAs throughout the
   United States, and it quickly spread through the USA and Canada. By
   1896, it was well established at several women's colleges. While the
   YMCA was responsible for initially developing and spreading the game,
   within a decade it discouraged the new sport, as rough play and rowdy
   crowds began to detract from the YMCA's primary mission. However, other
   amateur sports clubs, colleges, and professional clubs quickly filled
   the void. In the years before World War I, the Amateur Athletic Union
   and the Intercollegiate Athletic Association (forerunner of the NCAA)
   vied for control over the rules for the game.

   Basketball was originally played with a soccer ball. The first balls
   made specifically for basketball were brown, and it was only in the
   late 1950s that Tony Hinkle, searching for a ball that would be more
   visible to players and spectators alike, introduced the orange ball
   that is now in common use.

   Dribbling, the bouncing of the ball up and down while moving, was not
   part of the original game except for the "bounce pass" to teammates.
   Passing the ball was the primary means of ball movement. Dribbling was
   eventually introduced but limited by the asymmetric shape of early
   balls. Dribbling only became a major part of the game around the 1950s
   as manufacturing improved the ball shape.

   Basketball, netball, volleyball, and lacrosse are the only ball games
   which have been identified as being invented by North Americans. Other
   ball games, such as baseball and Canadian football, have Commonwealth
   of Nations, European, Asian or African connections.

College basketball and early leagues

   Kent Benson of Indiana University Bloomington takes a hook shot.
   Enlarge
   Kent Benson of Indiana University Bloomington takes a hook shot.

   Naismith and Berenson were instrumental in establishing college
   basketball. Naismith coached at University of Kansas for six years
   before handing the reins to renowned coach Phog Allen. Naismith's
   disciple Amos Alonzo Stagg brought basketball to the University of
   Chicago, while Adolph Rupp, a student of Naismith's at Kansas, enjoyed
   great success as coach at the University of Kentucky. In 1892,
   University of California and Miss Head's School, played the first
   women's inter-institutional game. Berenson's freshmen played the
   sophomore class in the first women's collegiate basketball game at
   Smith College, March 21, 1893. The same year, Mount Holyoke and Sophie
   Newcomb College (coached by Clara Gregory Baer) women began playing
   basketball. By 1895, the game had spread to colleges across the
   country, including Wellesley, Vassar and Bryn Mawr. The first
   intercollegiate women's game was on April 4, 1896. Stanford women
   played Berkeley, 9-on-9, ending in a 2-1 Stanford victory. In 1901,
   colleges, including the University of Chicago, Columbia University,
   Dartmouth College, University of Minnesota, the U.S. Naval Academy, the
   University of Utah and Yale University began sponsoring men's games. By
   1910, frequent injuries on the men's courts prompted President
   Roosevelt to suggest that college basketball form a governing body. And
   the Intercollegiate Athletic Association (IAA) was created.

   Teams abounded from through the 1920s. There were hundreds of men's
   professional basketball teams in towns and cities all over the United
   States and little organization of the professional game. Players jumped
   from team to team and teams played in armories and smoky dance halls.
   Leagues came and went. And barnstorming squads such as the Original
   Celtics and two all African American teams, the New York Renaissance
   Five ("Rens") and (still in existence as of 2006) the Harlem
   Globetrotters played up to two hundred games a year on their national
   tours. Women's basketball was more structured. In 1905, the National
   Women's Basketball Committee's Executive Committee on Basket Ball Rules
   was created by the American Physical Education Association. These rules
   called for six to nine players per team and 11 officials. The
   International Women's Sports Federation (1924) included a women's
   basketball competition. 37 women's high school varsity basketball or
   state tournaments were held by 1925. And in 1926, the Amateur Athletic
   Union backed the first national women's basketball championship,
   complete with men's rules. The first women's AAU All-America team was
   chosen in 1929. Women's industrial leagues sprang up throughout the
   nation, producing famous athletes like Babe Didrikson of the Golden
   Cyclones and the All American Red Heads Team who competed against men's
   teams, using men's rules. By 1938, the women's national championship
   changed from a three-court game to two-court game with six players per
   team. The first men's national championship tournament, the National
   Invitation Tournament (NIT) in New York, was organized in 1938.

   College basketball was rocked by gambling scandals from 1948 to 1951,
   when dozens of players from top teams were implicated in match fixing
   and point shaving. Partially spurred by an association with cheating,
   the NIT lost support to the NCAA national tournament. Today, the NCAA
   men's and women's " March Madness" tournaments are rivaled only by the
   MLB World Series.

U.S. high school basketball

   Before widespread school district consolidation, most United States
   high schools were far smaller than their present day counterparts.
   During the first decades of the 20th century, basketball quickly became
   the ideal interscholastic sport due to its modest equipment and
   personnel requirements. In the days before widespread television
   coverage of professional and college sports, the popularity of high
   school basketball was unrivaled in many parts of America.

   Today virtually every high school in the United States fields a
   basketball team in varsity competition. Baseketball's popularity
   remains high, both in rural areas where they carry the identification
   of the entire community, as well as at some larger schools known for
   their basketball teams where many players go on to participate at
   higher levels of competition after graduation. In the 2003–04 season,
   1,002,797 boys and girls represented their schools in interscholastic
   basketball competition, according to the National Federation of State
   High School Associations. The states of Illinois, Indiana and Kentucky
   are particularly well known for their residents' devotion to high
   school basketball; the critically acclaimed film Hoosiers shows high
   school basketball's depth of meaning to these rural communities. In
   fact, the term " March Madness" was first used to describe the Illinois
   high school basketball tournament.

National Basketball Association

   In 1946, the National Basketball Association was formed, organizing the
   top professional teams and leading to greater popularity of the
   professional game. The first game was played in Toronto, Canada between
   the Toronto Huskies and New York Knickerbockers on November 1, 1946. An
   upstart organization, the American Basketball Association, emerged in
   1967 and briefly threatened the NBA's dominance until the rival leagues
   merged in 1976. Today the NBA is the top professional basketball league
   in the world in terms of popularity, salaries, talent, and level of
   competition.

   The NBA has featured many famous players, including George Mikan, the
   first dominating "big man"; ball-handling wizard Bob Cousy and
   defensive genius Bill Russell of the Boston Celtics; Wilt Chamberlain,
   who originally played for the barnstorming Harlem Globetrotters;
   all-around stars Oscar Robertson and Jerry West; more recent big men
   Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Karl Malone; playmaker John Stockton; Julius
   Erving, pioneer of the slam dunk; and the three players who many credit
   with ushering the professional game to its highest level of popularity:
   Larry Bird, Earvin "Magic" Johnson, and Michael Jordan.

   The NBA-backed Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA) began
   1997. Though it had an insecure opening season, several marquee players
   ( Sheryl Swoopes, Lisa Leslie and Sue Bird among others) helped the
   league's popularity and level of competition. Other professional
   women's basketball leagues in the United States, such as the American
   Basketball League (1996-1998), have folded in part because of the
   popularity of the WNBA.

   In 2001, the NBA formed a developmental league, the NBDL. The league
   currently has 8 teams, but will add 7 more for the 2006-2007 season.

International basketball

   XX. Olympic games Munich 1972 Kresimir Cosic of Yugoslavia vs. Petr
   Novicky of Czechoslovakia
   Enlarge
   XX. Olympic games Munich 1972 Kresimir Cosic of Yugoslavia vs. Petr
   Novicky of Czechoslovakia

   The International Basketball Federation was formed in 1932 by eight
   founding nations: Argentina, Czechoslovakia, Greece, Italy, Latvia,
   Portugal, Romania and Switzerland. At this time, the organization only
   oversaw amateur players. Its acronym, in French, was thus FIBA; the "A"
   standing for amateur.

   Basketball was first included in the Olympic Games in 1936, although a
   demonstration tournament was held in 1904. This competition has usually
   been dominated by the United States, whose team has won all but three
   titles, the first loss in a controversial final game in Munich in 1972
   against the Soviet Union. In 1950 the first FIBA World Championship for
   men was held in Argentina. Three years later, the first FIBA World
   Championship for Women were held in Chile. Women's basketball was added
   to the Olympics in 1976, with teams such as Brazil and Australia
   rivaling the American squads.

   FIBA dropped the distinction between amateur and professional players
   in 1989, and in 1992, professional players played for the first time in
   the Olympic Games. The United States' dominance continued with the
   introduction of their Dream Team. However, with developing programs
   elsewhere, other national teams started to beat the United States. A
   team made entirely of NBA players finished sixth in the 2002 World
   Championships in Indianapolis, behind Yugoslavia, Argentina, Germany,
   New Zealand and Spain. In the 2004 Athens Olympics, the United States
   suffered its first Olympic loss while using professional players,
   falling to Puerto Rico and Lithuania in group games. It eventually won
   the bronze medal defeating Lithuania, finishing behind Argentina and
   Italy. (It should be noted, however, that of the twelve players
   originally selected by the NBA, only Tim Duncan and Allen Iverson chose
   to play; the rest of the team was put together from second and third
   choices.)

   Worldwide, basketball tournaments are held for boys and girls of all
   age levels. The global popularity of the sport is reflected in the
   nationalities represented in the NBA. Players from all over the globe
   can be found in NBA teams. Steve Nash, who won the 2005 and 2006 NBA
   MVP award, is Canadian; Kobe Bryant is an American who spent much of
   his childhood in Italy; Dallas Mavericks superstar Dirk Nowitzki is
   German; All-Star Pau Gasol of the Memphis Grizzlies is from Spain; and
   the San Antonio Spurs feature Tim Duncan of the U.S. Virgin Islands,
   Manu Ginobili of Argentina (like Chicago Bulls player Andrés Nocioni)
   and Tony Parker of France. (Duncan competes for the United States
   internationally, as the Virgin Islands do not field a basketball team
   for international competition.)

   The all-tournament teams at the two most recent FIBA World
   Championships, held in 2002 in Indianapolis and 2006 in Japan,
   demonstrate the globalization of the game equally dramatically. Only
   one member of either team was American, namely Carmelo Anthony in 2006.
   The 2002 team featured Nowitzki, Ginobili, Peja Stojakovic of
   Yugoslavia (now of Serbia), Yao Ming of China, and Pero Cameron of New
   Zealand. Ginobili also made the 2006 team; the other members were
   Anthony, Gasol, his Spanish teammate Jorge Garbajosa and Theodoros
   Papaloukas of Greece. The only players on either team to never have
   joined the NBA are Cameron and Papaloukas.

Rules and regulations

   Measurements and time limits discussed in this section often vary among
   tournaments and organizations; international and NBA rules are used in
   this section.

   The object of the game is to outscore one's opponents by throwing the
   ball through the opponents' basket from above while preventing the
   opponents from doing so on their own. An attempt to score in this way
   is called a shot. A successful shot is worth two points, or three
   points if it is taken from beyond the three-point arc which is 6.25
   meters (20 ft 6 in) from the basket in international games and 23 ft 9
   in (7.24 m) in NBA games.

Playing regulations

   Games are played in four quarters of 10 (international) or 12 minutes
   (NBA). Fifteen minutes are allowed for a half-time break, and two
   minutes are allowed at the other breaks. Overtime periods are five
   minutes long. Teams exchange baskets for the second half. The time
   allowed is actual playing time; the clock is stopped while the play is
   not active. Therefore, games generally take much longer to complete
   than the allotted game time, typically about two hours.

   Five players from each team may be on the court at one time. Teams can
   have up to seven substitutes. Substitutions are unlimited but can only
   be done when play is stopped. Teams also have a coach, who oversees the
   development and strategies of the team, and other team personnel such
   as assistant coaches, managers, statisticians, doctors and trainers.

   For both men's and women's teams, a standard uniform consists of a pair
   of shorts and a jersey with a clearly visible number, unique within the
   team, printed on both the front and back. Players wear high-top
   sneakers that provide extra ankle support. Typically, team names,
   players' names and sometimes sponsors are printed on the uniforms.

   A limited number of time-outs, clock stoppages requested by a coach for
   a short meeting with the players, are allowed. They generally last no
   longer than one minute unless, for televised games, a commercial break
   is needed.

   The game is controlled by the officials consisting of the referee, one
   or two umpires and the table officials. The table officials are
   responsible for keeping track of each teams scoring, timekeeping,
   individual and team fouls, player substitutions, team possession arrow,
   and the shot clock.

Equipment

   Traditional eight-panel basketball
   Enlarge
   Traditional eight-panel basketball
   A diagram of a FIBA basketball court.
   Enlarge
   A diagram of a FIBA basketball court.

   The only essential equipment in basketball is the ball and the court: a
   flat, rectangular surface with baskets at opposite ends. Competitive
   levels require the use of more equipment such as clocks, scoresheets,
   scoreboards, alternating possession arrows, and whistle-operated
   stop-clock systems.

   A regulation basketball court in international games is 28 by 15 meters
   (approx. 92 by 49 ft) and in the NBA is 94 by 50 feet (29 by 15 m).
   Most courts are made of wood. A cast iron basket with net and backboard
   hang over each end of the court. At almost all levels of competition,
   the top of the rim is exactly 10 feet (3.05 m) above the court and 4
   feet (1.2 m) inside the endline. While variation is possible in the
   dimensions of the court and backboard, it is considered important for
   the basket to be the correct height; a rim that is off by but a few
   inches can have an adverse effect on shooting.

Violations

   The ball may be advanced toward the basket by being shot, passed
   between players, thrown, tapped, rolled or dribbled (bouncing the ball
   while running).

   The ball must stay within the court; the last team to touch the ball
   before it travels out of bounds forfeits possession. The ball-handler
   may not move both feet without dribbling, known as traveling, nor may
   he dribble with both hands or catch the ball in between dribbles, a
   violation called double dribbling. A player's hand cannot be under the
   ball while dribbling; doing so is known as carrying the ball. A team,
   once having established ball control in the front half of the court,
   may not return the ball to the backcourt. The ball may not be kicked
   nor struck with the fist. A violation of these rules results in loss of
   possession, or, if committed by the defense, a reset of the shot clock.

   There are limits imposed on the time taken before progressing the ball
   past halfway (8 seconds in international and NBA), before attempting a
   shot (24 seconds), holding the ball while closely guarded (5 seconds),
   and remaining in the restricted area (the lane, or "key") (3 seconds).
   These rules are designed to promote more offense.

   No player may interfere with the basket or ball on its downward flight
   to the basket, or while it is on the rim (or, in the NBA, while it is
   directly above the basket), a violation known as goaltending. If a
   defensive player goaltends, the attempted shot is considered to have
   been successful. If a teammate of the shooter goaltends, the basket is
   cancelled and play continues.

Fouls

   The referee signals that a foul has been committed.
   Enlarge
   The referee signals that a foul has been committed.

   An attempt to unfairly disadvantage an opponent through personal
   contact is illegal and is called a foul. These are most commonly
   committed by defensive players; however, they can be committed by
   offensive players as well. Players who are fouled either receive the
   ball to pass inbounds again, or receive one or more free throws if they
   are fouled in the act of shooting, depending on whether the shot was
   successful. One point is awarded for making a free throw, which is
   attempted from a line 4.5 metres (15 ft) from the basket.

   The referee may use discretion in calling fouls (for example, by
   considering whether an unfair advantage was gained), sometimes making
   fouls controversial calls. The calling of fouls can vary between games,
   leagues and even between referees.

   A player or coach who shows poor sportsmanship, for instance, by
   arguing with a referee or by fighting with another player, can be
   charged with a technical foul. The penalty involves free throws and
   varies between leagues. Repeated incidents can result in
   disqualification. Blatant fouls with excessive contact or that are not
   an attempt to play the ball are called unsportsmanlike fouls (or
   flagrant fouls in the NBA) and incur a harsher penalty; in some rare
   cases a disqualifying foul will require the player to leave the playing
   area.

   If a team surpasses a preset limit of team fouls in a given period
   (quarter or half) – four for international and NBA games – the opposing
   team is awarded one or two free throws on all subsequent fouls for that
   period, the number depending on the league. A player who commits five
   fouls, including technical fouls, in one game (six in some professional
   leagues, including the NBA) is not allowed to participate for the rest
   of the game, and is described as having "fouled out".

Common techniques and practices

Positions and structures

   Basketball positions in the offensive zone
   Enlarge
   Basketball positions in the offensive zone

   Although the rules do not specify any positions whatsoever, they have
   evolved as part of basketball. During the first five decades of
   basketball's evolution, two guards, two forwards, and one centre were
   used. Since the 1980s, more specific positions have evolved, namely:
    1. point guard: organizes the team's offense by controlling the ball
       and making sure that it gets to the right player at the right time
    2. shooting guard: creates a high volume of shots on offense; guards
       the opponent's best perimeter player on defense
    3. small forward: often primarily responsible for scoring points via
       cuts to the basket and dribble penetration; on defense seeks
       rebounds and steals, but sometimes plays more actively
    4. power forward: plays offensively often with his back to the basket;
       on defense, plays under the basket (in a zone defense) or against
       the opposing power forward (in man-to-man defense)
    5. centre: uses size, either to score (on offense) or to protect the
       basket closely (on defense)

   The above descriptions are flexible. On some occasions, teams will
   choose to use a three guard offense, replacing one of the forwards or
   the centre with a third guard. The most commonly interchanged positions
   are point guard and shooting guard, especially if both players have
   good leadership and ball handling skills.

   There are two main defensive strategies: zone defense and man-to-man
   defense. Zone defense involves players in defensive positions guarding
   whichever opponent is in their zone. In man-to-man defense, each
   defensive player guards a specific opponent and tries to prevent him
   from taking action. Variations of these two main structures are also
   used.

   Offensive plays are more varied, normally involving planned passes and
   movement by players without the ball. A quick movement by an offensive
   player without the ball to gain an advantageous position is a cut. A
   legal attempt by an offensive player to stop an opponent from guarding
   a teammate, by standing in the defender's way such that the teammate
   cuts next to him, is a screen or pick. The two plays are combined in
   the pick and roll, in which a player sets a pick and then "rolls" away
   from the pick towards the basket. Screens and cuts are very important
   in offensive plays; these allow the quick passes and teamwork which can
   lead to a successful basket. Teams almost always have several offensive
   plays planned to ensure their movement is not predictable. On court,
   the point guard is usually responsible for indicating which play will
   occur.

   Defensive and offensive structures, and positions, are more emphasized
   in higher levels in basketball; it is these that a coach normally
   requests a time-out to discuss.

Shooting

   Player releases a short jump shot, while her defender is either knocked
   down, or trying to "take a charge."
   Enlarge
   Player releases a short jump shot, while her defender is either knocked
   down, or trying to "take a charge."

   Shooting is the act of attempting to score points throwing the ball
   through the basket. While methods can vary with players and situations,
   the most common technique can be outlined here.

   The player should be positioned facing the basket with feet about
   shoulder-width apart, knees slightly bent, and back straight. The
   player holds the ball to rest in the dominant hand's fingertips (the
   shooting arm) slightly above the head, with the other hand on the side
   of the ball. To aim the ball, the player's elbow should be aligned
   vertically, with the forearm facing in the direction of the basket. The
   ball is shot by bending and extending the knees and extending the
   shooting arm to become straight; the ball rolls off the finger tips
   while the wrist completes a full downward flex motion. When the
   shooting arm is stationary for a moment after the ball released, it is
   known as a follow-through; it is incorporated to maintain accuracy.
   Generally, the non-shooting arm is used only to guide the shot, not to
   power it.

   Players often try to put a steady backspin on the ball to deaden its
   impact with the rim. The ideal trajectory of the shot is somewhat
   arguable, but generally coaches will profess proper arch. Most players
   shoot directly into the basket, but shooters may use the backboard to
   redirect the ball into the basket.

   The two most common shots that use the above described set up are the
   set shot and the jump shot. The set shot is taken from a standing
   position, with neither foot leaving the floor, typically used for free
   throws. The jump shot is taken while in mid-air, near the top of the
   jump. This provides much greater power and range, and it also allows
   the player to elevate over the defender. Failure to release the ball
   before returning the feet to the ground is a traveling violation.

   Another common shot is called the layup. This shot requires the player
   to be in motion toward the basket, and to "lay" the ball "up" and into
   the basket, typically off the backboard (the backboard-free, underhand
   version is called a finger roll). The most crowd-pleasing, and
   typically highest-percentage accuracy shot is the slam dunk, in which
   the player jumps very high, and throws the ball downward, straight
   through the hoop.

   A missed shot that misses the basket completely is referred to as an
   air ball.

   The best shooters combine great dedication, coordination, and
   confidence. Practice is essential to shoot at a high level. Getting
   open is also crucial; at the pro level, top shooters rarely miss when
   given an unguarded look at the basket.

Passing

   A pass is a method of moving the ball between players. Most passes are
   accompanied by a step forward to increase power and are followed
   through with the hands to ensure accuracy.

   A staple pass is the chest pass. The ball is passed directly from the
   passer's chest to the receiver's chest. A proper chest pass involves an
   outward snap of the thumbs to add velocity and leaves the defense
   little time to react.

   Another type of pass is the bounce pass. Here, the passer bounces the
   ball crisply about two-thirds of the way from his own chest to the
   receiver. The ball strikes the court and bounces up toward the
   receiver. The bounce pass takes longer to complete than the chest pass,
   but it is also harder for the opposing team to intercept (kicking the
   ball deliberately is a violation). Thus, players often use the bounce
   pass in crowded moments, or to pass around a defender.

   The overhead pass is used to pass the ball over a defender. The ball is
   released while over the passer's head.

   The outlet pass occurs after a team gets a defensive rebound. The next
   pass after the rebound is the outlet pass.

   The crucial aspect of any good pass is being impossible to intercept.
   Good passers can pass the ball with great accuracy and touch and know
   exactly where each of their teammates like to receive the ball. A
   special way of doing this is passing the ball without looking at the
   receiving teammate. This is called a no-look pass.

Dribbling

   A U.S. Naval Academy ("Navy") player, left, posts up a U.S. Military
   Academy ("Army") defender
   Enlarge
   A U.S. Naval Academy ("Navy") player, left, posts up a U.S. Military
   Academy ("Army") defender

   Dribbling is the act of bouncing the ball continuously, and is a
   requirement for a player to take steps with the ball. To dribble, a
   player pushes the ball down towards the ground rather than patting it;
   this ensures greater control.

   When dribbling past an opponent, the dribbler should dribble with the
   hand farthest from the opponent, making it more difficult for the
   defensive player to get to the ball. It is therefore important for a
   player to be able to dribble competently with both hands.

   Good dribblers (or "ball handlers") tend to bounce the ball low to the
   ground, reducing the travel from the floor to the hand, making it more
   difficult for the defender to "steal" the ball. Additionally, good ball
   handlers frequently dribble behind their backs, between their legs, and
   change hands and directions of the dribble frequently, making a less
   predictable dribbling pattern that is more difficult to defend.

   A skilled player can dribble without watching the ball, using the
   dribbling motion or peripheral vision to keep track of the ball's
   location. By not having to focus on the ball, a player can look for
   teammates or scoring opportunities, as well as avoid the danger of
   someone stealing the ball from them.

Height

   At the professional level, most male players are above 1.90 meters (6
   ft 3 in) and most women above 1.70 meters (5 ft 7 in). Guards, for whom
   physical coordination and ball-handling skills are crucial, tend to be
   the smallest players. Almost all forwards in the men's pro leagues are
   2 meters (6 ft 6 in) or taller. Most centers are over 2.1 meters (6 ft
   10.5 in) tall. The tallest players ever in the NBA, Manute Bol and
   Gheorghe Mureşan, were 2.31 m (7 ft 7 in). The tallest current NBA
   player is Yao Ming, who stands at 2.29 m (7 ft 6 in).

   The shortest player ever to play in the NBA is Muggsy Bogues at 1.60
   meters (5 ft 3 in). Other short players have thrived at the pro level.
   Anthony "Spud" Webb was just 5 feet 7 inches (1.70 m) tall, but had a
   42-inch (1.07 m) vertical leap, giving him significant height when
   jumping. The shortest player in the NBA today is Earl Boykins at 5 feet
   5 inches (1.65 m). While shorter players are often not very good at
   defending against shooting, their ability to navigate quickly through
   crowded areas of the court and steal the ball by reaching low are
   strengths.

Variations and similar games

   Variations of basketball are activities based on the game of
   basketball, using common basketball skills and equipment (primarily the
   ball and basket). Some variations are only superficial rules changes,
   while others are distinct games with varying degrees of basketball
   influences. Other variations include children's games, contests or
   activities meant to help players reinforce skills. Most of the
   variations are played in informal settings without referees or strict
   rules.

   Perhaps the single most common variation is the half court game. Only
   one basket is used, and the ball must be "cleared" - passed or dribbled
   outside the half-court or three-point line - each time possession of
   the ball changes from one team to the other. Half-court games require
   less cardiovascular stamina, since players need not run back and forth
   a full court. Half-court games also raise the number of players that
   can use a court, an important benefit when many players want to play.

   A popular version of the half-court game is 21. Two-point shots count
   as one point and shots from behind the three-point line count two. A
   player who makes a basket is awarded up to three extra free throws,
   worth the usual one point. When a shot is missed, if one of the other
   players tips the ball in while it is in the air, the score of the
   player who missed the shot goes back to zero, or if they have reached
   15, their score goes back to 15. The first player to reach exactly 21
   points wins. If they go over, their score goes back to 15.

   Other variations include streetball and one-on-one; a variation in
   which two players will use only a small section of the court (often no
   more than a quarter of a court) and compete to play the ball into a
   single hoop. Such games tend to emphasize individual dribbling and ball
   stealing skills over shooting and team play.

   Outdoor basketball courts are commonly referred to as "blacktop", a
   reference to the asphalt surface used on many outdoor recreation
   grounds. This term can apply regardless of the actual surface material
   used.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basketball"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
