   #copyright

Basking shark

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Insects, Reptiles and
Fish

                  iBasking shark

                             Conservation status

   Vulnerable (VU)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Animalia
   Phylum:   Chordata
   Class:    Chondrichthyes
   Subclass: Elasmobranchii
   Order:    Lamniformes
   Family:   Cetorhinidae
             Gill, 1862
   Genus:    Cetorhinus
             Blainville, 1816
   Species:  C. maximus

                                Binomial name

   Cetorhinus maximus
   ( Gunnerus, 1765)
   Range (in blue)
   Range (in blue)

   The basking shark, Cetorhinus maximus, is the second largest fish,
   after the whale shark. The basking shark is a cosmopolitan species - it
   is found in all the world's temperate oceans, it is a slow moving and
   generally harmless filter feeder.

   Like other large sharks, basking sharks are at risk of extinction due
   to a combination of low resilience and overfishing through increasing
   demands for the sharks' fins, flesh and organs.

Taxonomy

   This shark is called the basking shark because it is most often
   observed when feeding at the surface and looks like it is basking. It
   is also called bone shark, elephant shark, hoe mother, sun-fish and
   sailfish. It is the only member of the family Cetorhinidae. It was
   first described and named Cetorhinus maximus by Gunnerus in 1765 from a
   specimen found in Norway. The genus name Cetorhinus comes from the
   greek, ketos which means marine monster or whale and rhinos meaning
   nose, the species name maximus is from Latin and means "great". It was
   later described as Squalus isodus by Macri in 1819, Squalus elephas by
   Lesueur in 1822 Squalus rashleighanus by Couch in 1838, Squalus
   cetaceus by Gronow in 1854, Cetorhinus blainvillei by Capello in 1869,
   Selachus pennantii by Cornish in 1885, Cetorhinus maximus infanuncula
   by Deinse & Adriani 1953 and finally as Cetorhinus maximus normani by
   Siccardi 1961.

Distribution and habitat

   The basking shark is a coastal-pelagic shark found worldwide in boreal
   to warm-temperate waters around the continental shelves. It prefers
   waters between 8 and 14° C (46 and 57° F). It is often seen close to
   land and will enter enclosed bays. The shark will follow concentrations
   of plankton in the water column and is therefore often visible on the
   surface. They are a highly migratory species leading to seasonal
   appearances in certain areas of the range.

Anatomy and appearance

   Head of a basking shark.
   Enlarge
   Head of a basking shark.

   The basking shark is one of the largest known sharks, second only to
   the whale shark. The largest specimen accurately measured was trapped
   in a herring net in the Bay of Fundy, Canada in 1851. Its total length
   was 12.27 metres (40 ft 3 in), and weighed an estimated 16 tons. There
   are reports from Norway of three basking sharks over 12 m (the largest
   being 13.7 m), but those are considered dubious since few if any sharks
   anywhere near such size have been caught in the area since. Normally
   the basking shark reaches a length of between 6 metres (20 feet) and a
   little over 8 m (28 ft). Some specimens surpass 9 or even 10 m, but
   after years of hard fishing, specimens of this size have become
   exceedingly rare. These sharks possess the typical lamniform body plan
   and have been mistaken for great white sharks. The two species can be
   easily distinguished, however, by the basking shark's cavernous jaw (up
   to 1 m in width, held wide open whilst feeding), longer and more
   obvious gill slits (which nearly encircle the head and are accompanied
   by well-developed gill raker), smaller eyes, and smaller average girth.
   Great whites possess large, dagger-like teeth, whilst those of the
   basking shark are much smaller (5–6 mm) and hooked; only the first 3–4
   rows of the upper jaw and 6–7 rows of the lower jaw are functional.
   There are also several behavioural differences between the two (see
   Behaviour).

   Other distinctive characteristics of the basking shark include a
   strongly keeled caudal peduncle, highly textured skin covered in
   placoid scales and a layer of mucus, a pointed snout (which is
   distinctly hooked in younger specimens), and a lunate caudal fin. In
   large individuals the dorsal may flop over when above the surface.
   Coloration is highly variable (and likely dependent on observation
   conditions and the condition of the animal itself): commonly, the
   coloring is dark brown to black or blue dorsally fading to a dull white
   ventrally. The sharks are often noticeably scarred, possibly through
   encounters with lampreys or cookiecutter sharks. The basking shark's
   liver, which may account for 25% of the its body weight, runs the
   entire length of the abdominal cavity and is thought to play a role in
   buoyancy regulation and long-term energy storage.

   In females, only the right ovary appears to be functional: if so, this
   is a unique characteristic among sharks.

Diet

   The basking shark is a passive filter feeder, eating zooplankton, small
   fish and invertebrates from the water at a rate of up to 2,000 tons of
   water per hour. Unlike the megamouth shark and whale shark, basking
   sharks do not appear to actively seek their quarry, but do possess
   large olfactory bulbs that may guide them in the right direction.
   Contrary to the other large filter feeders it relies only on the water
   that is pushed through the gills by swimming while the megamouth shark
   and whale shark can suck or pump water through its gills.

Behaviour

   Male basking shark
   Enlarge
   Male basking shark

   Although basking sharks are often sighted close to land and in enclosed
   bays during warmer months, they are highly migratory and seem to
   disappear entirely during autumn and winter (when the plankton is
   scarce at the surface). During this time they remain at the bottom in
   deep water where it is hypothisized they may hibernate and lose their
   gill rakers.

   They feed at or close to the surface with their mouths wide open and
   gill rakers erect. They are slow-moving sharks (feeding at about 2
   knots) and do not attempt to evade approaching boats (unlike great
   whites). They are harmless to humans if left alone and will not be
   attracted to chum.

   Basking sharks are social animals and form schools segregated by sex,
   usually in small numbers (3–4) but reportedly up to 100 individuals.
   Their social behaviour is thought to follow visual cues, as although
   the basking shark's eyes are small, they are fully developed; the
   sharks have been known to visually inspect boats, possibly mistaking
   them for conspecifics. Females are thought to seek out shallow water to
   give birth.

   These sharks have few predators, but orcas, tiger sharks are known to
   feed on them, and the aforementioned lampreys are often seen attached
   to them, although it is unlikely that they are able to cut through the
   shark's thick skin.

   Even though the basking shark is large and slow it can breach the
   surface and has been reported jumping fully out of the water. This
   behaviour could be an attempt to dislodge parasites or comensals. There
   are doubts as to the accuracy of these observations - since the basking
   shark has a recorded top swimming speed of 4 mph and has not been
   observed to jump under the stress of harpooning.

Reproduction

   Basking sharks are ovoviviparous: the developing embryos first rely on
   a yolk sac, and as there is no placental connection, they later feed on
   unfertilized ova produced by the mother (a behaviour known as oophagy).
   Gestation is thought to span over a year (but perhaps 2 or 3 years),
   with a small though unknown number of young born fully developed at
   1.5–2 m (5–6.5 ft). Only one pregnant female is known to have been
   caught; it was carrying 6 unborn young. Mating is thought to occur in
   early summer and birthing in late summer, following the female's
   movement into shallow coastal waters.

   The onset of maturity in basking sharks is not known but is thought to
   be between the age of 6 and 13 and at a length of between 4.6 and 6 m.
   Breeding frequency is also unknown, but is thought to be 2 to 4 years.

   The seemingly useless teeth of basking sharks may play a role in
   courtship behaviour, possibly as a means for the male to keep hold of
   the female during mating.

Importance to humans

   Historically, the basking shark has been a staple of fisheries because
   of its slow swimming speed, unaggressive nature and previously abundant
   numbers. Commercially it was put to many uses: the flesh for food and
   fishmeal, the hide for leather, and its large liver (which has a high
   squalene content) for oil. It is currently fished mainly for its fins
   (for shark fin soup). Parts (such as cartilage) are also used in
   traditional Chinese medicine and as an aphrodisiac in Japan, further
   adding to demand.

   As a result of rapidly declining numbers, the basking shark has been
   protected and trade in its products restricted in many countries. It is
   fully protected in the UK, Malta, Florida and US Gulf and Atlantic
   waters. Targeted fishing for basking sharks is illegal in New Zealand.

   It is tolerant of boats and divers approaching it and may even circle
   divers, making it an important draw for dive tourism in areas where it
   is common.

Basking sharks and cryptozoology

   The "wonderful fish" described in Harper's Weekly on October 24, 1868.
   It is likely this was the remains of a basking shark.
   Enlarge
   The "wonderful fish" described in Harper's Weekly on October 24, 1868.
   It is likely this was the remains of a basking shark.

   On several occasions corpses initially thought to be sea serpents or
   plesiosaurs, have later been identified as mostly likely to be the
   decomposing carcasses of basking sharks, as for example in the Stronsay
   beast and the Zuiyo Maru cases.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basking_shark"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
