   #copyright

Bass (fish)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Insects, Reptiles and
Fish

   Striped bass (Morone saxatilis)
   Enlarge
   Striped bass (Morone saxatilis)
   Largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides)
   Enlarge
   Largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides)

   Bass ( IPA /bæs/) is a name shared by many different species of popular
   game fish. The term encompasses both freshwater and marine species,
   many of which are native to North America and surrounding waters. All
   belong to the large order Perciformes, or perch-like fishes, and in
   fact the word bass comes from Middle English bars, meaning "perch."Bass
   can measure up to 80 cm (although expetional 100 cm long bass have been
   recorded)

   These are some of the most well-known species of bass:
     * The temperate basses, such as the striped bass (Morone saxatilis)
       and white bass (M. chrysops), belonging to the family Moronidae.
     * The warm water basses, such as the largemouth bass (Micropterus
       salmoides), smallmouth bass (M. dolomieu), spotted bass (M.
       punctulatus), Guadalupe bass (M. treculii) and rock bass
       (Ambloplites rupestris), belonging to the sunfish family,
       Centrarchidae. These basses are also referred to as black basses. .

   Large mouth bass can usually be found around structures. Such as logs
   submerged in the water, or rocks. The largemouth is known to be one of
   the best "fighters" and a ferocious predator attacking just about
   anything that moves. Largemouth have even been know to eat ducklings
   and baby alligators. The world record largemouth bass was caught near
   Jacksonville, Georgia on June 2, 1932 by George Perry. It weighed 22
   pounds 4 ounces and was caught from an oxbow lake off the Ocmulgee
   River called Montgomery Lake. This is one of the most sough-after
   records in the fishing world.

   Many other species are also known as basses, including:
     * The Australian bass, Macquaria novemaculeata, a member of the perch
       family, Percichthyidae.
     * The black sea bass, Centropristis striata, a member of the family
       Serranidae.
     * The giant sea bass Stereolepis gigas, also known as the black sea
       bass, a member of the family Polyprionidae.
     * The Chilean sea bass, Dissostichus eleginoides, more commonly known
       as the Patagonian toothfish.
     * The European seabass, Dicentrarchus labrax.

   Bass is also known as:

   Robalo (Portuguese) Lubina (Spanish) Bar, Loup (French) Zeebaars
   (Dutch) Seebarch (German) Havsaborre (Swedish)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bass_%28fish%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
