   #copyright

Basset Hound

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mammals

               Basset Hound
   Red and white Basset
   Enlarge
   Red and white Basset
             Country of origin
   France
    Classification and breed standards
     FCI:   Group 6 Section 1 #163 Stds
     AKC:   Hound                  Stds
    ANKC:   Group 4 (Hounds)       Stds
     CKC:   Group 2 - Hounds       Stds
   KC (UK): Hound                  Stds
    NZKC:   Hounds                 Stds
     UKC:   Scenthound             Stds

   The Basset Hound is a short-legged breed of dog of the hound family.
   They are scent hounds, bred to hunt by scent. Their sense of smell for
   tracking is second only to that of the Bloodhound. The name Basset
   derives from the French word "bas" meaning "low;" "basset" meaning,
   literally, "rather low."

Appearance

   Basset hounds commonly have large, outward-pointing feet, as seen in
   this typical specimen from Illinois
   Enlarge
   Basset hounds commonly have large, outward-pointing feet, as seen in
   this typical specimen from Illinois

   These dogs are around 33 to 38 cm (13 to 15 inches) in height at the
   withers. They usually weigh between twenty and thirty kg (45 and 65
   lb). They have smooth, short-haired coats. Although any hound colour is
   considered acceptable by breed standards, Bassets are generally
   tricolor (black, tan, and white), open red and white (red spots on
   white fur), closed red and white (a solid red color with white feet and
   tails), and lemon and white. Some Bassets are also classified as grey,
   or blue, however this colour is considered rare and undesirable.

   They have long, low-set ears and powerful necks, with much loose skin
   around their heads that forms wrinkles. Their tails are long and
   tapering and stand upright with a curve. The tail should also be tipped
   in white. This is so they are easily seen when hunting/tracking through
   large brush or weeds. The breed is also known for its hanging skin
   structure, which causes the face to have a permanently sad look; this,
   for many people, adds to the breed's charm. The dewlap, seen as the
   loose, elastic skin around the neck and the trailing ears help trap the
   scent of what they are tracking.

   The Basset Hound is a large dog on short legs. They were originally
   bred by the French to have achondroplasia, known as dwarfism. Their
   short stature can be deceiving: Bassets are surprisingly long and can
   reach things on table tops that dogs of similar heights cannot.

Temperament

   The basset hound is known for its comical mannerisms and gentle
   disposition.
   Enlarge
   The basset hound is known for its comical mannerisms and gentle
   disposition.

   The Basset Hound is a very calm and companionable breed. They are an
   especially loyal breed known for their pleasant disposition and
   emotional sensitivity. Around strangers, Bassets are friendly and
   welcome the opportunity to make new friends. For this reason they are
   an excellent pet for families with children and other pets. In fact, it
   is recommended that since Bassets are "pack" animals, if the Basset
   must be left alone on a daily basis during the daytime while the family
   is away, a second pet in the family will keep a Basset out of
   "trouble". Bassets hate to be alone.

   While Bassets love food and may be less energetic than some breeds,
   they will exercise regularly if given the chance. Most Bassets enjoy
   activities that use their natural endurance, like long walks or hikes.
   They also enjoy tracking games that let them use their powerful nose.

   Like other hounds, Basset Hounds are often difficult to obedience
   train. Many Basset Hounds will obey commands when offered a food
   reward, but will "forget" the training when a reward is not present.
   Bassets are notoriously difficult to housebreak. Training and
   housebreaking are not impossible, however, and can be accomplished with
   consistency and patience on the part of the owner.

   The breed has a strong hunting instinct and will give chase or follow a
   scent if given the opportunity. They should be trained in recall;
   failing that, they should be kept on a leash when out on walks.

   Bassets might howl or bay rather than bark when they want something or
   to suggest that they think something is wrong. They also use a low,
   murmuring whine to get attention, which sounds to many owners as though
   their Bassets are "talking."

History

   Basset Hounds are an aristocratic breed of French lineage, a descendant
   of the St. Hubert's Hound, a dog similar to the present-day Bloodhound.
   Friars of St. Hubert's Abbey in medieval France desired a
   shorter-legged dog, capable of following a scent under brush in thick
   forests, as hunting was a classic sport of the time. Both Bassets and
   St. Hubert's Hounds were bred to trail, not kill, their game. Bassets
   were originally used to hunt rabbits and hare. The first application of
   the word "Basset" to a breed of dog can be traced to an illustrated
   text on hunting written by Fouilloux in 1585.

   Early French Bassets closely resembled the Basset Artésien Normand,
   which is still a breed today though it is not recognized outside of
   France. Because many short-legged dogs from this time were called
   basset and record-keeping from this time was sparse, it is difficult to
   speculate which of these breeds have bloodlines in common with today's
   Basset Hounds. It is commonly believed that Marquis de Lafayette
   brought Basset Hounds to the United States as a gift to George
   Washington.

   In 1863 the Basset Hound reached international fame at the Paris Dog
   Show. At that time there were two common Bassets, those with a rough
   coat (Basset Griffon) and those with smooth (Basset Français). The dogs
   were further classified by the length of their legs. The two popular
   Basset breeders at this time were M. Lane and the Count Le Couteulx.

   In 1866, Lord Galway imported a pair of Le Couteulx Bassets to England,
   but it was not until 1874 that Basset Hounds were widely introduced
   there by Sir Everett Millais. The Kennel Club accepted the breed in
   1882 and the English Basset Hound Club was formed in 1884. The American
   Kennel Club first recognized Basset Hounds as a breed in 1885. In 1935,
   the Basset Hound Club of America was organized in the United States.
   The current American breed standard was adopted in 1964.

Health and care

   Tricolour Basset
   Enlarge
   Tricolour Basset

   In comparison to other breeds, the Basset Hound is an especially
   healthy breed, but there are some illnesses to which they may fall
   prey.

   They are a deep-chested breed, and are therefore prone to bloat. Many
   bloodlines are genetically prone to glaucoma, luxating patella, and
   ectropion (" cherry eye"). Young Bassets occasionally develop
   panosteitis. Older Bassets occasionally develop Von Willebrand disease.
   Long dogs on short legs can easily develop back pain, especially if
   excessive weight is already a concern. Hip dysplasia can be a problem
   in Bassets. Due to the breed's short legs and large mass, Bassets may
   be susceptible to arthritis as they grow older. Also, the life
   expectancy for an average Basset usually lies between 8 to 12 years of
   age, but there are extreme cases where they live beyond 14 years old.

   As Basset Hounds often overeat, feedings should be regulated to prevent
   weight gain. Long ears are prone to infection if not cleaned regularly.
   The pronounced haw of the eyes can become dry and irritated.

Training

   Training is a touchy topic when dealing with the Basset Hound breed.
   Gentle and patient training is the most effective form of training.
   Trainers must be persistent with the breed in order to achieve a well
   mannered dog. The Basset has the tendency to become stubborn by
   listening to their nose, rather than their master. Owners need to make
   the training process lively and entertaining to allow the Basset to
   learn more pro-efficiently.

Popular culture

   In 1928, Time magazine featured a Basset Hound on the front cover. The
   accompanying story was about the 52nd annual Westminster Kennel Club
   Dog Show at Madison Square Garden as if observed by the Basset Hound
   puppy. This prestige is often seen as the event which made the Basset
   Hound a popular part of American pop culture.

   Basset Hounds have had prominent roles in movies and television. Some
   bassets have been featured in comic strips and cartoons. Examples
   inlude cartoon character Droopy Dog, originally created in 1943 by Tex
   Avery and Fred Basset, the main character in the comic strip Fred
   Basset, created by Alex Graham in 1963. Basset Hounds playing more
   minor roles include Rosebud the Basselope from Berke Breathed's comic
   strip Bloom County and Lafayette, from the 1970 Disney film The
   Aristocats.

   Basset Hounds in films include Fred, the companion of Cledus in the
   1977 movie Smokey and the Bandit and Gabriel, Bateau's basset hound in
   Ghost in the Shell 2: Innocence; Gabriel is in fact director Mamoru
   Oshii's real life pet, and is included in many of his films. In a scene
   most likely referencing Smokey and the Bandit, a truck driver has a
   basset hound beside him in American Pie 2. Basset hounds are featured
   prominently in off-beat roles as well - one gets hit by a car and
   survives in The Rage: Carrie 2 and in the film Monkeybone a basset has
   its own nightmarish dream sequence. Finally, basset hounds appear in
   such other mainstream films as An American Werewolf in Paris, Nanny
   McPhee, and Spider-Man 2.

   Television programs have used basset hounds as characters as well. In
   the early days of television, Elvis Presley famously sang " Hound Dog"
   to a basset hound named Sherlock on The Steve Allen Show on July 1,
   1956. One the most famous bassets on television was Flash, the dog
   owned by Sheriff Rosco P. Coltrane in the 1980s TV series The Dukes of
   Hazzard . A life-sized replica named "Flush" was used in dangerous
   situations. Other bassets on television include Cleo from The People's
   Choice, the Basset Hound named simply "Dog" from Columbo, Quincey, from
   Coach, Sam from That's So Raven and Socrates in Judging Amy.

   Basset Hounds have also been featured in advertising. The logo for Hush
   Puppies brand shoes prominently features a Basset Hound. Basset Hounds
   are occasionally referred to as "Hush Puppies" for that reason. The dog
   used in the photos was named Jason. A Basset Hound also serves as the
   companion to the lonely Maytag Man in Maytag appliance advertisements.
   In the 1990's, a handsome red/white basset hound called SIGMUND
   featured in a several advertisements including one for Domestos bleach.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basset_Hound"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
