   #copyright

Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: World War II

   Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands
   Part of the Pacific Theatre of World War II
   The aircraft carrier Hornet under attack
   Anti-aircraft shell bursts, fired at attacking Japanese aircraft, fill
   the sky above USS Enterprise (centre left) and her screening ships
   during the battle on October 26, 1942.

     Date   October 25, 1942 – October 27, 1942
   Location Santa Cruz Islands, Solomon Islands
    Result  Japanese tactical victory;
            Allied strategic advantage
   Combatants
   United States Empire of Japan
   Commanders
   William Halsey, Jr.,
   Thomas C. Kinkaid Isoroku Yamamoto,
   Nobutake Kondo
   Strength
   2 carriers,
   1 battleship,
   6 cruisers,
   14 destroyers,
   136 aircraft 4 carriers,
   2 battleships,
   10 cruisers,
   22 destroyers,
   199 aircraft
   Casualties
   1 carrier,
   1 destroyer sunk,
   1 carrier,
   2 destroyers heavily damaged,
   81 aircraft destroyed,
   266 dead 2 carriers,
   1 cruiser heavily damaged,
   97 aircraft destroyed
   400–500 dead
                                Guadalcanal campaign
   Tulagi – Savo I. – Tenaru – Eastern Solomons – Edson's Ridge –
   Cape Esperance – Henderson Field – Santa Cruz Is. – Naval Guadalcanal –
   Tassafaronga – Ke – Rennell I.
                              Solomon Islands campaign
   1st Tulagi – Guadalcanal – Blackett Strait – Cartwheel – Death of
   Yamamoto – New Georgia – Kula Gulf – Kolombangara – Vella Gulf –
   Horaniu – Vella Lavella – Naval Vella Lavella – Treasury Is. – Choiseul
   – Empress Augusta Bay – Cape St. George – Green Is. – 2nd Rabaul –
   Bougainville

   The Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands, October 26, 1942, sometimes
   referred to as the Battle of Santa Cruz or in Japanese sources as the
   Battle of the South Pacific (南太平洋海戦), was the fourth carrier battle of
   the Pacific campaign of World War II and the fourth major engagement
   fought between the United States Navy and the Imperial Japanese Navy
   during the lengthy Battle of Guadalcanal in the Solomon Islands
   campaign. In similar fashion to the battles of Coral Sea, Midway, and
   the Eastern Solomons, the ships of the two adversaries were rarely in
   direct visual range of each other. Instead, almost all attacks by both
   sides were mounted by carrier or land-based aircraft.

   In an attempt to drive Allied forces from Guadalcanal and nearby
   islands, and end the stalemate which had existed since September 1942,
   the Imperial Japanese Army planned a major ground offensive on
   Guadalcanal for October 20-25, 1942. In support of this offensive, and
   with the hope of engaging Allied naval forces, Japanese carriers and
   other large warships moved into a position near the southern Solomon
   Islands. From this location, the Japanese naval forces hoped to engage
   and decisively defeat any Allied (primarily U.S.) naval forces,
   especially carrier forces, that responded to the ground offensive.
   However, Allied naval forces also hoped to meet the Japanese naval
   forces in battle, with the same objectives of breaking the stalemate
   and decisively defeating their adversary.

   The Japanese ground offensive was defeated by Allied ground forces on
   October 20-25 in the Battle for Henderson Field. Nevertheless, the
   naval warships and aircraft from the two adversaries confronted each
   other on the morning of October 26, 1942, just north of the Santa Cruz
   Islands. After an exchange of carrier air attacks, Allied surface ships
   were forced to retreat from the battle area with the loss of one
   carrier sunk and another heavily damaged. However, the participating
   Japanese carrier forces also retreated due to high aircraft and aircrew
   losses, and significant damage to two carriers. Although an apparent
   tactical victory for the Japanese in terms of ships sunk and damaged,
   the loss of many irreplaceable, veteran aircrews by the Japanese
   provided a long-term strategic advantage for the Allies, whose aircrew
   losses in the battle were relatively low, partially due to search and
   rescue efforts.

Background

   On August 7, 1942, Allied forces landed on Guadalcanal, Tulagi, and
   Florida Islands in the Solomon Islands with the immediate objective of
   denying the use of the islands to the Japanese, who would otherwise
   have been able to use the islands as bases from which to threaten
   supply routes between the U.S. and Australia. The Allies also sought to
   use the islands as the starting point for a campaign which could
   eventually isolate the major Japanese base at Rabaul while also
   supporting the Allied campaings in New Guinea and New Britain. The
   landings initiated the six-month-long Battle of Guadalcanal.

   After the Battle of the Eastern Solomons, in which the U.S. aircraft
   carrier Enterprise was heavily damaged and forced to travel to Pearl
   Harbour, Hawaii for a month of major repairs, three U.S. carrier task
   forces remained in the South Pacific area. The task forces included the
   U.S. carriers Wasp, Saratoga, and Hornet plus their respective air
   groups and supporting surface warships, including battleships,
   cruisers, and destroyers, and were primarily stationed between the
   Solomons and New Hebrides (Vanuatu) islands. At this location, the U.S.
   carriers were charged with guarding the line of communication between
   the major Allied bases at New Caledonia and Espiritu Santo, supporting
   the Allied ground forces at Guadalcanal and Tulagi against any Japanese
   counteroffensives, covering the movement of supply ships to
   Guadalcanal, and last, but not least, engaging and destroying any
   Japanese warships, especially carriers, that came within range.

   The area of ocean in which the U.S. carrier task forces operated was
   known as " Torpedo Junction" by U.S. forces due to the high
   concentration of Japanese submarines in the area. On August 31,
   Saratoga was torpedoed by Japanese submarine I-26 and was out of action
   for three months for repairs. On September 14, while supporting a major
   reinforcement and resupply convoy to Guadalcanal, and almost engaging
   Japanese carriers Shōkaku and Zuikaku (who withdrew just before the two
   adversaries came into range of each other's aircraft), Wasp was hit by
   three torpedoes fired by Japanese submarine I-19. With power knocked
   out due to damage from the torpedo explosions, Wasp’s damage-control
   teams were unable to contain the ensuing large fires, and she was
   abandoned and scuttled.

   Although the U.S. now had only one operational carrier (Hornet) in the
   South Pacific, the Allies still maintained air superiority over the
   southern Solomon Islands due to their aircraft based at Henderson Field
   on Guadalcanal. However, at night, when aircraft weren't able to
   operate effectively, the Japanese were able to operate their ships
   around Guadalcanal almost at will. Thus, a stalemate in the battle for
   Guadalcanal developed, with the Allies delivering supplies and
   reinforcements to Guadalcanal during the day, and the Japanese
   delivering supplies and reinforcements by warship (called the " Tokyo
   Express" by the Allies) at night with neither side able to deliver
   enough troops to the island to secure a decisive advantage. By
   mid-October, both sides had roughly an equal number of troops on the
   island. The stalemate was briefly interrupted by two large-ship naval
   actions. On the night of October 11–12, a U.S. warship force
   intercepted and defeated a Japanese warship force that was enroute to
   bombard Henderson Field in the Battle of Cape Esperance. But, just two
   nights later a Japanese force that included battleships Haruna and
   Kongō successfully bombarded Henderson Field, destroying most of the
   U.S. aircraft and inflicting severe damage on the field's facilities.
   Although still marginally operational, it would take several weeks for
   the airfield to recover from the damage and replace the destroyed
   aircraft.
   Enterprise conducts air operations in the South Pacific on October 24,
   1942. The aircraft pictured is an F4F Wildcat.
   Enlarge
   Enterprise conducts air operations in the South Pacific on October 24,
   1942. The aircraft pictured is an F4F Wildcat.

   At this time, the U.S. made two moves to try to break the stalemate in
   the battle for Guadalcanal. First, repairs to Enterprise were expedited
   so that she could return to the South Pacific as soon as possible. On
   October 10, Enterprise received her new air groups, on October 16, she
   left Pearl Harbour, and, on October 23, she arrived back in the South
   Pacific and rendezvoused with Hornet and the rest of the Allied South
   Pacific naval forces on October 24, 273 miles (505 km) northeast of
   Espiritu Santo.

   Second, on October 18, Admiral Chester Nimitz, Allied Commander in
   Chief of Pacific Forces, replaced Vice Admiral Robert L. Ghormley, as
   Commander, South Pacific Area (this position commanded Allied forces
   involved in the Solomon Islands campaign) with Vice Admiral William
   Halsey, Jr. Nimitz felt that Ghormley had become too myopic and
   pessimistic to effectively lead Allied forces involved in the struggle
   for Guadalcanal. Halsey was reportedly respected throughout the U.S.
   naval fleet as a "fighter." Upon assuming command, Halsey immediately
   began making plans to draw the Japanese naval forces into a battle,
   writing to Nimitz, "I had to begin throwing punches almost
   immediately."

   The Japanese Combined Fleet was also seeking to draw Allied naval
   forces into what was hoped to be a decisive battle. Two fleet carriers,
   Hiyō and Junyō, plus one light carrier, Zuihō, arrived at the main
   Japanese naval base at Truk from Japan in early October and joined
   Shōkaku and Zuikaku. With five carriers fully staffed with air groups,
   plus their numerous battleships, cruisers, and destroyers, the Japanese
   Combined Fleet, directed by Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto, was confident
   that they could make-up for their defeat at the Battle of Midway. Apart
   from a couple of air raids on Henderson Field in October, the Japanese
   carriers and their supporting warships stayed out of the battle for
   Guadalcanal in the northern Solomon Island's area, waiting for a chance
   to approach and engage the U.S. carrier fleet. With the Japanese Army's
   next planned major ground attack on Allied forces on Guadalcanal set
   for October 20–25, Yamamoto's warships began to position themselves
   towards the southern Solomons to not only support their army's
   offensive, but to be ready to engage any Allied (primarily U.S.) ships,
   especially carriers, that approached to support the Allied ground
   forces' defenses on Guadalcanal. The Japanese believed that U.S. Navy
   forces were likely to be in the Solomons Island area for they had read
   a report from the United Press dated October 20 that stated that the
   United States Navy was preparing for a major sea and air battle in the
   South Pacific.

Battle

Prelude

   From October 20–25, Japanese land forces on Guadalcanal attempted to
   capture Henderson Field with a large-scale attack against U.S. troops
   defending the airfield. However, the attack was decisively defeated
   with heavy casualties for the Japanese during the Battle for Henderson
   Field.

   Incorrectly believing that the Japanese army troops had succeeded in
   capturing Henderson Field, a force of Japanese warships approached
   Guadalcanal on the morning of October 25 to provide further support for
   the army offensive. Aircraft from Henderson Field attacked the convoy
   throughout the day, sinking the light cruiser Yura and damaging the
   destroyer Akizuki.
   Map of the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands, October 26, 1942. Red
   lines are Japanese warship forces and black lines are U.S. carrier
   forces. Numbered yellow dots represent significant actions in the
   battle. (Click on map for larger image and full description.)
   Enlarge
   Map of the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands, October 26, 1942. Red
   lines are Japanese warship forces and black lines are U.S. carrier
   forces. Numbered yellow dots represent significant actions in the
   battle. (Click on map for larger image and full description.)

   Despite the failure of the Japanese ground offensive and the loss of
   Yura. The rest of the Combined Fleet continued to maneuver near the
   southern Solomon Islands on October 25 with the hope of encountering
   Allied naval forces in battle. The Japanese naval forces now included
   four carriers, for Hiyō had suffered an accidental, damaging fire on
   October 22 that forced her to return to Truk for repairs. The Japanese
   naval forces were divided into three groups: The "Advanced" force
   contained Junyō, plus two battleships, four heavy cruisers, one light
   cruiser, and 10 destroyers, and was commanded by Vice Admiral Nobutake
   Kondo in heavy cruiser Atago; the "Main Body" consisted of Shōkaku,
   Zuikaku, and Zuihō plus one heavy cruiser and eight destroyers, and was
   commanded by Vice Admiral Chuichi Nagumo in Shōkaku; the "Vanguard"
   force contained two battleships, three heavy cruisers, one light
   cruiser, and seven destroyers, and was commanded by Rear Admiral
   Hiroaki Abe in battleship Hiei. In addition to commanding the Advanced
   force, Kondo acted as the overall commander of the three forces.

   On the U.S. side, the Hornet and Enterprise task groups, under the
   overall command of Rear Admiral Thomas Kinkaid swept around to the
   north of the Santa Cruz Islands on October 25 searching for the
   Japanese naval forces. The U.S. warships were deployed as two separate
   carrier groups, each centered on either Hornet or Enterprise, and
   separated from each other by about 10 miles (20 km). A U.S. PBY
   Catalina based in the Santa Cruz Islands located the Japanese Main body
   carriers at 11:03. However, the Japanese carriers were about 355 miles
   (655 km) from the U.S. force, just beyond carrier aircraft range.
   Kinkaid, hoping to close the range to be able to execute an attack that
   day, steamed towards the Japanese carriers at top speed, and, at 14:25,
   launched a strike force of 23 aircraft. But, the Japanese, knowing that
   they had been spotted by U.S. aircraft and not knowing where the U.S.
   carriers were, turned to the north to stay out of range of the U.S.
   carriers' aircraft. Thus, the U.S. strike force returned to their
   carriers without finding or attacking the Japanese warships.

Carrier action on October 26 - 1st strikes

   At 02:50 on October 26, the Japanese naval forces reversed direction
   and the naval forces of the two adversaries closed the distance until
   they were only 200 miles (370 km) away from each other by 05:00. At
   this time, both sides launched search aircraft and prepared their
   remaining aircraft to attack as soon as the other side's ships were
   located. Although a radar-equipped U.S. Catalina sighted the Japanese
   carriers at 03:10, the report didn't reach Kinkaid until 05:12.
   Therefore, believing that the Japanese ships had probably changed
   position during the last two hours, he decided to withhold launching a
   strike force until he received more current information on the location
   of the Japanese ships.
   Japanese fighter and dive bomber aircraft on Shokaku prepare to launch
   for an attack on U.S. carrier forces the morning of October 26, 1942.
   Enlarge
   Japanese fighter and dive bomber aircraft on Shokaku prepare to launch
   for an attack on U.S. carrier forces the morning of October 26, 1942.

   At 06:45, a U.S. scout aircraft sighted the carriers of Nagumo's Main
   body. At 06:58, a Japanese scout aircraft reported the location of
   Hornet’s task force. Both sides now raced to be the first to attack the
   other. The Japanese were first to get their strike force launched, with
   64 aircraft, including 21 "Val" dive bombers, 20 "Kate" torpedo
   bombers, 21 Zero fighters, and two "Kate" command and control aircraft
   on the way towards Hornet by 07:40. At this same time (07:40), two U.S.
   SBD Dauntless scout aircraft, responding to the earlier sighting of the
   Japanese carriers, arrived and dove on Zuihō. With the Japanese combat
   air patrol (CAP) busy chasing other U.S. scout aircraft away, the two
   U.S. aircraft were able to approach and drop both of their bombs on
   Zuihō, causing heavy damage and preventing the carrier's flight deck
   from being able to land aircraft.

   Meanwhile, Kondo ordered Abe's Vanguard force to race ahead to try to
   intercept and engage the U.S. warships. Kondo also brought his own
   Advanced force forward at maximum speed so that Junyō’s aircraft could
   join in the attacks on the U.S. ships. At 08:10, Shōkaku launched a
   second wave of strike aircraft, consisting of 19 Vals and eight Zeros
   and, at 08:40, Zuikaku launched 16 Kates. Thus, by 09:10 the Japanese
   had 110 aircraft on the way to attack the U.S. carriers.
   As a TBF Avenger prepares to take off from Enterprise on October 26,
   the signs held aloft by deck crewmen give the last known location of
   the Japanese carriers as well as instructions to proceed without
   waiting for Hornet’s aircraft.
   Enlarge
   As a TBF Avenger prepares to take off from Enterprise on October 26,
   the signs held aloft by deck crewmen give the last known location of
   the Japanese carriers as well as instructions to proceed without
   waiting for Hornet’s aircraft.

   The U.S. strike aircraft were running about 20 minutes behind the
   Japanese. Believing that a speedy attack was more important than a
   massed attack, the U.S. aircraft proceeded in small groups towards the
   Japanese ships instead of forming into one large strike force. The
   first group, consisting of 15 SBD dive bombers, six TBF Avenger torpedo
   bombers, and eight F4F Wildcat fighters from Hornet, was on its way by
   about 08:00. A second group, consisting of three SBDs, seven TBFs, and
   eight Wildcats from Enterprise was off by 08:10. A third group, which
   included nine SBDs, eight TBFs, and seven Wildcats from Hornet, was on
   its way by 08:20.

   At 08:30, the opposing aircraft strike formations began passing within
   sight of each other. Nine Zeros from Zuihō broke off from their
   formation and attacked the Enterprise group of aircraft. In the
   resulting engagement, four Zeros, three Wildcats, and two TBFs were
   shot down, with another two TBFs forced to return to Enterprise with
   heavy damage.

   At 08:50, the lead U.S. attack formation from Hornet spotted four ships
   from Abe's Vanguard force. Pressing on, the U.S. aircraft sighted the
   Japanese carriers and prepared to attack. Three Zeros from Zuihō
   attacked the formation's Wildcats, drawing them away from the bombers
   they were assigned to protect. Thus, the dive bombers in the first
   group initiated their attacks without fighter escort. Twenty Zeros from
   the Japanese carrier CAP attacked the SBD formation and shot-down four
   of them. The remaining 11 SBDs commenced their attack dives on Shōkaku
   at 09:27, hitting her with three to six bombs, ruining her flight deck,
   and causing serious damage to the interior of the ship. The final SBD
   of the 11 lost track of the Shōkaku and instead dropped its bomb near
   the Japanese destroyer Teruzuki, causing minor damage. The six TBFs in
   the first strike force, having become separated from their strike
   group, missed finding the Japanese carriers and eventually turned-back
   towards Hornet. On the way back, they attacked the Japanese heavy
   cruiser Tone, missing with all of their torpedoes.
   Japanese cruiser Chikuma under attack on October 26. The white spot in
   the center of the ship is where one of the 1,000 bombs hit directly on
   the bridge, causing heavy damage and high casualties.
   Enlarge
   Japanese cruiser Chikuma under attack on October 26. The white spot in
   the centre of the ship is where one of the 1,000 bombs hit directly on
   the bridge, causing heavy damage and high casualties.

   The TBFs of the second U.S. attack formation from Enterprise were
   unable to locate the Japanese carriers, and instead attacked the
   Japanese heavy cruiser Suzuya from Abe's Vanguard force, but caused no
   damage. At about the same time, the third U.S. attack formation, from
   Hornet, found Abe's ships and attacked the Japanese heavy cruiser
   Chikuma, hitting her with two 1,000 pound bombs and causing heavy
   damage. The three Enterprise SBDs then arrived and also attacked
   Chikuma, causing more damage with one bomb hit and two near-misses.
   Finally, the eight TBFs from the third strike group arrived and
   attacked the smoking Chikuma, scoring one more hit. Chikuma, escorted
   by two destroyers, withdrew from the battle and headed towards Truk for
   repairs.

   The U.S. carrier forces received word from their outbound strike
   aircraft at 08:30 that Japanese attack aircraft were headed their way.
   At 08:52, the Japanese strike force commander sighted the Hornet task
   force (the Enterprise task force was hidden by a rain squall) and
   deployed his aircraft for attack. At 08:55, the U.S. carriers detected
   the approaching Japanese aircraft on radar, about 35 miles (65 km)
   away, and began to vector the 37 Wildcat fighters of their CAP to
   engage the incoming Japanese aircraft. However, communication problems,
   mistakes by the U.S. fighter control directors, and primitive control
   procedures prevented all but a few of the U.S. fighters from engaging
   the Japanese aircraft before they began their attacks on Hornet.
   Although the U.S. CAP was able to shoot down several Vals, most of the
   Japanese aircraft commenced their attacks relatively unmolested by U.S.
   fighters.
   A damaged Japanese Val dive bomber (upper left) purposely dives towards
   Hornet at 09:13...
   Enlarge
   A damaged Japanese Val dive bomber (upper left) purposely dives towards
   Hornet at 09:13...
   ...and seconds later crashes into the carrier.
   Enlarge
   ...and seconds later crashes into the carrier.

   At 09:09, the anti-aircraft guns of Hornet and her escorting warships
   opened fire as the 20 untouched Japanese Kates and remaining 16 Vals
   commenced their attacks on the carrier. At 09:12, a Val placed its
   250-kilogram, semi-armor-piercing bomb dead centre on Hornet’s flight
   deck, across from the island, which penetrated three decks before
   exploding, killing 60 men. Moments later, a 242-kilogram "land" bomb
   struck the flight deck, detonating on impact and creating an 11-foot
   hole as well as killing 30 men. A minute or so later, a third bomb hit
   Hornet near where the first bomb hit, penetrating three decks before
   exploding, causing severe damage but no direct loss of life. At 09:14,
   a diving Val was hit and damaged by anti-aircraft fire directly over
   Hornet. The Val's pilot, in an apparently spontaneous, kamikaze-style
   attack, then purposely crashed his aircraft into Hornet’s stack,
   spreading burning aviation fuel over the signal deck.

   At the same time that the Vals were attacking, the Japanese Kate
   torpedo bombers were also attacking Hornet from two different
   directions. In spite of suffering heavy losses from anti-aircraft fire,
   the Kates planted two torpedoes in Hornet between 09:13 and 09:17,
   knocking-out her engines. As Hornet glided to a stop, a damaged Val
   approached and purposely crashed into the carrier's side, starting a
   fire near the ship's main supply of aviation fuel. At 09:20, the
   surviving Japanese aircraft departed, leaving Hornet dead in the water
   and burning. Twenty Five Japanese and six U.S. aircraft were destroyed
   in this first attack on Hornet.

   With the assistance of firehoses from three escorting destroyers, the
   fires on Hornet were under control by 10:00. Wounded personnel were
   evacuated from the carrier and an attempt was made by the U.S. cruiser
   Northampton to tow Hornet away from the battle area. However, the
   effort to rig the towline took some time and more attack waves of
   Japanese aircraft were inbound.

Carrier action on October 26 - post-first strike actions

   Starting at 09:30, Enterprise landed many of the damaged and
   fuel-depleted CAP fighters and returning scout aircraft from both
   carriers. However, with her flight deck full, and the second wave of
   Japanese aircraft inbound, which was detected on radar at 09:30,
   Enterprise ceased landing operations at 10:00. Fuel-depleted aircraft
   then began ditching in the ocean as the carrier's escorting destroyers
   rescued the aircrews. One of the ditching aircraft, a damaged TBF from
   Enterprise’s strike force that had been attacked earlier by Zuihō
   Zeros, crashed into the water near the U.S. destroyer Porter. As the
   destroyer rescued the TBF's crew, the torpedo from the TBF began
   running in a wild circle and struck Porter and exploded, causing heavy
   damage and killing 15 crewmen. After the task force commander ordered
   the destroyer scuttled, the crew was rescued by the U.S. destroyer Shaw
   which then sank Porter with gunfire.
   A Japanese Val dive bomber (center) is shot down during the attack on
   the Enterprise (lower right). Enterprise is smoking from earlier bomb
   hits as another bomb near-misses the carrier.
   Enlarge
   A Japanese Val dive bomber (centre) is shot down during the attack on
   the Enterprise (lower right). Enterprise is smoking from earlier bomb
   hits as another bomb near-misses the carrier.

   As the first wave of Japanese strike aircraft began returning to their
   carriers from their attack on Hornet, one of them spotted the
   Enterprise task force and reported the carrier's position. Thus, the
   second Japanese aircraft strike wave, believing Hornet to be sinking,
   directed their attacks on the Enterprise task force, beginning at
   10:08. Again, the U.S. CAP had trouble intercepting the Japanese
   aircraft before they attacked Enterprise, shooting down only two of the
   19 Vals as they began their dives on the carrier. Attacking through the
   intense anti-aircraft fire put-up by Enterprise and her escorting
   warships, the Vals hit the carrier with two 250-kilogram bombs and
   near-missed with another, causing heavy damage to the carrier and
   jamming her forward elevator in the "up" position. Twelve of the 19
   Vals were lost in this attack.

   Twenty-minutes later, the 16 Zuikaku Kates arrived and split-up to
   attack Enterprise. One group of Kates was attacked by two CAP Wildcats
   which shot down three of them and damaged a fourth. On fire, the fourth
   damaged Kate purposely crashed into the U.S. destroyer Smith, setting
   the ship on fire and killing 57 of her crew. The destroyer steered into
   the spraying wake of the U.S. battleship South Dakota to help put-out
   the fires and then resumed her station, firing her remaining
   anti-aircraft guns at the still attacking Kates.
   A Hornet Wildcat that just landed minutes earlier skids across
   Enterprise’s flight deck as the carrier maneuvers violently during
   Junyo’s dive bomber attack. Two crewmen are taking defensive postures
   on the deck as smoke from earlier bomb hits swirls around them.
   Enlarge
   A Hornet Wildcat that just landed minutes earlier skids across
   Enterprise’s flight deck as the carrier maneuvers violently during
   Junyo’s dive bomber attack. Two crewmen are taking defensive postures
   on the deck as smoke from earlier bomb hits swirls around them.

   The remaining Kates attacked Enterprise, South Dakota, and U.S. cruiser
   Portland, but all of their torpedoes missed or were duds, causing no
   damage. The engagement was over at 10:53 with nine of the 16 attacking
   Kates shot down. After suppressing most of the onboard fires, at 11:15
   Enterprise reopened her flight deck to begin landing returning aircraft
   from the morning U.S. strikes on the Japanese warship forces. However,
   only a few aircraft landed before the next wave of Japanese strike
   aircraft arrived and began their attacks on Enterprise, forcing a
   suspension of landing operations.

   Between 09:05 and 09:14, Junyō had arrived within 280 miles (520 km) of
   the U.S. carriers and launched a strike of 17 Vals and 12 Zeros. As the
   Japanese Main body and Advanced force maneuvered to try to join
   formations, Junyō readied follow-on strikes. At 11:21, the Junyō Vals
   arrived and dove on the Enterprise task force. The Vals scored one near
   miss on Enterprise, causing more damage, and one hit each on South
   Dakota and U.S. cruiser San Juan, causing moderate damage to both
   ships. Eleven of the 17 Vals were destroyed in this attack.

   At 11:35, Kinkaid decided to withdraw Enterprise and her screening
   ships from the battle, due to Hornet being out of action, the heavy
   damage that Enterprise had received, and believing (correctly), that
   the Japanese had one to two undamaged carriers in the area. He directed
   Hornet’s task force to follow as soon as they were able. Between 11:39
   and 13:22, Enterprise recovered 57 aircraft as she headed away from the
   battle. The remaining airborne U.S. aircraft ditched in the ocean and
   their aircrews were rescued by escorting warships.

   Between 11:40 and 14:00, Zuikaku and Junyō recovered the few aircraft
   that returned from the morning strikes on Hornet and Enterprise and
   prepared follow-on strikes. At 13:00, Kondo's Advanced force and Abe's
   Vanguard force warships together headed directly towards the last
   reported position of the U.S. carrier task forces and increased speed
   to try intercept them for a warship gunfire battle. Zuihō and Shōkaku,
   with Nagumo still on board, retreated from the battle area, leaving
   Rear Admiral Kakuji Kakuta in charge of the Zuikaku and Junyō battle
   forces. At 13:06, Junyō launched her second strike of seven Kates and
   eight Zeros, and Zuikaku launched her third strike of seven Kates, two
   Vals, and five Zeros. At 15:35, Junyō launched the last Japanese strike
   force of the day, consisting of four Kates and six Zeros.
   Hornet, sinking and abandoned late on October 26, 1942.
   Enlarge
   Hornet, sinking and abandoned late on October 26, 1942.

   After several technical problems, U.S. cruiser Northampton finally
   began slowly towing Hornet out of the battle area at 14:45. Also,
   Hornet’s crew was on the verge of restoring partial power to the ship.
   However, at 15:20, Junyō’s second strike arrived and attacked the
   almost stationary carrier. At 15:23, one torpedo struck Hornet,
   destroying the repairs to the power system, causing heavy flooding, and
   a 14-degree list. With no power to pump-out the water, Hornet was
   given-up for lost and the crew abandoned ship. The third strike from
   Zuikaku attacked Hornet during this time, hitting the sinking ship with
   one more bomb. All of the Hornet’s crewmen were off by 16:27. The last
   Japanese strike of the day dropped one more bomb on the sinking hulk at
   17:20.

   U.S destroyers Mustin and Anderson were ordered to scuttle Hornet with
   gunfire and torpedoes while the rest of the U.S. warships retired
   towards the southeast to get out of range of Kondo's and Abe's oncoming
   warships. With advancing Japanese destroyers only 20 minutes away, the
   two U.S. destroyers abandoned Hornet’s burning hulk at 20:40. The rest
   of the warships of Kondo's and Abe's forces arrived at Hornet’s
   location by 22:20 and decided that she was too damaged to try to
   capture. Thus, they finished the job of scuttling her with torpedoes by
   01:35 on October 27. Several night attacks by radar-equipped Catalinas
   on Junyō and Teruzuki, knowledge of the head-start the U.S. warships
   had in their retreat from the area, plus a critical fuel situation
   apparently caused the Japanese to reconsider further pursuit of the
   U.S. warships. After refueling near the northern Solomon Islands, the
   ships returned to their main base at Truk on October 30. During the
   U.S. retreat from the battle area towards Espiritu Santo and New
   Caledonia, South Dakota collided with U.S. destroyer Mahan, heavily
   damaging the destroyer.

Aftermath

   The crew of Enterprise conducts a burial-at-sea on October 27, 1942,
   for 44 of their fellow crewmen killed during the battle the day before.
   Enlarge
   The crew of Enterprise conducts a burial-at-sea on October 27, 1942,
   for 44 of their fellow crewmen killed during the battle the day before.

   The loss of Hornet was a severe blow for Allied forces in the South
   Pacific, leaving just one operational, albeit damaged, Allied carrier
   in the entire Pacific theatre. Enterprise, however, received temporary
   repairs at New Caledonia and, although still somewhat damaged, returned
   to the southern Solomons area just two weeks later to support Allied
   forces during the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal, playing an important
   role in what turned out to be the decisive naval engagement in the
   overall battle for Guadalcanal.

   Although a tactical victory for the Japanese in terms of ships sunk, it
   came at a high cost for Japanese naval forces. Both damaged carriers
   were forced to return to Japan for extensive repairs and refitting.
   After repair, Zuihō returned to Truk in late January, 1943. Shōkaku was
   under repair until March, 1943 and didn't return to the front until
   July, 1943, when she was reunited with Zuikaku at Truk.

   The most significant losses for the Japanese Navy, however, were in
   aircrew. The U.S. lost 24 aircrew members in the battle. The Japanese,
   on the other hand, lost 148 aircrew members including two dive bomber
   group leaders, three torpedo squadron leaders, and 18 other section or
   flight leaders. The Japanese lost so many aircrew members that
   undamaged Zuikaku and Hiyō were also forced to return to Japan due to a
   scarcity of trained aircrew to man their air groups. Admiral Nagumo,
   upon being relieved of command shortly after the battle and reassigned
   to shore duty in Japan, stated,


   Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands

     This battle was a tactical win, but a shattering strategic loss for
     Japan. Considering the great superiority of our enemy's industrial
      capacity, we must win every battle overwhelmingly. This last one,
               unfortunately, was not an overwhelming victory.


   Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands

   With its carrier aircrew ranks decimated, and with no quick way to
   replace them, Japan lost its strategic opportunity to defeat Allied
   naval forces in a single, decisive battle before the industrial might
   of the U.S. placed that goal out of reach. Although they returned to
   Truk by summer, 1943, the Japanese carriers played no further offensive
   role in the decisive Solomon Islands campaign. Historian Eric Hammel
   sums up the significance of the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands this
   way:


   Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands

     Santa Cruz was a Japanese victory. That victory cost Japan her last
                          best hope to win the war.


   Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_the_Santa_Cruz_Islands"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
