   #copyright

Battle of Moscow

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: World War II

                            Battle of Moscow
   Part of the Eastern Front of World War II
   The Battle of Moscow
   Soviet troops in winter camouflage

     Date   October 2, 1941 - January 7, 1942
   Location Moscow region, USSR
    Result  Strategic Soviet victory
                               Combatants

                                   Germany

                                          Soviet Union

                               Commanders
   Fedor von Bock,
   Heinz Guderian                         Georgy Zhukov,
                                          Aleksandr Vasilevsky
                                Strength
   As of October 1:
   1,000,000+ men,
   1,700 tanks,
   14,000 guns,
   950 planes                             As of October 1:
                                          1,250,000 men,
                                          1000 tanks,
                                          7600 guns,
                                          677 planes
                               Casualties
   248,000 - 400,000^(see §7)             650,000 - 1,280,000^(see §7)
   Eastern Front
   Barbarossa – Finland – Leningrad and Baltics – Crimea and Caucasus –
   Moscow – 1st Rzhev-Vyazma – 2nd Kharkov – Stalingrad – Velikiye Luki –
   2nd Rzhev-Sychevka – Kursk – 2nd Smolensk – Dnieper – 2nd Kiev – Korsun
   – Hube's Pocket – Belorussia – Lvov-Sandomierz – Balkans – Hungary –
   Vistula-Oder – Königsberg – Berlin – Prague

   The Battle of Moscow (Russian: Битва за Москву, Bitva za Moskvu) refers
   to the Soviet defense of Moscow and the subsequent Soviet
   counter-offensive that occurred between October 1941 and January 1942
   on the Eastern Front of World War II against German forces. Adolf
   Hitler considered Moscow, which was the capital of the Union of Soviet
   Socialist Republics ( USSR) and the largest Soviet city, to be the
   primary military and political objective for the Axis forces in their
   invasion of the Soviet Union. A separate German plan was codenamed
   Operation Wotan.

   The original blitzkrieg invasion plan, which the Axis called Operation
   Barbarossa, had called for the capture of Moscow within three to four
   months. However, despite large initial advances, the Wehrmacht was soon
   slowed by Soviet resistance (in particular during the Battle of
   Smolensk, which lasted from July through September 1941 and delayed the
   German offensive towards Moscow for two months). Having secured
   Smolensk, the Wehrmacht was forced to consolidate its lines around
   Leningrad and Kiev, further delaying the drive towards Moscow. The Axis
   advance was finally renewed on September 30, 1941, with an offensive
   codenamed Operation Typhoon, the goal of which was the capture of
   Moscow before the onset of winter.

   After a successful initial advance leading to the encirclement and
   destruction of several Soviet armies, the German offensive was stopped
   by Soviet resistance at the Mozhaisk defensive line, just 120 km
   (75 mi) from the capital. Having penetrated the Soviet defenses, the
   Wehrmacht offensive was slowed by weather conditions, with autumn rains
   turning roads and fields into thick mud that significantly impeded Axis
   vehicles, horses, and soldiers. Although the onset of colder weather
   and the freezing of the ground allowed the Axis advance to continue, it
   continued to struggle in the face of the severe cold and stiffening
   Soviet resistance.

   By early December, the lead German Panzer Groups stood less than
   30 kilometers (19 mi) from the Kremlin, and Wehrmacht officers were
   able to see some of Moscow's buildings with binoculars; but,
   handicapped by cold and exhausted troops, the Axis forces were unable
   to make further advances. On December 5, 1941, fresh Soviet Siberian
   troops, prepared for winter warfare, attacked the German forces in
   front of Moscow; by January 1942, the Wehrmacht had been driven back
   100 to 250 km (60 to 150 mi), ending the immediate threat to Moscow and
   marking the closest that Axis forces ever got to capturing the Soviet
   capital.

   The Battle of Moscow is usually considered one of the most important
   battles in the war between the Axis Powers and the USSR, primarily
   because the Soviets were able to successfully prevent the most serious
   attempt to capture their capital. The battle was also one of the
   largest during World War II, with more than a million total casualties.
   It marked a turning point as it was the first time since the Wehrmacht
   began its conquests in 1939 war that it had been forced into a major
   retreat. The Wehrmacht had been forced to retreat earlier during the
   Yelnya Offensive in September 1941 and at the Battle of Rostov (1941)
   (which led to von Rundstedt losing his job), but these retreats were
   minor compared to the one at Moscow.

Background

   The eastern front at the time of the Battle of Moscow: ██ Initial
   Wehrmacht advance - to 9 July 1941 ██ Subsequent advances - to 1
   September 1941 ██ Encirclement and battle of Kiev - to 9 September 1941
   ██ Final Wehrmacht advance - to 5 December 1941
   Enlarge
   The eastern front at the time of the Battle of Moscow: ██ Initial
   Wehrmacht advance - to 9 July 1941 ██ Subsequent advances - to 1
   September 1941 ██ Encirclement and battle of Kiev - to 9 September 1941
   ██ Final Wehrmacht advance - to 5 December 1941

   On June 22, 1941, German, Hungarian, and Romanian troops invaded the
   Soviet Union, effectively starting Operation Barbarossa. Having
   destroyed most of the Soviet Air Force on the ground, German forces
   quickly advanced deep into Soviet territory using blitzkrieg tactics.
   Armored units raced forward in pincer movements, pocketing and
   destroying entire Soviet armies. While the German Army Group North
   moved towards Leningrad, Army Group South was to take control of
   Ukraine, while Army Group Centre advanced towards Moscow. The Soviet
   defenses were overwhelmed and the casualties sustained by the Red Army
   were significant.

   By July 1941, Army Group Centre had managed to encircle several Soviet
   armies near Minsk during the Battle of Białystok-Minsk, creating a huge
   breach in Soviet lines — one that the Soviets couldn't immediately
   fill, as no reserves were available — and destroying the Soviet Western
   Front as an organized force. Thus, the Wehrmacht was able to cross the
   Dnieper river, which barred the path to Moscow, with only minimal
   casualties.

   In August 1941, German forces captured the city of Smolensk, an
   important stronghold on the road to Moscow. Smolensk was historically
   considered as the "key" to Moscow because it controlled a landbridge
   located between the Dvina, Dnieper, and several other rivers, allowing
   for a fast advance by ground troops without the necessity of building
   major bridges across wide rivers. The desperate Soviet defense of the
   Smolensk region lasted for two months, from July 10, 1941 to September
   10, 1941. This intense engagement, known as the Battle of Smolensk,
   delayed the German advance until mid-September, effectively disrupting
   the blitzkrieg and forcing Army Group Centre to use almost half of its
   strategic reserves (10 divisions out of 24) during the battle.

   Elsewhere, the German advance was also bogged down. Near Leningrad,
   Army Group North was held up by the Luga defense line for almost a
   month before eventually overrunning it. In the south, Army Group South,
   which included many Hungarian and Romanian units that were less well
   trained, equipped and experienced than the Wehrmacht, sustained several
   serious counterattacks and was stopped. The Wehrmacht now faced a
   dilemma, as Army Group Centre was still strong enough to reach Moscow —
   but such an advance would create a bulge in the German lines, leaving
   it vulnerable to Red Army flanking attacks. Moreover, according to
   Hitler, Germany needed the food and mineral resources located in the
   Ukraine. Thus, the Wehrmacht was ordered to first secure the Donbass
   region and to move towards Moscow afterwards. Heinz Guderian's Panzer
   Army was turned south to support Gerd von Rundstedt's attack on Kiev,
   which inflicted another significant defeat on the Red Army. On
   September 19, 1941, Soviet forces had to abandon Kiev after Stalin's
   persistent refusal to withdraw forces from the Kiev salient, as
   recorded by Aleksandr Vasilevsky and Georgy Zhukov in their respective
   memoirs. This refusal cost Zhukov his post of Chief of the General
   Staff, but his prediction of German encirclement was correct. Several
   Soviet armies were encircled and annihilated by the Wehrmacht in a
   double pincer movement, allowing the German forces to advance in the
   south.

   Despite being a decisive Axis victory, the Battle of Kiev set the
   German blitzkrieg even further behind schedule. As Guderian later
   wrote, "Kiev was certainly a brilliant tactical success, but the
   question of whether it had a significant strategic importance still
   remains open. Everything now depended on our ability to achieve
   expected results before the winter and even before autumn rains."
   Hitler still believed that the Wehrmacht had a chance to finish the war
   before winter by taking Moscow. On October 2, 1941, Army Group Centre,
   under Fedor von Bock, launched its final offensive towards Moscow,
   code-named Operation Typhoon. Hitler said soon after its start that
   "After three months of preparations, we finally have the possibility to
   crush our enemy before the winter comes. All possible preparations were
   done...; today starts the last battle of the year...."

Initial German advance ( 30 September - 10 October)

Plans

   For Hitler, Moscow was the most important military and political
   target, as he anticipated that the city's surrender would shortly
   afterwards lead to the general collapse of the Soviet Union. As Franz
   Halder, head of the Oberkommando des Heeres (Army General Staff), wrote
   in 1940, "The best solution would be a direct offensive towards
   Moscow." Therefore, the city was a primary target for the large and
   well-equipped Army Group Centre. The forces committed to Operation
   Typhoon included three armies (the 2nd, 4th and 9th) supported by three
   Panzer Groups (the 2nd, 3rd and 4th) and by the Luftwaffe's Second Air
   Fleet. Overall, more than one million men were committed to the
   operation, along with 1,700 tanks, 14,000 guns, and 950 planes. The
   attack relied on standard blitzkrieg tactics, using Panzer groups
   rushing deep into Soviet formations and executing double-pincer
   movements, pocketing Red Army divisions and destroying them.

   The initial Wehrmacht plan called for two initial movements. The first
   would be a double-pincer performed around the Soviet Western Front and
   Reserve Front forces located around Vyazma. The second would be a
   single-pincer around the Bryansk Front to capture the city of Bryansk.
   From that point, the plan called for another quick pincer north and
   south of Moscow to encircle the city. However, the German armies were
   already battered and experiencing some logistical issues. Guderian, for
   example, wrote that some of his destroyed tanks had not been replaced,
   and that his mechanized troops lacked fuel at the beginning of the
   operation.

   Facing the Wehrmacht were three Soviet fronts formed from exhausted
   armies that had already been involved in heavy fighting for several
   months. The forces committed to the city's defense totaled 1,250,000
   men, 1,000 tanks, 7,600 guns and 677 aircraft. However, these troops,
   while presenting a significant threat to the Wehrmacht based on their
   numbers alone, were poorly located, with most of the troops deployed in
   a single line, and had little or no reserves to the rear. In his
   memoirs, Vasilevsky pointed out that while immediate Soviet defenses
   were quite well prepared, these errors in troop placement were largely
   responsible for the Wehrmacht's initial success. Furthermore, many
   Soviet defenders were seriously lacking in combat experience and some
   critical equipment (such as anti-tank weapons), while their tanks were
   obsolete models.
   Factory workers dig anti-tank trenches around Moscow in 1941.
   Enlarge
   Factory workers dig anti-tank trenches around Moscow in 1941.

   The Soviet command began constructing extensive defenses around the
   city. The first part, the Rzhev-Vyazma defense setup, was built on the
   Rzhev- Vyazma- Bryansk line. The second, the Mozhaisk defense line, was
   a double defense stretching between Kalinin and Kaluga. Finally, a
   triple defense ring surrounded the city itself, forming the Moscow
   Defense Zone. However, these defenses were still largely unprepared by
   the beginning of the operation due to the speed of the German advance.
   Furthermore, the German attack plan had been discovered quite late, and
   Soviet troops were ordered to assume a total defensive stance only on
   September 27, 1941. However, new Soviet divisions were being formed on
   the Volga, in Asia and in the Urals, and it would only be a matter of a
   few months before these new troops could be committed, making the
   battle a race against time as well.

Vyazma and Bryansk pockets

   The German offensives during operation Typhoon.
   Enlarge
   The German offensives during operation Typhoon.

   Near Vyazma, the Western and Reserve fronts were quickly defeated by
   the highly mobile forces of the 3rd and 4th Panzer groups that
   exploited weak areas in the defenses and then quickly moved behind the
   Red Army lines. The defense setup, still under construction, was
   overrun as both German armored spearheads met at Vyazma on October 10,
   1941. Four Soviet armies (the 19th, 20th, 24th and 32nd) were trapped
   in a huge pocket just west of the city.

   Contrary to German expectations, the encircled Soviet forces did not
   surrender easily. Instead, the fighting was fierce and desperate, and
   the Wehrmacht had to employ 28 divisions to eliminate the surrounded
   Soviet armies, using forces that were needed to support the offensive
   towards Moscow. The remnants of the Soviet Western and Reserve fronts
   were able to retreat and consolidate their lines around Mozhaisk.
   Moreover, the surrounded Soviet forces were not completely destroyed,
   as some of the encircled troops escaped in groups ranging in size from
   platoons to full rifle divisions. Soviet resistance near Vyazma also
   provided time for the Soviet high command to quickly bring some
   reinforcements to the four armies defending the Moscow direction
   (namely, the 5th, 16th, 43rd and 49th), and to transport three rifle
   and two tank divisions from the Far East.

   In the south near Bryansk, initial Soviet performance was barely more
   effective than near Vyazma. The Second Panzer Group executed an
   enveloping movement around the whole front, linking with the advancing
   2nd Army and capturing Orel by October 3 and Bryansk by October 6. The
   Soviet 3rd and 13th armies were encircled but, again, did not
   surrender, and troops were able to escape in small groups, retreating
   to intermediate defense lines around Poniry and Mtsensk. By October 23,
   the last remnants had escaped from the pocket.

   By October 7, 1941, the German offensive in this area was bogged down.
   The first snow fell and quickly melted, turning roads into stretches of
   mud, a phenomenon known as rasputitsa in Russia. German armored groups
   were greatly slowed and were unable to easily maneuver, wearing down
   men and tanks. The 4th Panzer division fell into an ambush set by
   Dmitri Leliushenko and Mikhail Katukov near the city of Mtsensk. Newly
   built T-34 tanks were concealed in the woods as German panzers rolled
   past them; as a scratch team of Soviet infantry contained their
   advance, Soviet armor attacked from both flanks and savaged the German
   Panzer IV formations. For the Wehrmacht, the shock of this defeat was
   so great that a special investigation was ordered. Guderian and his
   troops discovered, to their dismay, that new Soviet T-34s were almost
   impervious to German tank guns. As the general wrote, "Our T-IV tanks
   with their short 75 mm guns could only explode a T-34 by hitting the
   engine from behind." Guderian also noted in his memoirs that "the
   Russians already learned a few things." Elsewhere, massive Soviet
   counterattacks had further slowed the German offensive.
   A German Panzer IV tank.
   Enlarge
   A German Panzer IV tank.

   The magnitude of the initial Soviet defeat was appalling. According to
   German estimates, 673,000 soldiers were captured by the Wehrmacht in
   both pockets, although recent research suggests a somewhat lower, but
   still enormous figure of 514,000 prisoners, reducing Soviet strength by
   41 %. The desperate Red Army resistance however, had greatly slowed the
   Wehrmacht. When, on October 10, 1941, the Germans arrived within sight
   of the Mozhaisk line, they found a well-prepared defensive setup and
   new, fresh Soviet forces. That same day, Georgy Zhukov was recalled
   from Leningrad to take charge of the defense of Moscow. He immediately
   ordered the concentration of all available defenses on a strengthened
   Mozhaisk line, a move supported by Vasilevsky.

   Reportedly, Stalin's first reaction to the German advance on Moscow was
   to deny the truth and to search for scapegoats for the Soviet defeats.
   However, once he realized the danger to the capital, the Soviet leader
   came close to hysteria. On October 13, he ordered the evacuation of the
   Communist Party, the General Staff and various civil government offices
   from Moscow to Kuibyshev (now Samara), leaving only a limited number of
   officials behind. The evacuation caused panic among Moscovites. From
   October 16 to October 17, much of the civilian population tried to
   flee, mobbing the available trains and jamming the roads from the city.
   Despite all this, Stalin publicly remained in the Soviet capital,
   somewhat calming the fear and pandemonium.

Mozhaisk defense line ( 13 October - 30 October)

   Anti-tank fortifications on Moscow streets, 1941.
   Enlarge
   Anti-tank fortifications on Moscow streets, 1941.

   By October 13, 1941, the Wehrmacht had arrived at the Mozhaisk defense
   line, a hastily constructed double set of fortifications protecting
   Moscow from the west and stretching from Kalinin towards Volokolamsk
   and Kaluga. However, despite recent reinforcements, the combined
   strength of the Soviet armies manning the line (the 5th, 16th, 43rd and
   49th armies) barely reached 90,000 men, hardly sufficient to stem the
   German advance. In light of the situation, Zhukov decided to
   concentrate his forces at four critical points: Volokolamsk, Mozhaisk,
   Maloyaroslavets and Kaluga. The entire Soviet Western front, almost
   completely destroyed after its encirclement near Vyazma, was being
   recreated from scratch.

   Moscow itself was transformed into a fortress. According to Zhukov,
   250,000 women and teenagers worked, building trenches and anti-tank
   moats around Moscow, moving almost three million cubic meters of earth
   with no mechanical help. Moscow's factories were hastily transformed
   into military complexes: the automobile factory was turned into a
   submachine gun armory, a clock factory was manufacturing mine
   detonators, the chocolate factory was producing food for the front, and
   automobile repair stations were repairing damaged tanks and vehicles.
   However, the situation was very dangerous, as the Soviet capital was
   still within reach of German panzers. Additionally, Moscow was now a
   target of massive air raids, although these caused only limited damage
   because of extensive anti-aircraft defenses and effective civilian fire
   brigades.
   Shells manufactured on one of the Moscow factories in October-November
   1941.
   Enlarge
   Shells manufactured on one of the Moscow factories in October-November
   1941.

   On October 13, 1941 ( October 15, 1941, according to other sources),
   the Wehrmacht resumed its offensive. At first, the Wehrmacht was
   unwilling to assault the Soviet defenses directly and attempted to
   bypass them by pushing northeast towards the weakly protected city of
   Kalinin, and south towards Kaluga and Tula, capturing all three by
   October 14. Encouraged by this initial success, the Germans conducted a
   frontal assault against the fortified line, taking Mozhaisk and
   Maloyaroslavets on October 18, Naro-Fominsk on October 21, and
   Volokolamsk on October 27, after intense fighting. Due to the
   increasing danger of flanking attacks, Zhukov was forced to fall back
   and withdraw his forces east of the Nara river.

   In the south, the Second Panzer Army was moving towards Tula with
   relative ease, since the Mozhaisk defense line did not extend that far
   south, and because there were no significant concentrations of Soviet
   troops to slow down the advance. The bad weather, however, greatly
   slowed the Germans. Also, the German forces experienced fuel problems
   and had to deal with damaged and destroyed roads and bridges, so that
   Guderian reached the outskirts of Tula only by October 26, 1941. The
   German plan initially called for an instant capture of Tula and for a
   pincer move around Moscow. However, the first attempt to capture the
   city failed, as German panzers were stopped by the 50th Army and
   civilian volunteers in a desperate fight. Guderian's army had to stop
   within sight of the city on October 29, 1941.

Wehrmacht at the gates ( 1 November - 5 December)

Wearing down

   The October Revolution military parade on November 7, 1941, in Red
   Square was not cancelled despite German troops on the outskirts of
   Moscow.
   Enlarge
   The October Revolution military parade on November 7, 1941, in Red
   Square was not cancelled despite German troops on the outskirts of
   Moscow.

   As David Glantz pointed out in his book When Titans Clashed, by late
   October the Wehrmacht and the Red Army could be compared to
   "punch-drunk boxers, staying precariously on their feet but rapidly
   losing the power to hurt each other." The German forces were worn out,
   with only a third of their motor vehicles still functioning, infantry
   divisions at one-third to one-half strength, and serious logistics
   issues preventing the delivery of warm clothing and other winter
   equipment to the front. Even Hitler seemed to surrender to the idea of
   a long struggle, since the prospect of sending tanks into such a large
   city without heavy infantry support seemed risky after the costly
   capture of Warsaw in 1939.

   To stiffen the resolve of both the Red Army and increasingly
   demoralized civilians, Stalin ordered the traditional military parade
   on November 7 to be staged in Red Square. Soviet troops paraded past
   the Kremlin and then marched directly to the front. However, despite
   such a brave show, the Red Army was actually in a very precarious
   position. Although 100,000 additional Soviet troops had reinforced Klin
   and Tula, where new German offensives were expected, Soviet defenses
   were still relatively thin. Nevertheless, Stalin wanted several
   preemptive counteroffensives to be launched against the German lines,
   despite protests from Zhukov, who pointed out the complete lack of
   reserves. The Wehrmacht was able to repel most of these
   counteroffensives, depleting the Red Army of men and vehicles that
   could have been used for Moscow's defense. The offensive was only
   successful west of Moscow near Aleksino, where Soviet tanks inflicted
   heavy losses on the 4th Army because the Germans still lacked anti-tank
   weapons capable of damaging the new, well-armored T-34 tanks.

   Despite the defeat near Aleksino, the Wehrmacht still possessed an
   overall superiority in men and equipment over the Red Army. The German
   divisions committed to the final assault on Moscow numbered 943,000
   men, 1,500 tanks and 650 planes, while Soviet forces were reduced to a
   shadow of their former selves, with barely 500,000 men, 890 tanks and
   1,000 planes. However, compared to October, Soviet rifle divisions
   occupied much better defensive positions, a triple defensive ring
   surrounding the city, and some remains of the Mozhaisk line still in
   Soviet hands near Klin. Most of the Soviet field armies now had a
   multilayered defense with at least two rifle divisions in second
   echelon positions. Artillery support and sapper teams were also
   concentrated along major roads that German troops were expected to use
   in their attacks. Finally, Soviet troops — and especially officers —
   were now more experienced and better prepared for the offensive.
   Soviet poster proclaiming, "We shall keep Moscow!"
   Enlarge
   Soviet poster proclaiming, "We shall keep Moscow!"

   By November 15, 1941, the ground had finally frozen, solving the mud
   problem. The armored Wehrmacht spearheads were unleashed, with the goal
   of encircling Moscow and linking up near the city of Noginsk, east of
   the capital. In order to achieve this objective, the German Third and
   Fourth Panzer groups needed to concentrate their forces between the
   Moscow reservoir and Mozhaisk, then proceed to Klin and Solnechnogorsk
   to encircle the capital from the north. In the south, the Second Panzer
   Army intended to bypass Tula, still in Soviet hands, and advance to
   Kashira and Kolomna, linking up with the northern pincer at Noginsk.

Final pincer

   On November 15, 1941, German tank armies began their offensive towards
   Klin, where no Soviet reserves were available due to Stalin's wish to
   attempt a counteroffensive at Volokolamsk, which had forced the
   relocation of all available reserves forces further south. Initial
   German attacks split the front in two, separating the 16th Army from
   the 30th. Several days of intense combat followed. As Zhukov recalls in
   his memoirs, "The enemy, ignoring the casualties, was making frontal
   assaults, willing to get to Moscow by any means necessary." Despite the
   Wehrmacht's efforts, the multilayered defense reduced Soviet casualties
   as the Soviet 16th Army slowly retreated and constantly harassed the
   German divisions trying to make their way through the fortifications.

   The Third Panzer Army finally captured Klin after heavy fighting on
   November 24, 1941, and by November 25, 1941, Solnechnogorsk as well.
   Soviet resistance was still strong, and the outcome of the battle was
   by no means certain. Reportedly, Stalin asked Zhukov whether Moscow
   could be successfully defended and ordered him to "speak honestly, like
   a communist." Zhukov replied that it was possible, but that reserves
   were desperately needed. By November 28, the German 7th Panzer Division
   had seized a bridgehead across the Moscow-Volga Canal — the last major
   obstacle before Moscow — and stood less than 35 kilometers from the
   Kremlin; but a powerful counterattack by the Soviet 1st Shock Army
   drove them back across the canal. Just northwest of Moscow, the
   Wehrmacht reached Krasnaya Polyana, little more than 20 kilometers from
   Moscow; German officers were able to make out some of the major
   buildings of the Soviet capital through their field glasses. However,
   both Soviet and German forces were severely depleted, sometimes having
   only 150 to 200 riflemen (a company's full strength) left in a
   regiment.

   In the south, near Tula, hostilities resumed on November 18, 1941, with
   the Second Panzer army trying to encircle the city. However, the German
   forces involved were extremely battered from previous fighting, and
   still had no winter clothing. As a result, initial German progress was
   only 5 to 10 km (3 to 6 mi) per day, making chances of success "less
   than certain" according to Guderian. Moreover, it exposed the German
   tank armies to flanking attacks from the Soviet 49th and 50th armies,
   located near Tula, further slowing the advance. However, Guderian was
   still able to pursue the offensive, spreading his forces in a star-like
   attack, taking Stalinogorsk on November 22, 1941 and surrounding a
   Soviet rifle division stationed there. On November 26, German panzers
   approached Kashira, a city controlling a major highway to Moscow. In
   response, a violent Soviet counterattack was launched the following
   day. General Belov's cavalry corps, supported by several rifle brigades
   and tank groups, halted the German advance near Kashira. The Germans
   were driven back in early December, securing the southern approach to
   the city. Tula itself held, protected by fortifications and determined
   defenders, both soldiers and civilians. In the south, the Wehrmacht
   never got close to the capital.
   A Soviet soldier in his winter camouflage.
   Enlarge
   A Soviet soldier in his winter camouflage.

   Due to the resistance on both the northern and southern sides of
   Moscow, the Wehrmacht attempted, on December 1, 1941, a direct
   offensive from the west, along the Minsk-Moscow highway near the city
   of Naro-Fominsk. However, this attack had only limited tank support and
   was forced to assault extensive Soviet defenses. After meeting
   determined resistance from the Soviet 1st Guards Motorized Rifle
   Division and flank counterattacks staged by the 33rd Army, the German
   offensive was driven back four days later, with the Germans losing
   10,000 men and several dozen tanks.

   By early December, the temperatures, so far relatively mild by Russian
   standards, dropped as low as twenty to fifty degrees Celsius below
   zero, freezing German troops, who still had no winter clothing, and
   German vehicles, which were not designed for such severe weather. More
   than 130,000 cases of frostbite were reported among German soldiers.
   Frozen grease had to be removed from every loaded shell and vehicles
   had to be heated for hours before use.

   The Axis offensive on Moscow stopped. As Guderian wrote in his journal,
   "the offensive on Moscow failed.... We underestimated the enemy's
   strength, as well as his size and climate. Fortunately, I stopped my
   troops on December 5, otherwise the catastrophe would be unavoidable."

Soviet counteroffensive

   The Soviet winter counter-offensive, 5 December 1941 to 7 May 1942
   Enlarge
   The Soviet winter counter-offensive, 5 December 1941 to 7 May 1942

   Although the Wehrmacht's offensive had been stopped, German
   intelligence estimated that Soviet forces had no more reserves left and
   thus would be unable to stage a counteroffensive. This estimate proved
   wrong, as Stalin transferred fresh divisions from Siberia and Far East,
   relying on intelligence from his spy, Richard Sorge, which indicated
   that Japan would not attack the Soviet Union. The Red Army had
   accumulated a 58-division reserve by early December, when the offensive
   proposed by Zhukov and Vasilevsky was finally approved by Stalin.
   However, even with these new reserves, Soviet forces committed to the
   operation numbered only 1,100,000 men, only slightly outnumbering the
   Wehrmacht. Nevertheless, with careful troop deployment, a ratio of
   two-to-one was reached at some critical points. On December 5, 1941,
   the counteroffensive started on the Kalinin Front. After two days of
   little progress, Soviet armies retook Krasnaya Polyana and several
   other cities in the immediate vicinity of Moscow.
   December, 1941. Soviet troops in winter gear supported by the tanks
   take on the Germans in the counter-attack.
   Enlarge
   December, 1941. Soviet troops in winter gear supported by the tanks
   take on the Germans in the counter-attack.

   The same day, Hitler signed his directive number 39, ordering the
   Wehrmacht to assume a defensive stance on the whole front. However,
   German troops were unable to organize a solid defense at their present
   locations and were forced to pull back to consolidate their lines.
   Guderian wrote that discussions with Hans Schmidt and Wolfram von
   Richthofen took place the same day, and both commanders agreed that the
   current front line could not be held. On December 14, Franz Halder and
   Günther von Kluge finally gave permission for a limited withdrawal to
   the west of the Oka river, without Hitler's approval. On December 20,
   1941, during a meeting with German senior officers, Hitler cancelled
   the withdrawal and ordered his soldiers to defend every patch of
   ground, "digging trenches with howitzer shells if needed." Guderian
   protested, pointing out that losses from cold were actually greater
   than combat losses and that winter equipment was held by traffic ties
   in Poland. Nevertheless, Hitler insisted on defending the existing
   lines, and Guderian was dismissed by Christmas, along with generals
   Hoepner and Strauss, commanders of the 4th Panzers and 9th Army,
   respectively. Fedor von Bock was also dismissed, officially for
   "medical reasons." Walther von Brauchitsch, Hitler's
   commander-in-chief, had been removed even earlier, on December 19,
   1941.

   Meanwhile, the Soviet offensive continued; in the north, Klin and
   Kalinin were liberated on December 15 and December 16, as the Kalinin
   Front drove west. The Soviet front commander, General Konev, attempted
   to envelop Army Group Centre, but met strong opposition near Rzhev and
   was forced to halt, forming a salient that would last until 1943. In
   the south, the offensive went equally well, with Southwestern Front
   forces relieving Tula on December 16, 1941. In the centre, however,
   progress was much slower, and Soviet troops liberated Naro-Fominsk only
   on December 26, Kaluga on December 28, and Maloyaroslavets on January
   2, after ten days of violent action. Soviet reserves ran low, and the
   offensive halted on January 7, 1942, after having pushed the exhausted
   and freezing German armies back 100 to 250 km (60 to 150 mi) from
   Moscow. This victory provided an important boost for Soviet morale,
   with the Wehrmacht suffering its first defeat. Having failed to
   vanquish the Soviet Union in one quick strike, Germany now had to
   prepare for a prolonged struggle. The blitzkrieg on Moscow had failed.

Aftermath

   The "Defense of Moscow" medal, created in 1944 for soldiers who took
   part in the battle.
   Enlarge
   The "Defense of Moscow" medal, created in 1944 for soldiers who took
   part in the battle.

   The Red Army's winter counteroffensive drove the Wehrmacht from Moscow,
   but the city was still considered to be threatened, with the front line
   still relatively close. Thus, the Moscow direction remained a priority
   for Stalin, who had been frightened by the initial German success. In
   particular, the initial Soviet advance was unable to level the Rzhev
   salient, held by several divisions of Army Group Centre. Immediately
   after the Moscow counteroffensive, a series of Soviet attacks (the
   Battles of Rzhev) were attempted against the salient, each time with
   heavy losses on both sides. Soviet losses are estimated to be between
   500,000 and 1,000,000 men, and German losses between 300,000 and
   450,000 men. By early 1943, however, the Wehrmacht had to disengage
   from the salient as the whole front was moving west. Nevertheless, the
   Moscow front was not finally secured until October 1943, when Army
   Group Centre was decisively repulsed from the Smolensk landbridge and
   from the left shore of the upper Dnieper at the end of the Second
   Battle of Smolensk.

   Furious that his army had been unable to take Moscow, Hitler dismissed
   his commander-in-chief, Walther von Brauchitsch, on December 19, 1941,
   and took personal charge of the Wehrmacht, effectively taking control
   of all military decisions and setting most experienced German officers
   against him. Additionally, Hitler surrounded himself with staff
   officers with little or no recent combat experience. As Guderian wrote
   in his memoirs, "This created a cold (chill) in our relations, a cold
   (chill) that could never be eliminated afterwards." This increased
   Hitler's distrust of his senior officers and ultimately proved fatal to
   the Wehrmacht. Germany now faced the prospect of a war of attrition,
   something it was not prepared for.

   For the first time since June 1941, Soviet forces had stopped the enemy
   and driven him back. However, this resulted in Stalin becoming
   overconfident and deciding to further expand the offensive. On January
   5, 1942, during a meeting in the Kremlin, Stalin announced that he was
   planning a general spring counteroffensive, which would be staged
   simultaneously near Moscow, Leningrad and in southern Russia. This plan
   was accepted over Zhukov's objections. However, low Red Army reserves
   and Wehrmacht tactical skill led to a bloody stalemate near Rhzev,
   known as " Rzhev meat grinder," and to a string of Red Army defeats,
   such as the Second Battle of Kharkov, the failed elimination of the
   Demyansk pocket, and the encirclement of General Vlasov's army near
   Leningrad in a failed attempt to lift the siege of the city.
   Ultimately, these failures would lead to a successful German offensive
   in the south and to the Battle of Stalingrad.

   Nevertheless, the defense of Moscow became a symbol of Soviet
   resistance against the invading Axis forces. To commemorate the battle,
   Moscow was awarded the title of " Hero City" in 1965, on the 20th
   anniversary of Victory Day. The "Defense of Moscow" medal was created
   in 1944, and was awarded to soldiers, civilians, and partisans who took
   part in the battle.

Casualties

   Both German and Soviet casualties during the battle of Moscow have been
   a subject of debate, as various sources provide somewhat different
   estimates. Not all historians agree on what should be considered the
   "Battle of Moscow" in the timeline of World War II. While the start of
   the battle is usually regarded as the beginning of Operation Typhoon on
   September 30, 1941 (or sometimes on October 2, 1941), there are two
   different dates for the end of the offensive. In particular, some
   sources (such as Erickson and Glantz) exclude the Rzhev offensive from
   the scope of the battle, considering it as a distinct operation and
   making the Moscow offensive "stop" on January 7, 1942 — thus lowering
   the number of casualties. Other historians, who include the Rzhev and
   Vyazma operations in the scope of the battle (thus making the battle
   end in May 1942), give higher casualty numbers. Since the Rzhev
   operation started on January 8, 1942, with no pause after the previous
   counteroffensive, such a stance is understandable.

   There are also significant differences in figures from various sources.
   John Erickson, in his Barbarossa: The Axis and the Allies, gives a
   figure of 653,924 Soviet casualties between October 1941 and January
   1942. Glantz, in his book When Titans Clashed, gives a figure of
   658,279 for the defense phase alone, and of 370,955 for the winter
   counteroffensive until January 7, 1942. The Great Soviet Encyclopedia
   published in 1973-1978, estimates 400,000 German casualties by January,
   1942. Another estimate available is provided in the Moscow
   Encyclopedia, published in 1997; its authors, based on various sources,
   give a figure of 145,000 German and 900,000 Soviet casualties for the
   defensive phase, along with 103,000 German and 380,000 Soviet
   casualties for the counteroffensive until January 7, 1942. Therefore,
   total casualties between September 30, 1941 and January 7, 1942 are
   estimated to be between 248,000 and 400,000 for the Wehrmacht (GSE /
   Moscow encyclopedia estimate) and between 650,000 and 1,280,000 for the
   Red Army (Erickson / Moscow encyclopedia estimate).
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_Moscow"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
