   #copyright

Beijing

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Asia

   Beijing - 北京

             The Temple of Heaven, an enduring symbol of Beijing

   Location in the People's Republic of China
   Beijing is highlighted on this map
   Basic Information
   Origin of name: 北 běi - north
   京 jīng - capital
   "Northern Capital"
   Abbreviation: 京 Jīng
   Area: 16,808 km² ( 29th)
   Population ( 2004): 14,930,000 ( 26th) Municipality
   approx. 7.5 million Urban Area
   Density ( 2004): 888/km² ( 4th) Municipality
   GDP ( 2004):
    - per capita CNY 428.3 billion ( 15th)
   CNY 28,700 ( 2nd)
   HDI ( 2005) 0.882 ( 2nd) — high
   Major nationalities ( 2000): Han - 96%
   Manchu - 2%
   Hui - 2%
   Mongolian - 0.3%
   City trees: Chinese arborvitae
   (Platycladus orientalis)
   Pagoda tree
   (Sophora japonica)
   City flowers: Chrysanthemum
   (Chrysanthemum morifolium)
   Chinese rose
   (Rosa chinensis)
   Elevation: 43.5m
   Coordinates: 39°54′20″N, 116°23′29″E
   Postal code: 100000 - 102600
   Area code: +86/10
   License plate prefixes : 京A, C, E, F, H, J
   京B (taxis)
   京G (outside urban area)
   京O (police and authorities)
   京V (military headquarters
   & central government)
   ISO 3166-2: cn-11
   Time zone : UTC+8
   Website : www.beijing.gov.cn
   www.ebeijing.gov.cn (English)
   Government
   Administration Type: Municipality
   CPC Beijing
   Committee Secretary: Liu Qi
   Mayor: Wang Qishan
   County-level divisions: 18
   Township-level divisions: 273

   Beijing [ English Pronunciation] (Chinese: 北京 [ Chinese Pronunciation];
   Pinyin: Běijīng; IPA: [pei˨˩˦ tɕɪŋ˥˥]), a city in northern China, is
   the capital of the People's Republic of China (PRC). It was formerly
   known in English as Peking or Peiking [ English Pronunciation]. Beijing
   is also one of the four municipalities of the PRC, which are equivalent
   to provinces in China's administrative structure. Beijing Municipality
   borders Hebei Province to the north, west, south, and for a small
   section in the east, and Tianjin Municipality to the southeast.

   Beijing is China's second largest city in terms of population, after
   Shanghai. It is a major transportation hub, with dozens of railways,
   roads and expressways entering and leaving it in all directions. It is
   also the focal point of many international flights to China. Beijing is
   recognized as the political, educational, and cultural centre of the
   People's Republic of China, while Shanghai and Hong Kong predominate in
   economic fields.

   Beijing is one of the Four Great Ancient Capitals of China. It will
   also host the 2008 Summer Olympics.

Names

   Beijing (北京) literally means "Northern capital", in line with the
   common East Asian tradition whereby capital cities are explicitly named
   as such. Other cities similarly named include Nanjing (南京), China,
   meaning "southern capital"; Tokyo (東京), Japan, and Đông Kinh (東京; now
   Hanoi), Vietnam, both meaning "eastern capital"; as well as Kyoto (京都),
   Japan, and Gyeongseong (京城; now Seoul), Korea, both meaning simply
   "capital".

   Peking is the name of the city according to Chinese Postal Map
   Romanization, and the traditional customary name for Beijing in
   English. The term originated with French missionaries four hundred
   years ago and corresponds to an older pronunciation predating a
   subsequent sound change in Mandarin from [kʲ] to [tɕ]. ([tɕ] is
   represented in pinyin as j, as in Beijing), and is still used in some
   languages (for example, the Portuguese name is Pequim).

   In China, the city has had many names. Between 1928 and 1949, it was
   known as Peiping (北平; Pinyin: Beiping; Wade-Giles: Pei-p'ing),
   literally "Northern Peace". The name was changed — with the removal of
   the element meaning "capital" (jing or king, 京) — to reflect the fact
   that, with the Kuomintang government having established its capital in
   Nanjing (pinyin: Nanjing), Peking was no longer the capital of China,
   and that the warlord government based in Peking was not legitimate.

   The Communist Party of China reverted the name to Beijing (Peking) in
   1949 again in part to emphasize that Beijing had returned to its role
   as China's capital. The government of the Republic of China on Taiwan
   has never formally recognized the name change, and during the 1950s and
   1960s it was common in Taiwan for Beijing to be called Beiping to imply
   the illegitimacy of the PRC. Today, almost all of Taiwan, including the
   ROC government, uses Beijing, although some maps of China from Taiwan
   still use the old name along with pre-1949 political boundaries.

   Yanjing (燕京; Pinyin: Yānjīng; Wade-Giles: Yen-ching) is and has been
   another popular informal name for Beijing, a reference to the ancient
   State of Yan that existed here during the Zhou Dynasty. This name is
   reflected in the locally-brewed Yanjing Beer as well as Yenching
   University, an institution of higher learning that was merged into
   Peking University. During the Yuan Dynasty, Beijing was known as
   Khanbaliq which is the Cambuluc described in Marco Polo's accounts.

   (The history section below outlines other historical names of Beijing.)

History

   There were cities in the vicinities of Beijing by the 1st millennium
   BC, and the capital of the State of Yan, one of the powers of the
   Warring States Period (473-221 BC), Ji (薊/蓟), was established in
   present-day Beijing.
   Remnants of city walls around Beijing (August 2004 image).
   Enlarge
   Remnants of city walls around Beijing (August 2004 image).

   After the fall of the Yan, the subsequent Qin, Han, and Jin dynasties
   set-up local prefectures in the area. In Tang Dynasty it became the
   headquarter for Fanyang jiedushi, the virtual military governor of
   current northern Hebei area. An Lushan lauched An Shi Rebellion from
   here in 755. This rebellion is often regarded as a turning point of
   Tang dynasty, as the central government began to lose the control of
   the whole country.

   In 936, the Later Jin Dynasty (936-947) of northern China ceded a large
   part of its northern frontier, including modern Beijing, to the Khitan
   Liao Dynasty. In 938, the Liao Dynasty set up a secondary capital in
   what is now Beijing, and called it Nanjing (the "Southern Capital"). In
   1125, the Jurchen Jin Dynasty annexed Liao, and in 1153 moved its
   capital to Liao's Nanjing, calling it Zhongdu (中都), "the central
   capital." Zhongdu was situated in what is now the area centred around
   Tianningsi, slightly to the southwest of central Beijing.

   Mongol forces burned Zhongdu to the ground in 1215 and rebuilt it to
   the north of the Jin capital in 1267. In preparation for the conquest
   of all of China, Yuan (Mongol) Dynasty founder Kublai Khan made this
   his capital as Khanbaliq ( Mongolian for "great residence of the Khan")
   or Dadu (大都, Chinese for "grand capital"). This site is known as
   Cambuluc in Marco Polo's accounts. Apparently, Kublai Khan, who wanted
   to become a Chinese emperor, established his capital at this location
   instead of more traditional sites in central China because it was
   closer to his power base in Mongolia. The decision of the Khan greatly
   enhanced the status of a city that had been situated on the northern
   fringe of China proper. Khanbaliq was situated north of modern central
   Beijing. It centred on what is now the northern stretch of the 2nd Ring
   Road, and stretched northwards to between the 3rd and 4th Ring Roads.
   There are remnants of Mongol-era wall still standing.

   After the fall of the Yuan Dynasty in 1368, the city was later rebuilt
   by the Ming Dynasty and Shuntian (順天) prefecture was established in the
   area around the city. In 1403, the third Ming Emperor Yongle moved the
   Ming capital from Nanjing (Nanking) to the renamed Beijing (Peking)
   (北京), the "northern capital", situated in the north. The capital was
   also known as Jingshi 京師, simply meaning capital. During the Ming
   Dynasty, Beijing took its current shape, and the Ming-era city wall
   served as the Beijing city wall until modern times, when it was pulled
   down and the 2nd Ring Road was built in its place.

   It is believed that Beijing was the largest city in the world from 1425
   to 1650 and from 1710 to 1825 .

   The Forbidden City was constructed soon after that (1406-1420),
   followed by the Temple of Heaven (1420), and numerous other
   construction projects. Tian'anmen, which has become a state symbol of
   the People's Republic of China and is featured on its emblem, was
   burned down twice during the Ming Dynasty and the final reconstruction
   was carried out in 1651.
   The Forbidden City, home to the Emperors of the Ming and Qing
   Dynasties.
   Enlarge
   The Forbidden City, home to the Emperors of the Ming and Qing
   Dynasties.
   Beijing's Tian'anmen Square, as seen from the Tian'anmen Chenglou
   Building (taken in July of 2004).
   Enlarge
   Beijing's Tian'anmen Square, as seen from the Tian'anmen Chenglou
   Building (taken in July of 2004).

   After the Manchus overthrew the Ming Dynasty and established the Qing
   Dynasty in its place, Beijing remained China's capital throughout the
   Qing period. Just like during the preceding dynasty, Beijing was also
   known as Jingshi, which corresponded to the Manchu Gemun Hecen with the
   same meaning. It was the scene of the siege of the foreign legations
   during the Boxer Rebellion in 1900.

   The Xinhai Revolution of 1911, aimed at replacing Qing rule with a
   republic, originally intended to establish its capital at Nanjing.
   After high-ranking Qing official Yuan Shikai forced the abdication of
   the Qing emperor in Beijing and ensured the success of the revolution,
   the revolutionaries in Nanjing accepted that Yuan should be the
   president of the new Republic of China, and that the capital should
   remain at Beijing.

   Yuan gradually consolidated power, culminating in his declaration of a
   Chinese Empire in late 1915 with himself as emperor. The move was
   highly unpopular, and Yuan himself died less than a year later, ending
   his brief reign. China then fell under the control of regional
   warlords, and the most powerful factions fought frequent wars (the
   Zhili-Anhui War, the First Zhili-Fengtian War, and the Second
   Zhili-Fengtian War) to take control of the capital at Beijing.

   Following the success of the Kuomintang's Northern Expedition which
   pacified the warlords of the north, Nanjing was officially made the
   capital of the Republic of China in 1928, and Beijing was renamed
   Beiping (Peip'ing) (北平), "northern peace" or "north pacified", to
   emphasize that the warlord government in Beijing was not legitimate.

   During the Second Sino-Japanese War, Beiping fell to Japan on 29 July
   1937. During the occupation, the city was reverted to its former name,
   Beijing, and made the seat of the Provisional Government of the
   Republic of China, a puppet state that ruled the ethnic Chinese
   portions of Japanese-occupied North China. It was later merged into the
   larger Wang Jingwei Government based in Nanjing. With Japan's surrender
   in World War II, on 15 August 1945, however, Beijing's name was changed
   back to Beiping.

   On January 31, 1949, during the Chinese Civil War, Communist forces
   entered Beijing without a fight. On October 1 of the same year, the
   Communist Party of China, under the leadership of Mao Zedong, announced
   in Tian'anmen the creation of the People's Republic of China in
   Beijing. Just a few days earlier, the Chinese People's Political
   Consultative Conference had decided that Beiping would be the capital
   of the new government, and that its name would be changed back to
   Beijing.

   At the time of the founding of the People's Republic, Beijing
   Municipality consisted of just its urban area and immediate suburbs.
   The urban area was divided into many small districts inside what is now
   the 2nd Ring Road. Since then several surrounding counties have been
   incorporated into the Municipality, enlarging the limits of Beijing
   Municipality by many times and giving it its present shape. The Beijing
   city wall was torn down between 1965 and 1969 to make way for the
   construction of the 2nd Ring Road.

   Following the economic reforms of Deng Xiaoping, the urban area of
   Beijing has expanded greatly. Formerly within the confines of the 2nd
   Ring Road and the 3rd Ring Road, the urban area of Beijing is now
   pushing at the limits of the recently-constructed 5th Ring Road and 6th
   Ring Road (currently under construction), with many areas that were
   formerly farmland now developed residential or commercial
   neighborhoods. A new commercial area has developed in the Guomao area,
   Wangfujing and Xidan have developed into flourishing shopping
   districts, while Zhongguancun has become a major centre of electronics
   in China.

   As the national capital, Beijing has also been the site of political
   turmoil in recent years. Tian'anmen Square, a well-known landmark in
   the city, was the site of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1976 and
   then the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, which ended in a military
   crackdown. Tian'anmen Square has also been the site of protests by
   Falun Gong.

   In recent years, the expansion of Beijing has also brought to the
   forefront some problems of urbanization, such as heavy traffic, poor
   air quality, the loss of historic neighborhoods, and significant influx
   of migrants from poorer regions of the country, especially rural areas.

   Early 2005 saw the approval by government of a plan to finally stop the
   sprawling development of Beijing in all directions. Development of the
   Chinese capital would now proceed in two semicircular bands just
   outside of the city centre (both west and east) instead of being in
   concentric rings.

   Beijing has been chosen to host the 2008 Summer Olympics, an event that
   has sparked nationalistic pride across China.

Geography and climate

   A simulated-color image of Beijing, taken by NASA's Landsat 7.
   Enlarge
   A simulated-colour image of Beijing, taken by NASA's Landsat 7.

   Beijing is situated at the northern tip of the roughly triangular North
   China Plain which opens to the south and east of the city. Mountains to
   the north, northwest and west shield the city and northern China's
   agricultural heartland from the encroaching desert steppes. The
   northwestern part of the municipality, especially Yanqing County and
   Huairou District, are dominated by the Jundu Mountains, while the
   western part of the municipality is framed by the Xishan Mountains. The
   Great Wall of China, which stretches across the northern part of
   Beijing Municipality, made use of this rugged topography to defend
   against nomadic incursions from the steppes. Mount Dongling in the
   Xishan ranges and on the border with Hebei is the municipality's
   highest point, with an altitude of 2303 m. Major rivers flowing through
   the municipality include the Yongding River and the Chaobai River, part
   of the Hai River system, and flowing in a southerly direction. Beijing
   is also the northern terminus of the Grand Canal of China which was
   built across the North China Plain to Hangzhou. Miyun Reservoir, built
   on the upper reaches of the Chaobai River, is Beijing's largest
   reservoir, and crucial to its water supply.

   The urban area of Beijing, located at 39°54′20″N, 116°23′29″E (39.9056,
   116.3914), is situated in the south-central part of the municipality
   and occupies a small but expanding part of the municipality's area. It
   spreads out in bands of concentric ring roads, of which the fifth and
   outermost (the Sixth Ring Road; the numbering starts at 2) passes
   through several satellite towns. Tian'anmen (Gate of Heavenly Peace)
   and Tian'anmen Square are at the centre of Beijing, and are directly to
   the south of the Forbidden City, former residence of the emperors of
   China. To the west of Tian'anmen is Zhongnanhai, current residence of
   the paramount leaders of the People's Republic of China. Running
   through central Beijing from east to west is Chang'an Avenue, one of
   Beijing's main thoroughfares.

   The city's climate is harsh, characterized by hot, humid summers due to
   the East Asian monsoon, and cold, windy, dry winters that reflect the
   influence of the vast Siberian anticyclone. Average temperatures in
   January are at around -7 to -4 ° C, while average temperatures in July
   are at 25 to 26 ° C. Annual precipitation is over 600 mm, with 75% of
   that in summer.

   Beijing also suffers from heavy pollution and poor air quality from
   industry and traffic. Dust from erosion of deserts in northern and
   northwestern China result in seasonal dust storms that plague the city.
   In the first four months of 2006 alone, there were no fewer than eight
   such storms. Efforts have been made of late to clean up Beijing in
   preparation for the 2008 Summer Olympics.

City layout

Neighbourhoods

   Southern end of Wangfujing Road (July 2004 image).
   Enlarge
   Southern end of Wangfujing Road (July 2004 image).
   Beijing by night
   Enlarge
   Beijing by night
   Beijing Bookstore at Xidan
   Enlarge
   Beijing Bookstore at Xidan

   Major neighbourhoods in urban Beijing include the following.
   Neighborhoods may overlap across multiple districts (see below):
     * Andingmen 安定门
     * Beiyuan 北苑
     * Chaoyangmen 朝阳门
     * Dongzhimen 东直门
     * Fangzhuang 方庄
     * Fuchengmen 阜成门
     * Fuxingmen 复兴门
     * Guomao 国贸
     * Hepingli 和平里
     * Wangjing 望京
     * Wangfujing 王府井
     * Wudaokou 五道口
     * Xidan 西单
     * Yayuncun 亚运村
     * Zhongguancun 中关村

   Several place names in Beijing end with men (门), meaning "gate", as
   they were the locations of gates in the former Beijing city wall. Other
   place names end in cun (村), meaning "village", as they were originally
   villages outside the city wall.

Towns

   Towns within Beijing Municipality but outside the urban area include:
     * Changping 昌平
     * Huairou 怀柔
     * Miyun 密云
     * Liangxiang 良乡
     * Liulimiao 琉璃庙
     * Tongzhou 通州
     * Yizhuang 亦庄

Subdivisions

   Beijing Municipality currently comprises 18 administrative
   sub-divisions, county-level units governed directly by the municipality
   (second-level divisions). Of these, 16 are districts and 2 are
   counties.

   The urban and suburban areas of the city are divided into eight (8)
   districts:
   District Population (2000 census) Area (km²) Density (per km²)
   Dongcheng District (东城区: Dōngchéng Qū) 536,000 24.7 21,700
   Xicheng District (西城区: Xīchéng Qū) 707,000 30.0 23,567
   Chongwen District (崇文区: Chóngwén Qū) 346,000 15.9 21,761
   Xuanwu District (宣武区: Xuānwǔ Qū) 526,000 16.5 31,879
   Chaoyang District (朝阳区: Cháoyáng Qū) 2,290,000 470.8 4,864
   Haidian District (海淀区: Hǎidiàn Qū) 2,240,000 426.0 5,258
   Fengtai District (丰台区: Fēngtái Qū) 1,369,000 304.2 4,500
   Shijingshan District (石景山区: Shíjǐngshān Qū) 489,000 89.8 5,445
   City proper + inner suburbs 8.50 million 1377.9 6,171

   The following six districts encompass the more distant suburbs and
   satellite towns, constituting part of the metropolitan area:
   District Population (2000 census) Area (km²) Density (per km²)
   Mentougou District (门头沟区: Méntóugōu Qū) 267,000 1,331.3 201
   Fangshan District (房山区: Fángshān Qū)
   Fangshan County until 1986 814,000 1,866.7 436
   Tongzhou District (通州区: Tōngzhōu Qū)
   Tong County until 1997 674,000 870.0 775
   Shunyi District (顺义区: Shùnyì Qū)
   Shunyi County until 1998 637,000 980.0 650
   Changping District (昌平区: Chāngpíng Qū)
   Changping County until 1999 615,000 1,430.0 430
   Daxing District (大兴区: Dàxīng Qū)
   Daxing County until 2001 672,000 1,012.0 664
   Outer suburbs 3.68 million 7,490 491

   The other two districts and the two counties located further out govern
   semirural and rural areas:
   District Population (2000 census) Area (km²) Density (per km²)
   Pinggu District (平谷区: Pínggǔ Qū)
   Pinggu County until 2001 397,000 1,075.0 369
   Huairou District (怀柔区: Huáiróu Qū)
   Huairou County until 2001 296,000 2,557.3 116
   Miyun County (密云县: Mìyún Xiàn) 420,000 2,335.6 180
   Yanqing County (延庆县: Yánqìng Xiàn) 275,000 1,980.0 139
   Peripheral areas 1.39 million 7,947.9 175

   Source: Geohive

   Beijing's 18 districts and counties are further subdivided into 273
   lower (third)-level administrative units at the township level: 119
   towns, 24 townships, 5 ethnic townships and 125 subdistricts.

Economy

   The Beijing CBD area around Dawangqiao and Dabeiyao, as seen from the
   Jingtong Expressway.
   Enlarge
   The Beijing CBD area around Dawangqiao and Dabeiyao, as seen from the
   Jingtong Expressway.

   In 2005, Beijing's nominal GDP was 681.45 billion RMB (about 84 billion
   USD), a year-on-year growth of 11.1% from the previous year. Its per
   capita GDP was 44,969 RMB, an increase of 8.1% from the previous year
   and nearly twice as much as in 2000. Beijing's primary, secondary, and
   tertiary industries were worth 9.77 billion RMB, 210.05 billion RMB,
   and 461.63 billion RMB. Urban disposable income per capita was 17,653
   yuan, a real increase of 12.9% from the previous year. Per capita pure
   income of rural residents was 7,860 RMB, a real increase of 9.6%. Per
   capita disposable income of the 20% low-income residents increased
   16.7%, 11.4 percentage points higher than the growth rate of the 20%
   high-income residents. The Engel's coefficient of Beijing's urban
   residents reached 31.8% in 2005 and that of the rural residents was
   32.8%, declining 4.5 percentage points and 3.9 percentage points,
   respectively, compared with 2000.

   Beijing's real estate and automobile sectors continue to bloom in
   recent years. In 2005, a total of 28.032 million square metres of
   housing real estate was sold, for a total of 175.88 billion RMB. The
   total number of automobiles registered in Beijing in 2004 was
   2,146,000, of which 1,540,000 were privately-owned (a year-on-year
   increase of 18.7%).

   The Beijing CBD, centered at the Guomao area, has been identified as
   the city's new central business district, and is home to a variety of
   corporate regional headquarters, shopping malls, and high-end housing.
   The Beijing Financial Street, in the Fuxingmen and Fuchengmen area, is
   a traditional financial centre. The Wangfujing and Xidan areas are
   major shopping districts. Zhongguancun, dubbed "China's Silicon
   Valley", continues to be a major centre in electronics- and
   computer-related industries, as well as pharmaceuticals-related
   research. Meanwhile, Yizhuang, located to the southeast of the urban
   area, is becoming a new centre in pharmaceuticals, IT, and materials
   engineering. Urban Beijing is also known for being a centre of pirated
   goods and anything from the latest designer clothing to the latest DVDs
   can be found in markets all over the city, often marketed to
   expatriates and international visitors.
   A corner of the emerging Beijing CBD.
   Enlarge
   A corner of the emerging Beijing CBD.

   Major industrial areas include Shijingshan, located on the western
   outskirts of the city. Agriculture is carried out outside the urban
   area of Beijing, with wheat and maize (corn) being the main crops.
   Vegetables are also grown in the regions closer to the urban area in
   order to supply the city.

   Beijing is increasingly becoming known for its innovative entrepreneurs
   and high-growth start-ups. This culture is backed by large community of
   both Chinese and foreign venture capital firms, such as Sequoia
   Capital, whose head office in China resides in Chaoyang, Beijing.
   Though Shanghai is seen as the economic center of China, this is
   typically based on the numerous large corporations based there, rather
   than as a centre for Chinese entrepreneurs.

   The development of Beijing continues to proceed at a rapid pace, and
   the vast expansion of Beijing has created a multitude of problems for
   the city. Beijing is known for its smog as well as the frequent
   "power-saving" programs instituted by the government. Citizens of
   Beijing as well as tourists frequently complain about the quality of
   the water supply and the cost of the basic services such as electricity
   and natural gas. The major industrial areas outside of Beijing were
   ordered to clean their operations or leave the Beijing area in an
   effort to alleviate the smog that covers the city. Most factories,
   unable to update, have moved and relocated to other cities such as
   Xi'an, China.

Architecture

   Three styles of architecture predominate in urban Beijing. First, the
   traditional architecture of imperial China, perhaps best exemplified by
   the massive Tian'anmen (Gate of Heavenly Peace), which remains the
   PRC's trademark edifice, the Forbidden City, and the Temple of Heaven.
   Next there is what is sometimes referred to as the "Sino-Sov" style,
   built between the 1950s and the 1970s, which tend to be boxy, bland,
   and poorly made. Finally, there are much more modern architectural
   forms — most noticeably in the area of the Beijing CBD. Pictured below
   are some images of Beijing architecture — blending the old and the new.

   The ancient Beijing skyline.

   The boxy look of buildings made in the 1970s.

   The very modern contrast.

   Details of traditional architecture.

   A mix of 70s and 90s styles.

   Mix and match of the old and the new.

   The Tian'anmen

   Wangfujing, a major commercial street.

   A bizarre and striking mixture of both old and new styles of
   architecture can be seen at the Dashanzi Art District, which mixes
   1950s-design with a blend of the new. The influence of American urban
   form and social values in manifest in the creation of Orange County,
   China, a suburban development about one hour north of the city.

Demographics

   The Wangjing neighbourhood, in Chaoyang District, Beijing, is known for
   its large number of South Korean residents.
   Enlarge
   The Wangjing neighbourhood, in Chaoyang District, Beijing, is known for
   its large number of South Korean residents.

   The population of Beijing Municipality, defined as the total number of
   people who reside in Beijing for 6 months or more per year, was 15.38
   million in 2005. 11.870 million people in Beijing Municipality had
   Beijing hukou (permanent residence) and the remainder were on temporary
   residence permits. In addition, there is a large but unknown number of
   migrant workers (min gong) who live illegally in Beijing without any
   official residence permit (also termed hei ren which means "black
   people" (as in "black market") or unregistered people). The population
   of Beijing's urban core (city proper) is around 7.5 million.

   Over 95% of Beijing's residents belong to the Han Chinese majority.
   Other major ethnic minorities include the Manchu, Hui, and Mongol, etc.
   A Tibetan high school exists for youth of Tibetan ancestry, nearly all
   of whom have come to Beijing from Tibet expressly for their studies.

   A sizable international community exists in Beijing, mostly attracted
   by the highly growing foreign business and trade sector, and many live
   in the Beijing urban area's densely populated northern, northeastern
   and eastern sections. In recent years there has also been an influx of
   South Koreans who live in Beijing predominantly for business and study
   purpose. Many of them live in the Wangjing and Wudaokou areas.
   Wangfujing Cathedral
   Enlarge
   Wangfujing Cathedral
   Ethnic groups in Beijing, 2000 census
   Nationality Population   Percentage
   Han Chinese 12,983,696 95.69%
   Manchu      250,286    1.84%
   Hui         235,837    1.74%
   Mongol      37,464     0.28%
   Korean      20,369     0.15%
   Tujia       8372       0.062%
   Zhuang      7322       0.054%
   Miao        5291       0.039%
   Uyghur      3129       0.023%
   Tibetan     2920       0.022%

   Excludes members of the People's Liberation Army in active service.
   Source: Department of Population, Social, Science and Technology
   Statistics of the National Bureau of Statistics of China
   (国家统计局人口和社会科技统计司) and Department of Economic Development of the State
   Ethnic Affairs Commission of China (国家民族事务委员会经济发展司), eds. Tabulation on
   Nationalities of 2000 Population Census of China (《2000年人口普查中国民族人口资料》).
   2 vols. Beijing: Nationalities Publishing House (民族出版社), 2003. ( ISBN
   7-105-05425-5)

Culture

   A Beijing performance of the classic opera Farewell my Concubine
   (September 2002).
   Enlarge
   A Beijing performance of the classic opera Farewell my Concubine
   (September 2002).

   People native to urban Beijing speak the Beijing dialect, which belongs
   to the Mandarin subdivision of spoken Chinese. Beijing dialect provides
   the basis for Standard Mandarin, the standard Chinese language used in
   the People's Republic of China, the Republic of China on Taiwan, and
   Singapore. Rural areas of Beijing Municipality have their own dialects
   akin to those of Hebei province, which surrounds Beijing Municipality.

   Beijing Opera, or Peking Opera (Jingju), is well-known throughout the
   national capital. Commonly lauded as one of the highest achievements of
   Chinese culture, Beijing Opera is performed through a combination of
   song, spoken dialogue, and codified action sequences, such as gestures,
   movement, fighting and acrobatics. Much of Beijing Opera is carried out
   in an archaic stage dialect quite different from modern Standard
   Mandarin and from the Beijing dialect; this makes the dialogue somewhat
   hard to understand, and the problem is compounded if one is not
   familiar with Chinese. As a result, modern theaters often have
   electronic titles in Chinese and English.

   The Siheyuan (四合院) is a traditional architectural style of Beijing. A
   siheyuan consists of a square housing compound, with rooms enclosing a
   central courtyard. This courtyard often contains a pomegranate or other
   type of tree, as well as potted flowers or a fish tank. Siheyuans line
   Hutongs (胡同), or alleys, which connect the interior of Beijing's old
   city. They are usually straight and run east-to-west so that doorways
   can face north and south for Feng Shui reasons. They vary in width —
   some are very narrow, enough for only a few pedestrians to pass through
   at a time.
   A Hutong （胡同） in eastern urban Beijing near Dongsishitiao. When
   photographed in March 2003, the left side was still standing; it has
   since given way to a new construction project.
   Enlarge
   A Hutong （胡同） in eastern urban Beijing near Dongsishitiao. When
   photographed in March 2003, the left side was still standing; it has
   since given way to a new construction project.

   Once ubiquitous in Beijing, siheyuans and hutongs are now rapidly
   disappearing, as entire city blocks of hutongs are leveled and replaced
   with high-rise buildings. Residents of the hutongs are entitled to
   apartments in the new buildings of at least the same size as their
   former residences. Many complain, however, that the traditional sense
   of community and street life of the hutongs cannot be replaced. Some
   particularly historic or picturesque hutongs are being preserved and
   restored by the government, especially for the 2008 Olympics. One such
   example can be seen at Nanchizi.

   Mandarin cuisine is the local style of cooking in Beijing. Peking Roast
   Duck is perhaps the most well-known dish. The Manhan Quanxi (" Manchu-
   Han Chinese full banquet") is a traditional banquet originally intended
   for the ethnic- Manchu emperors of the Qing Dynasty; it remains very
   prestigious and expensive.

   Teahouses are also common in Beijing. Chinese tea comes in many
   varieties and some rather expensive types of Chinese tea are said to
   cure an ailing body extraordinarily well.

   The Jingtailan is a cloisonné metalworking technique and tradition
   originating from Beijing, and one of the most revered traditional
   crafts in China. Beijing lacquerware is well known for the patterns and
   images carved into its surface.

   The Fuling Jiabing is a traditional Beijing snack food, a pancake
   (bing) resembling a flat disk with filling, made from fu ling ( Poria
   cocos (Schw.) Wolf, or "tuckahoe"), an ingredient common in traditional
   Chinese medicine.

Stereotypes

   Beijingers are stereotypically held to be open, confident, humorous,
   majestic in manner, enthusiastic about politics, art, culture, or other
   "grand" matters, unconcerned with thrift or careful calculation, and
   happy to take centre stage. They are also stereotypically aristocratic,
   arrogant, laid back, disdainful of "provincials", always "lording it
   over others", and strongly conscious of social class. These stereotypes
   may have originated from Beijing's status as China's capital for most
   of the past 800 years, and the high concentration of officials and
   other notables in Beijing that has resulted. Needless to say, these
   stereotypes are generally untrue.

Transportation

   With the growth of the city following economic reforms, Beijing has
   evolved as an important transportation hub. Encircling the city are
   five ring roads, nine expressways and city express routes, eleven China
   National Highways, several railway routes, and an international
   airport.

Rail

   Beijing has two major railway stations: Beijing Railway Station (or the
   central station) and Beijing West Railway Station. Three other railway
   stations in Metropolitan Beijing handle regular passenger traffic:
   Beijing East, Beijing North, and Fengtai. There are also several other
   small stations serving suburban area.

   As for August 1, 2006, Beijing Railway Station has 167 trains stopping
   daily, while Beijing West Railway Station has 176 trains.

   Beijing is a railway hub. There are railway lines from Beijing to
   Guangzhou, Shanghai, Harbin, Baotou, Taiyuan, Chengde and Qinhuangdao.

   International trains, including lines to cities in Russia and
   Pyongyang, North Korea (DPRK), all run through Beijing. Direct trains
   to Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR also depart from Beijing.

   Construction on a Beijing-Tianjin high-speed rail began on July 4,
   2005, and is scheduled to be completed in 2007.

Roads and expressways

   The Badaling Expressway near the intersection with the Northern 6th
   Ring Road (November 2002 image)
   Enlarge
   The Badaling Expressway near the intersection with the Northern 6th
   Ring Road (November 2002 image)

   Beijing is connected via road links from all parts of China. Nine
   expressways of China (with six wholly new expressways under projection
   or construction) connect with Beijing, as do eleven China National
   Highways. Within Beijing itself, an elaborate network of five ring
   roads has developed, but they appear more rectangular than ring-shaped.
   Roads in Beijing often are in one of the four compass directions
   (unlike, for example, Tianjin).

   One of the biggest concerns with traffic in Beijing deals with its
   apparently ubiquitous traffic jams. Traffic in the city centre is often
   gridlocked, especially around rush hour. Even outside of rush hour,
   several roads still remain clogged up with traffic. Urban area ring
   roads and major through routes, especially near the Chang'an Avenue
   area, are often clogged up during rush hour.

   Recently expressways have been extended (in some cases reconstructed as
   express routes) into the territories within the 3rd Ring Road. As they
   are either expressways or express routes, drivers do not need to pass
   through intersections with traffic lights. This may finally solve the
   difficulties in "hopping between one ring and another".

   Another problem is that public transportation is underdeveloped (the
   subway system is presently minimal) and that even buses are jam-packed
   with people around rush hour. Beijing was poorly designed in terms of
   zoning and in terms of transportation system , . Compounding the
   problem is patchy enforcement of traffic regulations, and road rage.
   Beijing authorities claim that traffic jams may be a thing of a past
   come the 2008 Olympics. The authorities have introduced several bus
   lanes where, during rush hour, all vehicles except for public buses
   must keep clear.

   Chang'an Avenue runs east-west through the centre of Beijing, past
   Tian'anmen. It is a major through route and is often called the "First
   Street in China" by authorities.

            Roads and Expressways of Beijing Expressway Overpass


   Main Roads: Chang'an Avenue ( East, West) | Ping'an Avenue | Zhongzhou
   Road ( North, South)
   Ring Roads: Open: 2nd Ring Road | 3rd Ring Road | 4th Ring Road | 5th
   Ring Road | 6th Ring Road
   Projected: 7th Ring Road |
   Expressways: Open: Badaling Expressway ( Jingda Expressway) | Jingcheng
   Expressway | Airport Expressway | Jingtong Expressway | Jingha
   Expressway | Jingshen Expressway | Jingjintang Expressway ( Jinghu
   Expressway) | Jingkai Expressway | Jingshi Expressway ( Jingzhu
   Expressway)
   Partially under construction: Jingcheng Expressway | Jingkai Expressway
   | Northern Airport Line | Jingping Expressway | Jingbao Expressway |
   Litian Expressway
   Projected: 2nd Airport Expressway | Jingjin Expressway ( North, South)
   7 National Expressways: Jingtai Expressway (projected) | Jinghu
   Expressway | Jinggang'ao Expressway (partially complete) | Jingkun
   Expressway | Jingla Expressway (projected) | Jingwu Expressway
   (projected) | Jingha Expressway (alternate route)
   National Highways G101 | G102 | G103 | G104 | G105 | G106 | G107 | G108
   | G109 | G110 | G111

Air

   Beijing's main airport is the Beijing Capital International Airport
   (PEK) near Shunyi, which is about 20 km northeast of Beijing city
   centre. Most domestic and nearly all international flights arrive and
   depart at Capital Airport. Capital Airport is the main hub for Air
   China. It is linked to central Beijing by the Airport Expressway and is
   a roughly 40-minute drive from the city centre during good traffic
   hours. In preparation for the 2008 Olympics, another expressway is
   being built to the Airport, as well as a lightrail system.

   Other airports in the city include Liangxiang Airport, Nanyuan Airport,
   Xijiao Airport, Shahe Airport and Badaling Airport. However, these are
   primary for military use and less well-known to the public.
   Inside a Beijing Subway station
   Enlarge
   Inside a Beijing Subway station

Public transit

   The evolving Beijing Subway has four lines (two above ground, two
   underground), with several more being built in preparation for the 2008
   Summer Olympics. There were 599 bus and trolleybus routes in Beijing as
   of 2004.

   Bus fares cost 2 Renminbi for Air Conditioned Buses under 10km, and
   another 2 RMB per 10km. Non-air conditioned buses are 1 RMB per 10km.
   Subway tickets cost 3 Renminbi for the 1, 2, 13, and 8T lines; 5 RMB
   for tickets allowing a transfer to Line 13, and 4 RMB for tickets
   allowing a transfer to Line 8T.

   Taxis are nearly ubiquitous, including a large number of unregistered
   taxis. As of June 30, 2006 all fares on legal taxies start at 10
   Renminbi for the first 3km (idling time is also a factor), and are 2.00
   Renminbi per extra kilometer. Most taxis are a mixed fleet of new
   Hyundai Elantra and Volkswagen Jetta (Borla) cars. After 15km, the base
   fare is increased by 50% (but only applied to the portion of the
   distance over 15km, so that the passenger is not retroactively charged
   extra for the first 15km). Between 11pm and 6am, the fee is increased
   by 20%, starting at 11 RMB and increasing at a rate of 2.4 RMB per km.
   Rides over 15km and between 11pm and 6am apply both charges, for a
   total increase of 80% (120%*150%=180%).

Tourism

   The Summer Palace in Beijing - photographed by Felice Beato in October
   1860.
   Enlarge
   The Summer Palace in Beijing - photographed by Felice Beato in October
   1860.
   Wansong Pagoda
   Enlarge
   Wansong Pagoda
   Miaoying Temple, one of the most renowned Buddhist temples in Beijing
   Enlarge
   Miaoying Temple, one of the most renowned Buddhist temples in Beijing
   The Temple of Azure Clouds
   Enlarge
   The Temple of Azure Clouds

   Despite the turmoil of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries —
   including damage caused by European military intervention, the Japanese
   invasion of WWII and the Cultural Revolution — and the recent intense
   urbanisation and transformation, including the demolition of hutongs,
   Beijing still maintains tourist attractions that are rich in history.

   Although more known for its political significance in the West, the
   Tian'anmen (Gate of Heavenly Peace) has long been one of the most
   important tourist sites of Beijing, both by itself and as the main
   entrance to the Forbidden City. Other world-renowned sites include the
   Badaling section of the Great Wall of China, the Summer Palace, and the
   Temple of Heaven.

Within the Beijing metropolitan area

Buildings, monuments, and landmarks

     * Forbidden City (World Heritage Site)
     * Tiananmen Square, site of the Tiananmen Square protests of May 4,
       1919, 1976, and 1989
          + Tiananmen (The Gate of Heavenly Peace)
          + Great Hall of the People (National Legislature)
          + National Museum of China
          + Monument to the People's Heroes
          + Mausoleum of Mao Zedong
     * The Summer Palace (World Heritage Site)
     * Ruins of the Old Summer Palace
     * Bell Tower and Drum Tower
     * Historic Hutongs and Siheyuans in many older neighborhoods
     * Lugou Bridge (Marco Polo Bridge)
     * Prince Gong Mansion (Gong Wang Fu)
     * Zheng Yici Peking Opera Theatre
     * Liulichang Culture Street
     * Beijing Ancient Observatory

Temples, cathedrals, and mosques

     * Temple of Heaven (World Heritage Site), situated in the southern
       area of urban Beijing
     * Temple of Earth, located in northern Beijing
     * Temple of Sun, situated in the eastern area of urban Beijing
     * Temple of Moon, located in western Beijing
     * Tanzhe Temple
     * Jietai Temple
     * Yunju Temple
     * Yonghegong (Lama Temple)
     * Guangji Temple
     * Confucius Temple
     * Great Bell Temple
     * Fa Yuan Temple
     * Miaoying Temple
     * Zhen Jue Temple
     * Wanshou Temple
     * Five Pagoda Temple
     * Zhihua Si Temple
     * Temple of Azure Clouds
     * Temple of Recumbent Buddha
     * White Dagoba Temple in Beihai Park
     * Badachu
     * Immaculate Conception Cathedral
     * Holy Saviour Church
     * Niujie Mosque

Parks and gardens

     * Beihai Park
     * Shichahai
     * Jingshan Park
     * The Fragrant Hills (Xiangshan)
     * The Grandview Garden (Daguanyuan)
     * Beijing Botanical Garden
     * Taoranting Park
     * Beijing Zoo

Shopping and commercial districts

     * Wangfujing: Beijing's most upscale, globalized shopping district
     * Xidan
     * Silk Street
     * Beijing CBD
     * Beijing Financial Street
     * Zhongguancun
     * Yizhuang

Outside the metropolitan area, but within the municipality

     * Sections of the Great Wall (World Heritage Site) at:
          + Badaling
          + Juyongguan
          + Mutianyu
          + Simatai
          + Jinshanling
          + Jiankou
     * The Ming Dynasty Tombs (World Heritage Site)
     * Peking Man Site at Zhoukoudian (World Heritage Site)
     * Shidu

Hotels and lodging

   In first two decades following the PRC's foundation in 1949, Beijing
   had virtually no hotels (at least by Western standards), due to
   economic and social conditions at the time. One system of institution
   providing a place for individuals traveling to Beijing from other
   locations to spend the night was the zhaodaisuo (literally,
   "accommodation centre"). Zhaodaisuo were subordinate to state
   organisations or state organs. Older ones had communal public
   conveniences and amenities. Some zhaodaisuos still remain in use today.

   In the late 1970s, Beijing, alongside much of China during the period
   of reform and economic opening under Deng Xiaoping, saw greater
   attempts at attracting and catering to international business. A large
   number of hotels and other facilities to accommodate business, tourist,
   and other visitors began to be constructed. Today, given Beijing's size
   and status as one of the most frequently visited and economically,
   politically, and culturally important cities in Asia, a great number of
   hotels exist, many rivalling the highest international standards.

   The most well-known hotel is the Beijing Hotel, which is state-owned.
   Other notable hotels are the Great Wall Sheraton Hotel, the Jianguo
   Hotel, Raffles Beijing Hotel the China World Hotel, the St. Regis,
   Grand Hyatt at Oriental Plaza and the Peninsula Palace Hotel, operated
   by the Hong Kong-based Peninsula Group.

   Youth hostels have become more and more popular in the last few years
   and there are now quite a few in Beijing. Most hostels are located in
   the downtown area of Beijing, on the East 3rd Ring Road or in the old
   Hutongs.

Nightlife

   Nightlife in Beijing is varied. Most clubs are situated in the area
   around Sanlitun or in the region near the Workers Stadium, especially
   to the north and to the west. New clubs opened on Gongrentiyuchang West
   Road.

   Wudaokou, in northwestern Beijing, is also a bustling centre of
   nightlife. There are more Koreans and other foreigners, mostly
   students, in the area.

   Bar-wise, the following areas of Beijing are known as hubs for bars
   which open until late:
     * Sanlitun
     * Houhai
     * Yuandadu

Education

   Beijing is home to a great number of colleges and universities,
   including several well-regarded universities of international stature,
   especially including China's two most prestigious institutions, Peking
   University, and Tsinghua University.

   Owing to Beijing's status as the political and cultural capital of
   China, a larger proportion of tertiary-level institutions are
   concreated here than probably any other city in China, reaching at
   least 59 in number. Many international students from Japan, Korea,
   North America, Europe, Southeast Asia, and elsewhere come to Beijing to
   study every year, a growing trend, especially among Western students.
   The institutions listed here are administered by China's Ministry of
   Education.
     * Peking University (北京大学) (founded in 1898), which is best in
       Humanities, natural sciences, business and law.
     * Tsinghua University (清华大学) (founded in 1911), which is best in
       engineering
     * Renmin University of China (中国人民大学) (founded in 1937)
     * Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics (北京航空航天大学)
     * Beijing Normal University (北京师范大学) (founded 1902)
     * Beijing Institute of Technology (北京理工大学)
     * Beijing Jiaotong University (北京交通大学)
     * Central University of Finance and Economics (中央财经大学)
     * University of International Business and Economics (对外经济贸易大学)
     * University of International Relations (国际关系学院)
     * University of Science and Technology Beijing (北京科技大学)
     * China University of Political Science and Law (中国政法大学)
     * Beijing University of Technology (北京工业大学)
     * Beijing Foreign Studies University (北京外国语大学)
     * Beijing Language and Culture University (北京语言大学)
     * China Agricultural University (中国农业大学)
     * Beijing University of Chemical Technology (北京化工大学)
     * Beijing University of Chinese Medicine (北京中医药大学)
     * Beijing University of Petroleum (石油大学)
     * Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications (北京邮电大学)
     * Capital Normal University (首都师范大学)
     * Beijing Forestry University (北京林业大学)
     * Communication University of China (中国传媒大学)
     * Central Academy of Drama (中央戏剧学院)
     * Central Conservatory of Music (中央音乐学院)
     * Central Institute of Fine Arts (中央美术学院)
     * Beijing Film Academy (北京电影学院)
     * Central University for Nationalities (中央民族大学)

Sports

   Beijing will host the 2008 Summer Olympics and the 2008 Summer
   Paralympics.

   Professional sports teams based in Beijing include:
     * Chinese Football Association Super League
          + Beijing Guoan
     * Chinese Basketball Association
          + Beijing Ducks
          + Beijing Olympians

   The Beijing Aoshen Olympians of the ABA, formerly a CBA team, kept
   their name and maintained a roster of primarily Chinese players after
   moving to Maywood, California in 2005.

City and regional partnerships

   Beijing maintains partnerships or "sister city" status with the
   following international locations. (Note: some locations are provinces
   or regional-level units, not cities properly. Beijing itself is not
   technically a city, being a municipality).
         City                      Country                 Sister City since:
   Tokyo            Flag of Japan  Japan                   March 14, 1979
   New York City    Flag of United States  United States   February 25, 1980
   Algiers          Flag of Algeria  Algeria               September 11, 1989
   Belgrade         Flag of Serbia  Serbia                 October 14, 1980
   Lima             Flag of Peru  Peru                     November 21, 1983
   Washington, D.C. Flag of United States  United States   May 15, 1984
   Madrid           Flag of Spain  Spain                   September 16, 1985
   Rio de Janeiro   Flag of Brazil  Brazil                 November 24, 1986
   Île-de-France    Flag of France  France                 July 2, 1987
   Cologne          Flag of Germany  Germany               September 14, 1987
   Ankara           Flag of Turkey  Turkey                 June 20, 1990
   Cairo            Flag of Egypt  Egypt                   October 28, 1990
   Islamabad        Flag of Pakistan  Pakistan             October 8, 1992
   Jakarta          Flag of Indonesia  Indonesia           October 8, 1992
   Bangkok          Flag of Thailand  Thailand             May 26, 1993
   Tel Aviv         Flag of Israel  Israel                 May 29, 1993
   Buenos Aires     Flag of Argentina  Argentina           July 13, 1993
   Seoul            Flag of South Korea  Republic of Korea October 23, 1993
   Kiev             Flag of Ukraine  Ukraine               December 13, 1993
   Berlin           Flag of Germany  Germany               April 5, 1994
   Brussels         Flag of Belgium  Belgium               September 22, 1994
   Hanoi            Flag of Vietnam  Vietnam               October 6, 1994
   Amsterdam        Flag of Netherlands  Netherlands       October 29, 1994
   Moscow           Flag of Russia  Russia                 May 16, 1995
   Paris            Flag of France  France                 October 23, 1997
   Rome             Flag of Italy  Italy                   May 28, 1998
   Gauteng          Flag of South Africa  South Africa     December 6, 1998
   Ottawa           Flag of Canada  Canada                 October 18, 1999
   Canberra         Flag of Australia  Australia           September 14, 2000
   Manila           Flag of Philippines  Philippines       November 14, 2005
   London           Flag of United Kingdom  United Kingdom April 10, 2006
   Tehran           Flag of Iran  Iran                     April 10, 1999
    1. ^ French region hosting the largest part of Paris metropolitan area
    2. ^ A province of South Africa

          Source: www.ebeijing.gov.cn

Books

     * The Diaries of Sir Ernest Satow, British Envoy in Peking (1900-06)
       edited by Ian Ruxton in two volumes, Lulu Press Inc., April 2006
       ISBN 1-4116-8804-X (Volume One); ISBN 1-4116-8805-8 (Volume Two)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beijing"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
