   #copyright

Bhutan

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Asian Countries;
Countries

                   འབྲུག་ཡུལ
   Druk Yul
   Kingdom of Bhutan

   Flag of Bhutan Coat of arms of Bhutan
   Flag           Coat of arms
   Motto: "One Nation, One People"
   Anthem: Druk tsendhen
   Location of Bhutan
   Capital
   (and largest city)  Thimphu
                       27°28′N 89°38′E
   Official languages  Dzongkha, English
   Government          Monarchy
    - King             Jigme Singye Wangchuck
    - Prime Minister   Lyonpo Khandu Wangchuk
        Formation
    - Wangchuk Dynasty December 17, 1907
                              Area
    - Total            47,000 km² ( 131st)
                       18,147 sq mi
    - Water (%)        negligible
                           Population
    - 2006 estimate    672,425 ^( 142nd)
    - 2006 census      672,425
    - Density          46/km² ( {{{population_density_rank}}})
                       119

                       population_density_rank = 149th/sq mi
       GDP ( PPP)      2005 estimate
    - Total            $3.007  billion ( 160th)
    - Per capita       $3,921 ( 117th)
       HDI  (2003)     0.536 (medium) ( 134th)
        Currency       Ngultrum ( BTN)
        Time zone      BTT ( UTC+6:00)
    - Summer ( DST)    not observed ( UTC+6:00)
      Internet TLD     .bt
      Calling code     +975

   This is a featured article. Click here for more information.

   The Kingdom of Bhutan (also Bootan) ( IPA: [buː'tɑːn] Listen ) is a
   landlocked South Asian nation situated between India and People's
   Republic of China. The entire country is mountainous except for an 8-10
   mile (13-16 km) wide strip of subtropical plains in the extreme south
   which is intersected by valleys known as the Duars. The elevation gain
   from the subtropical plains to the glacier-covered Himalayan heights
   exceeds 23,000  feet (7,000  m). Its traditional economy is based on
   forestry, animal husbandry and subsistence agriculture however these
   account for less than 50% of a GDP now that Bhutan has become an
   exporter of hydroelectricity^ . Cash crops, tourism, and development
   aid (the latter mostly from India) are also significant. An extensive
   census done in April, 2006 resulted in a population figure of 672,425.
   Thimphu is the capital and largest city.

   Bhutan is one of the most isolated nations in the world; foreign
   influences and tourism are regulated by the government to preserve its
   traditional Tibetan Buddhist culture. Most Bhutanese follow either the
   Drukpa Kagyu or the Nyingmapa school of Tibetan Buddhism. The official
   language is Dzongkha (lit. "the language of the dzong"). Bhutan is
   often described as the last surviving refuge of traditional Himalayan
   Buddhist culture.

   Bhutan is linked historically and culturally with its northern
   neighbour Tibet. Yet politically and economically today's kingdom has
   drawn much closer to India.

   Bhutan has been a monarchy since 1907. The different dzongkhags were
   united under the leadership of the Trongsa Penlop. The current king,
   Jigme Singye Wangchuck, has made some moves toward constitutional
   government.

Name

   'Bhutan' may be derived from the Sanskrit word 'Bhu-Uttan' which means
   'High Land'. In another theory of sanskritisation, 'Bhots-ant' means
   'end of Tibet' or 'south of Tibet'. However some Bhutanese call their
   country 'Druk Yul' and its inhabitants 'Drukpa'. The Dzongkha (and
   Tibetan) name for the country is 'Druk Yul' (Land of the Dragon).
   Because of the serenity and the virginity of the country and its
   landscapes, Bhutan today is sometimes referred to as the Last
   Shangri-La.

   Historically, Bhutan was known by many names, such as 'Lho Mon'
   (Southern Land of Darkness), 'Lho Tsendenjong' (Southern Land of the
   Sandalwood), 'Lhomen Khazhi' (Southern Land of Four Approaches), and
   'Lho Men Jong' (Southern Land of Medicinal Herbs).

History

Ancient Bhutan

   Stone tools, weapons, and remnants of large stone structures provide
   evidence that Bhutan was inhabited as early as 2000 BC. Historians have
   theorised that the state of Lhomon (literally, "southern darkness"), or
   Monyul ("Dark Land", a reference to the Monpa – the aboriginal peoples
   of Bhutan) may have existed between 500 BC and AD 600. The names Lhomon
   Tsendenjong ( Sandalwood Country), and Lhomon Khashi, or Southern Mon
   (country of four approaches) have been found in ancient Bhutanese and
   Tibetan chronicles.

   The earliest transcribed event in Bhutan was the passage of the
   Buddhist saint Padmasambhava (also called Guru Rinpoche) in the 8th
   century. Bhutan's early history is unclear, because most of the records
   were destroyed after fire ravaged Punakha, the ancient capital in 1827.
   By the 10th century, Bhutan's political development was heavily
   influenced by its religious history. Various sub-sects of Buddhism
   emerged which were patronised by the various Mongol and Tibetan
   overlords. After the decline of the Mongols in the 14th century, these
   sub-sects vied with each other for supremacy in the political and
   religious landscape, eventually leading to the ascendancy of the Drukpa
   sub-sect by the 16th century.

Between 17th century and the modern age

   Until the early 17th century, Bhutan existed as a patchwork of minor
   warring fiefdoms until unified by the Tibetan lama and military leader
   Shabdrung Ngawang Namgyal. To defend the country against intermittent
   Tibetan forays, Namgyal built a network of impregnable dzong
   (fortresses), and promulgated a code of law that helped to bring local
   lords under centralised control. Many such dzong still exist. After
   Namgyal's death in 1651, Bhutan fell into anarchy. Taking advantage of
   the chaos, the Tibetans attacked Bhutan in 1710, and again in 1730 with
   the help of the Mongols. Both assaults were successfully thwarted, and
   an armistice was signed in 1759.
   Map of Bhutan
   Enlarge
   Map of Bhutan

   In the 18th century, the Bhutanese invaded and occupied the kingdom of
   Cooch Behar to the south. In 1772, Cooch Behar appealed to the British
   East India Company who assisted them in ousting the Bhutanese, and
   later in attacking Bhutan itself in 1774. A peace treaty was signed in
   which Bhutan agreed to retreat to its pre-1730 borders. However, the
   peace was tenuous, and border skirmishes with the British were to
   continue for the next hundred years. The skirmishes eventually led to
   the Duar War (1864–1865), a confrontation over who would control the
   Bengal Duars. After Bhutan lost the war, the Treaty of Sinchula was
   signed between British India and Bhutan. As part of the reparations,
   the Duars were ceded to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
   in exchange for a rent of Rs. 50,000. The treaty ended all hostilities
   between British India and Bhutan.

   During the 1870s, power struggles between the rival valleys of Paro and
   Trongsa led to civil war in Bhutan, eventually leading to the
   ascendancy of Ugyen Wangchuck, the ponlop (governor) of Tongsa. From
   his power base in central Bhutan, Ugyen Wangchuck defeated his
   political enemies and united the country following several civil wars
   and rebellions in the period 1882–1885.

   In 1907, an epochal year for the country, Ugyen Wangchuck was
   unanimously chosen as the hereditary king of the country by an assembly
   of leading Buddhist monks, government officials, and heads of important
   families. The British government promptly recognised the new monarchy,
   and in 1910 Bhutan signed a treaty which let Great Britain to ‘guide’
   Bhutan's foreign affairs.

1950s to 1970s

   After India gained independence from the United Kingdom on August 15,
   1947, Bhutan became of one of the first countries to recognize India's
   independence.

   After the British left the region, a treaty similar to the one of 1910
   was signed August 8, 1949 with the newly independent India.
   The Trongsa Dzong
   Enlarge
   The Trongsa Dzong

   After the Chinese People's Liberation Army entered Tibet in 1951,
   Bhutan sealed its northern frontier and improved bilateral ties with
   India. To reduce the risk of Chinese encroachment, Bhutan began a
   modernisation program that was largely sponsored by India. In 1953,
   King Jigme Dorji Wangchuck established the country's legislature – a
   130-member National Assembly – to promote a more democratic form of
   governance. In 1965, he set up a Royal Advisory Council, and in 1968 he
   formed a Cabinet. In 1971, Bhutan was admitted to the United Nations,
   having held observer status for three years. In July 1972, Jigme Singye
   Wangchuck ascended to the throne at the age of 16 after the death of
   his father, Dorji Wangchuck.

Conflict regarding Bhutan’s Ethnic Nepali Population

   Bhutan has a continuing immigration problem with illegal immigration
   largely by people of Nepali descent. The first waves of migration by
   Nepalese into Bhutan in the 19th Century.. They were 'naturalized by
   registration’ by the 1958 Citizenship Act. More continued to settle
   illegally and this became exacerbated following the introduction of
   Bhutan’s 5-Year plans in 1961 . From the late 1980s, the government
   cracked down on illegal immigration which resulted in considerable
   numbers of people leaving Bhutan. This led to mass demonstrations and
   violence resulting in even more people leaving the country. Eventually
   the 'refugee’s' were setup in the refugee camps in eastern Nepal funded
   by the UNHCR. They remain there to this day.

Recent Developments to the present day

   In the recent years (1988 onwards) Nepalese immigrants as well as
   illegal immigrants have accused Bhutan of violating Human rights. The
   Bhutanese regime they allege to be responsible for atrocities and crime
   against her Nepali speaking minority population. The allegations range
   from rape, executions and eviction of over 100,000 of its minority
   population, which accounts almost 15% of its people. These allegations
   remain unproven and are vehemently denied by Bhutan. Most of these
   refugees settled in UN run refugee camps in south-eastern Nepal where
   they have remained for 15 years.

   In 1998, King Jigme Singye Wangchuck introduced significant political
   reforms, transferring most of his powers to the Prime Minister and
   allowing for impeachment of the King by a two-thirds majority of the
   National Assembly. In late 2003, the Bhutanese army successfully
   launched a large-scale operation to flush out anti-India insurgents who
   were operating training camps in southern Bhutan.

   In 1999, the King also lifted a ban on television and the Internet,
   making Bhutan one of the last countries to have introduced the
   television. In his speech, he said that the television was a critical
   step to the modernization of Bhutan as well as a major contributor to
   the country's Gross National Happiness (Bhutan is the only country to
   measure happiness) but warned against the misuse of the television that
   may erode traditional Bhutanese values.

   A new constitution has been presented in early 2005 which will be put
   up for ratification by a referendum before coming into force. In
   December 2005, King Jigme Singye Wangchuck announced that he would step
   down as King of Bhutan in 2008. King Wangchuck said he would be
   succeeded by his son, the crown prince Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck.

Geography

   Topographic map of Bhutan
   Enlarge
   Topographic map of Bhutan

   The northern region consists of an arc of glaciated mountain peaks with
   an extremely cold climate at the highest elevations. Most peaks in the
   north are over 23,000  feet (7,000  m) above sea level; the highest
   point is claimed to be the Kula Kangri, at 24,780 feet (7,553 m), but
   detailed topographic studies claim Kula Kangri is wholly in Tibet and
   modern Chinese measurements claim that Gangkhar Puensum, which has the
   distinction of being the highest unclimbed mountain in the world, is
   higher at 24,835 feet (7,570 m). Watered by snow-fed rivers, alpine
   valleys in this region provide pasture for livestock, tended by a
   sparse population of migratory shepherds. The Black Mountains in
   central Bhutan form a watershed between two major river systems: the Mo
   Chhu and the Drangme Chhu. Peaks in the Black Mountains range between
   4,900 feet and 8,900 feet (1,500 m and 2,700 m) above sea level, and
   fast-flowing rivers have carved out deep gorges in the lower mountain
   areas. Woodlands of the central region provide most of Bhutan's forest
   production. The Torsa, Raidak, Sankosh, and Manas are the main rivers
   of Bhutan, flowing through this region. Most of the population lives in
   the central highlands.
   Terraced farming in the Punakha valley.
   Enlarge
   Terraced farming in the Punakha valley.

   In the south, the Shiwalik Hills are covered with dense, deciduous
   forests, alluvial lowland river valleys, and mountains up to around
   4,900 feet (1,500 m) above sea level. The foothills descend into the
   subtropical Duars plain. Most of the Duars is located in India,
   although a 6–9 mile (10–15 km) wide strip extends into Bhutan. The
   Bhutan Duars is divided into two parts: the northern and the southern
   Duars. The northern Duars, which abuts the Himalayan foothills, has
   rugged, sloping terrain and dry, porous soil with dense vegetation and
   abundant wildlife. The southern Duars has moderately fertile soil,
   heavy savannah grass, dense, mixed jungle, and freshwater springs.
   Mountain rivers, fed by either the melting snow or the monsoon rains,
   empty into the Brahmaputra river in India. Data released by the
   Ministry of agriculture showed that the country had a forest cover of
   64% as of October 2005. The climate in Bhutan varies with altitude,
   from subtropical in the south to temperate in the highlands and
   polar-type climate, with year-round snow, in the north. Bhutan
   experiences five distinct seasons: summer, monsoon, autumn, winter and
   spring. Western Bhutan has the heavier monsoon rains; southern Bhutan
   has hot humid summers and cool winters; central and eastern Bhutan is
   temperate and drier than the west with warm summers and cool winters.

Economy

   Though Bhutan's economy is one of the world's smallest, it has grown
   very rapidly with about 8% in 2005 and 14% in 2006. As of March 2006,
   Bhutan's per capita income was US$ 1,321 making it the highest in South
   Asia. Bhutan's standard of living grew and is one of the best
   performing in South Asia. Bhutan's economy is one of the world's
   smallest and least developed, and is based on agriculture, forestry,
   and the sale of hydroelectric power to India. Agriculture provides the
   main livelihood for more than 80% of the population. Agrarian practices
   consist largely of subsistence farming and animal husbandry.
   Handicrafts, particularly weaving and the manufacture of religious art
   for home altars are a small cottage industry and a source of income for
   some. A landscape that varies from hilly to ruggedly mountainous has
   made the building of roads, and other infrastructure, difficult and
   expensive. This, and a lack of access to the sea, has meant that Bhutan
   has never been able to benefit from significant trading of its produce.
   Bhutan currently does not have a railway system, though Indian Railways
   plans to link up southern Bhutan with its vast network under an
   agreement signed in January 2005.^ The historic trade routes over the
   high Himalayas, which connected India to Tibet, have been closed since
   the 1959 military takeover of Tibet (although smuggling activity still
   brings Chinese goods into Bhutan).

   The industrial sector is minimal, production being of the
   cottage-industry type. Most development projects, such as road
   construction, rely on Indian contract labour. Agricultural produce
   includes rice, chilies, dairy (yak) products, buckwheat, barley, root
   crops, apples, and citrus and maize at lower elevations. Industries
   include cement, wood products, processed fruits, alcoholic beverages
   and calcium carbide.

   Bhutan's currency, the ngultrum, is pegged to the Indian Rupee. The
   rupee is also accepted as legal tender in the country. Incomes of over
   Nu 100,000 per annum are taxed, but very few wage and salary earners
   qualify. Bhutan's inflation rate was estimated at about 3% in 2003.
   Bhutan has a Gross Domestic Product of around USD 2.913 billion
   (adjusted to Purchasing Power Parity), making it the 162nd largest
   economy in the world. Per capita income is around $1,400 (€1,170),
   ranked 124th. Government revenues total €122 million ($146 million),
   though expenditures amount to €127 million ($152 million). 60% of the
   budget expenditure, however, is financed by India's Ministry of
   External Affairs.^ Bhutan's exports, principally electricity, cardamom,
   gypsum, timber, handicrafts, cement, fruit, precious stones and spices,
   total €128 million ($154 million) (2000 est.). Imports, however, amount
   to €164 million ($196 million), leading to a trade deficit. Main items
   imported include fuel and lubricants, grain, machinery, vehicles,
   fabrics and rice. Bhutan's main export partner is India, accounting for
   87.9% of its export goods. Bangladesh (4.6%) and the Philippines (2%)
   are the other two top export partners. As its border with Tibet is
   closed, trade between Bhutan and China is now almost non-existent.
   Bhutan's import partners include India (71.3%), Japan (7.8%) and
   Austria (3%).

   In a response to accusations in 1987 by a journalist from UK's
   Financial Times that the pace of development in Bhutan was slow, the
   King said that " Gross National Happiness is more important than Gross
   National Product." ^This statement appears to have presaged recent
   findings by western economic psychologists, including 2002 Nobel
   Laureate Daniel Kahneman, that questions the link between levels of
   income and happiness. It signalled his commitment to building an
   economy that is appropriate for Bhutan's unique culture, based on
   Buddhist spiritual values, and has served as a unifying vision for the
   economy. In addition, the policy seems to be reaping the desired
   results as in a recent survey organized by the University of Leicester
   in the UK, Bhutan was ranked as the planet's 8th happiest place

Government and politics

   The Takstang Monastery. Buddhism is the state religion and plays an
   important part in the nation's politics.
   Enlarge
   The Takstang Monastery. Buddhism is the state religion and plays an
   important part in the nation's politics.

   Politics of Bhutan takes place in a framework of a traditional absolute
   monarchy, developing into a constitutional monarchy. The King of Bhutan
   is head of state. Executive power is exercised by the Lhengye
   Shungtsog, the council of ministers. Legislative power is vested in
   both the government and the National Assembly. Political parties are
   prohibited for the time being.

Districts

   For administrative purposes, Bhutan is divided into four dzongdey
   (administrative zones). Each dzongdey is further divided into dzongkhag
   (districts). There are 20 dzongkhag in Bhutan. Large dzongkhags are
   further divided into subdistricts known as dungkhag. At the basic
   level, groups of villages form a constituency called gewog and are
   administered by a gup, who is elected by the people.
   Dzongkhag of Bhutan.
   Enlarge
   Dzongkhag of Bhutan.

   { |
    1. Bumthang
    2. Chukha (old spelling: Chhukha)
    3. Dagana
    4. Gasa
    5. Haa
    6. Luentse (Lhuntse)
    7. Mongar
    8. Paro
    9. Pemagatshel (Pemagatsel)
   10. Punaka

   |
   11. Samdrup Jongkhar
   12. Samtse (Samchi)
   13. Sarpang
   14. Thimphu
   15. Trashigang (Tashigang)
   16. Trashiyangse
   17. Trongsa (Tongsa)
   18. Tsirang (Chirang)
   19. Wangdue Phodrang (Wangdi Phodrang)
   20. Zhemang (Shemgang)

   |}

Cities and towns

     * Jakar - the admistrative headquarters of Bumthang District and the
       place where Buddhism entered Bhutan.
     * Mongar
     * Paro - Site of the international airport
     * Punakha - The Old Capital
     * Phuentsholing - Commercial hub of Bhutan.
     * Samdrup Jongkhar
     * Thimphu - the largest city and capital of Bhutan
     * Trashigang
     * Trongsa

Military and foreign affairs

   The Royal Bhutan Army is Bhutan's military service. It includes the
   Royal Bodyguard and the Royal Bhutan Police. Membership is voluntary,
   and the minimum age for recruitment is 18. The standing army numbers
   about 6,000 and is trained by the Indian Army.^ It has an annual budget
   of about US$13.7 million—1.8% of the GDP.

   Though the 1949 Treaty with India is still sometimes misinterpreted to
   mean that India controls Bhutan's foreign affairs, Bhutan today handles
   all of its foreign affairs itself including the sensitive (to India)
   border demarcation issue with China. Bhutan has diplomatic relations
   with 22 countries, including the European Union, with missions in
   India, Bangladesh, Thailand and Kuwait. It has two UN missions, one in
   New York and one in Geneva. Only India and Bangladesh have residential
   embassies in Bhutan, while Thailand has a consulate office in Bhutan.

   By a long standing treaty, Indian and Bhutanese citizens may travel to
   each other's countries without a passport or visa using their national
   identity cards instead. Bhutanese citizens may also work in India
   without legal restriction. Bhutan does not have formal diplomatic ties
   with its northern neighbour, China, although exchanges of visits at
   various levels between the two have significantly increased in the
   recent past. The first bilateral agreement between China and Bhutan was
   signed in 1998, and Bhutan has also set up consulates in Macau and Hong
   Kong. Bhutan’s border with China is largely not demarcated and thus
   disputed in some places. ^

   On November 13 2005, Chinese soldiers crossed into Bhutan under the
   pretext that environmental conditions had forced their retreat south
   from the Himalayas. The Bhutanese government allowed this incursion
   (after the fact) on humanitarian grounds. Soon after, the Chinese began
   building roads and bridges within Bhutanese territory. Bhutanese
   Foreign Minister Khandu Wangchuk took up the matter with Chinese
   authorities after the issue was raised in Bhutanese parliament. In
   response, Foreign Ministry spokesman Qin Gang of the People's Republic
   of China has said that the border remains in dispute (completely
   ignoring the original official pretext for the incursion) and that the
   two sides continue to work for a peaceful and cordial resolution of the
   dispute ^. Neither the Bhutanese nor Indian governments (India still
   handles some foreign affairs for Bhutan) have reported any progress
   regarding this matter (peaceful, cordial or otherwise), and the Chinese
   continue to this day building infrastructure and increasing their
   military garrison within Bhutan. An Indian intelligence officer has
   said that a Chinese delegation in Bhutan told the Bhutanese that they
   were "overreacting." The Bhutanese newspaper Kuensel has said that
   China might use the roads to further Chinese claims along the border. ^

Demographics

   The dominant ethnic group is of Tibetan / Tibeto-Burman ancestry;
   Ethnic Nepalis migrants form the majority in the southern part of the
   country.
   Enlarge
   The dominant ethnic group is of Tibetan / Tibeto-Burman ancestry;
   Ethnic Nepalis migrants form the majority in the southern part of the
   country.

   The population of Bhutan, once estimated at several million, has now
   been officially downgraded by the Bhutanese government to 750,000,
   after a census in the early nineties. An extensive census done in June
   of 2005 resulted in a further reduction of the population figure to
   554,000. The government has yet to release demographic breakdown on the
   new population figures. Most believe that the population was
   artificially inflated in the seventies because of an earlier perception
   that nations with populations of less than a million would not be
   admitted to the United Nations. Hence the United Nation population
   figures are much higher than the figures provided by the government.

   The population density, 45 per square kilometre (117/sq. mi), makes
   Bhutan one of the least densely populated countries in Asia. Roughly
   20% percent of the population lives in urban areas comprised of small
   towns mainly along the central valley and the southern border. This
   percentage is increasing rapidly as the pace of rural to urban
   migration has been picking up. The largest town is the capital,
   Thimphu, which has a population of 50,000. Other urban areas with
   significant population are Paro, and Phuentsholing.

   Among the Bhutanese people, several principal ethnic groups may be
   distinguished. The dominant group are the Ngalops, a Buddhist group
   based in the western part of the country. Their culture is closely
   related to that of Tibet. Much the same could be said of the Sharchops
   ("Easterners"), who are associated with the eastern part of Bhutan (but
   who traditionally follow the Nyingmapa rather than the official Drukpa
   Kagyu form of Tibetan Buddhism). These two groups together are called
   Bhutanese. The remaining 15% of the population is ethnic Nepali, most
   of whom are Hindu.

   The national language is Dzongkha, one of 53 languages in the Tibetan
   language family. The script, here called Chhokey ("Dharma Language"),
   is identical with the Tibetan script. The government classifies 19
   related Tibetan languages as dialects of Dzongkha. Lepcha is spoken in
   parts of western Bhutan; Tshangla, a close relative of Dzongkha, is
   widely spoken in the eastern parts. Khengkha is spoken in central
   Bhutan. The Nepali language is widely spoken in the south. In the
   schools English is the medium of instruction and Dzongkha is taught as
   the national language. Ethnologue lists 24 languages currently spoken
   in Bhutan, all of them in the Tibeto-Burman family, except Nepali, an
   Indo-Aryan language. The languages of Bhutan are still not
   well-characterised, and several have yet to be recorded in an in-depth
   academic grammar. English now has official status as well.

   The literacy rate is only 42.2% (56.2% of males and 28.1% of females).
   People 14 years old and younger comprise 39.1%, while people between 15
   and 59 comprise 56.9%, and those over 60 are only 4%. The country has a
   median age of 20.4 years. Bhutan has a life expectancy of 62.2 years
   (61 for males and 64.5 for females) according to the latest data from
   the World Bank. There are 1,070 males to every 1,000 females in the
   country.

Culture

   While the Bhutanese are free to travel abroad, Bhutan is seen to be
   inaccessible to foreigners. The widespread misperception that Bhutan
   has set limits on tourist visas, the high tourist tariff and the
   requirement to go on packaged tours seem to create this impression.

   The traditional dress for Ngalong and Sharchop men is the gho, a
   knee-length robe tied at the waist by a cloth belt known as the kera.
   Women wear an ankle-length dress, the kira, which is clipped at one
   shoulder and tied at the waist. An accompaniment to the kira is a
   long-sleeved blouse, the toego, which is worn underneath the outer
   layer. Social status and class determine the texture, colours, and
   decorations that embellish the garments. Scarves and shawls are also
   indicators of social standings, as Bhutan has traditionally been a
   feudal society. Earrings are worn by females. Controversially,
   Bhutanese law now requires these garments for all Bhutanese citizens.

   Rice, and increasingly corn, are the staple foods of the country. The
   diet in the hills is rich in protein because of the consumption of meat
   chiefly poultry, yak and beef. Soups of meat, rice, and dried
   vegetables spiced with chillies and cheese are a favourite meal during
   the cold seasons. Dairy foods, particularly butter and cheese from yaks
   and cows, are also popular, despite the scarcity of milk (because all
   milk is turned to butter and cheese). Popular beverages include butter
   tea, tea, locally brewed rice wine and beer. Bhutan is the only country
   in the world to have banned tobacco smoking and the sale of tobacco.
   Archery is the national sport of Bhutan and competitions are held
   regularly.
   Enlarge
   Archery is the national sport of Bhutan and competitions are held
   regularly.

   Bhutan's national sport is archery, and competitions are held regularly
   in most villages. It differs from Olympic standards not only in
   technical details such as the placement of the targets and atmosphere.
   There are two targets placed over 100 metres apart and teams shoot from
   one end of the field to the other. Each member of the team shoots two
   arrows per round. Traditional Bhutanese archery is a social event and
   competitions are organised between villages, towns, and amateur teams.
   There are usually plenty of food and drink complete with singing and
   dancing cheerleaders comprising wives and supporters of the
   participating teams. Attempts to distract an opponent include standing
   around the target and making fun of the shooter's ability. Darts
   (khuru) is an equally popular outdoor team sport, in which heavy wooden
   darts pointed with a 10cm nail are thrown at a paperback-sized target
   ten to twenty metres away.

   Another traditional sport is the digor, which can be best described as
   shot put combined with horseshoe throwing. Soccer is an increasingly
   popular sport. In 2002, Bhutan's national soccer team played Montserrat
   - billed as 'The Other Final', the match took place on the same day
   Brazil played Germany in the World Cup Final, but at the time Bhutan
   and Montserrat were the world's two lowest ranked teams. The match was
   held in Thimphu's Changlimithang National Stadium, and Bhutan won 4-0.
   A documentary of the match was made by the Dutch filmmaker Johan
   Kramer. Rigsar is the new emergent style of popular music, played on a
   a mix of traditional instruments and electronic keyboards, and dates
   back to the early 1990s; it shows the influence of Indian popular
   music, a hybrid form of traditional and Western popular influences.
   Traditional genres include the zhungdra and boedra.

   Characteristic of the region is a type of fortress known as dzong
   architecture.
   Chaam or the masked dance is a mystic dance performed during Buddhist
   festivals.
   Enlarge
   Chaam or the masked dance is a mystic dance performed during Buddhist
   festivals.

   Bhutan has numerous public holidays, most of which centre around
   traditional seasonal, secular and religious festivals. They include the
   winter solstice (around January 1, depending on the lunar calendar),
   the lunar New Year (February or March), the King's birthday and the
   anniversary of his coronation, the official start of monsoon season (
   September 22), National Day ( December 17), and various Buddhist and
   Hindu celebrations. Even the secular holidays have religious overtones,
   including religious dances and prayers for blessing the day.

   Masked dances and dance dramas are common traditional features at
   festivals, usually accompanied by traditional music. Energetic dancers,
   wearing colourful wooden or composition facemasks and stylised
   costumes, depict heroes, demons, death heads, animals, gods, and
   caricatures of common people. The dancers enjoy royal patronage, and
   preserve ancient folk and religious customs and perpetuate the ancient
   art of mask making.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bhutan"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
