   #copyright

Bill Clinton

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Political People

   William Jefferson Clinton
   Bill Clinton
     __________________________________________________________________

   42nd President of the United States
   In office
   January 20, 1993 –  January 20, 2001
   Vice President(s)   Albert Gore, Jr.
   Preceded by George H. W. Bush
   Succeeded by George W. Bush
     __________________________________________________________________

   Born August 19, 1946 (age 60)
   United States Hope, Arkansas, USA
   Political party Democratic
   Spouse Hillary Rodham Clinton
   Religion Baptist
   Signature

   William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton (born William Jefferson Blythe III on
   August 19, 1946) was the 42nd President of the United States, serving
   from 1993 to 2001. Before his election as President, Clinton served
   nearly 12 years as the 50th and 52nd Governor of Arkansas. His wife,
   Hillary Rodham Clinton, is the junior United States Senator from New
   York, where they both reside. Clinton founded and heads the William J.
   Clinton Foundation.

Early life

   William Jefferson Blythe III was born in Hope, Arkansas, and raised in
   Hot Springs, Arkansas. He was named after his father, William Jefferson
   Blythe, Jr., a traveling salesman who died in a car accident three
   months before he was born. His mother, born Virginia Dell Cassidy
   (1923–1994), remarried in 1950 to Roger Clinton. Roger Clinton owned an
   automobile dealership business with his brother, Raymond. The young
   Billy, as he was called, was raised by his mother and stepfather,
   assuming his last name "Clinton" throughout elementary school but not
   formally changing it until he was 14. Clinton grew up in a traditional,
   albeit blended, family; however, according to Clinton, his stepfather
   was a gambler and an alcoholic who regularly abused Clinton's mother
   and sometimes Clinton's half-brother Roger, Jr.

   Bill Clinton as a child went to St. John's Catholic School and Ramble
   Elementary School. While at Hot Springs High School, Clinton was an
   excellent student and a talented saxophonist. He considered dedicating
   his life to music, but a visit to the White House to meet
   then-President John F. Kennedy following his election as a Boys Nation
   Senator led him to pursue a career in politics. Clinton was a member of
   Youth Order of DeMolay but never actually became a Freemason.

   Clinton received a Bachelor of Science in Foreign Service (B.S.F.S.)
   degree from the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service at Georgetown
   University in Washington D.C., where he became a brother of Alpha Phi
   Omega, worked for Senator J. William Fulbright, was elected to Phi Beta
   Kappa and won a Rhodes Scholarship to University College, Oxford. While
   at Oxford, he played rugby union as a lock, and later in life he played
   for the Little Rock Rugby club in Arkansas. There he also participated
   in the Vietnam War protest movement. After Oxford, Clinton obtained a
   Juris Doctor (J.D.) degree from Yale Law School in 1973. While at Yale,
   he began dating classmate Hillary Rodham. They married in 1975 and
   their only child, Chelsea, was born in 1980. Clinton is a member of
   Kappa Kappa Psi National Honorary Band Fraternity, Inc.

Arkansas political career

   Bill Clinton

                     50^th & 52^nd Governor of Arkansas

               Term of office:
    January 9, 1979 – January 19, 1981
   January 11, 1983 – December 12, 1992

   Lieutenant Governor: Joe Purcell
                        (1979-1981)

                        Winston Bryant
                        (1983-1991)
                        Jim Guy Tucker
                        (1991-1992)
       Predecessor:     Joe Purcell (1st)

                        Frank D. White (2nd)
        Successor:      Frank D. White (1st)

                        Jim Guy Tucker (2nd)
          Born:         August 19, 1946
                        Hope, Arkansas
     Political party:   Democrat
       Profession:      Politician
         Spouse:        Hillary Rodham Clinton

   In 1974, his first year as a University of Arkansas law professor,
   Clinton ran for the House of Representatives. The incumbent, John Paul
   Hammerschmidt, defeated Clinton with 52% of the vote. In 1976, Clinton
   was elected Attorney General of Arkansas without opposition in the
   general election.

   In 1978, Bill Clinton was first elected Governor of Arkansas, the
   youngest to be elected governor since 1938. His first term was fraught
   with difficulties, including an unpopular motor vehicle tax and popular
   anger over the escape of Cuban prisoners (from the Mariel boatlift)
   detained in Fort Chaffee in 1980.

   In the 1980 election, Clinton was defeated in his bid for a second term
   by Republican challenger Frank D. White. As he once joked, he was the
   youngest ex-governor in the nation's history. But in 1982, Clinton won
   his old job back, and over the next decade he helped Arkansas transform
   its economy. He became a leading figure among the New Democrats, a
   branch of the Democratic Party that called for welfare reform and
   smaller government, a policy supported by both Democrats and
   Republicans alike.

   Clinton's approach mollified conservative criticism during his terms as
   governor. However, personal and business transactions made by the
   Clintons during this period became the basis of the Whitewater
   investigation, which dogged his later presidential Administration.
   After very extensive investigation over several years, no indictments
   were made against the Clintons related to the years in Arkansas.

Campaign for the Democratic Nomination

   There was some media speculation in 1987 that Clinton would enter the
   race for 1988 Democratic presidential nomination after then-New York
   Governor Mario Cuomo declined to run and Democratic frontrunner Gary
   Hart bowed out due to revelations about marital infidelity. Often
   referred to as the "Boy Governor" at the time because of his youthful
   appearance, Clinton decided to remain as Arkansas Governor and postpone
   his presidential ambitions until 1992. Presenting himself as a moderate
   and a member of the New Democrat wing of the Democratic Party, he
   headed the moderate Democratic Leadership Council in 1990 and 1991.

   In 1992, Clinton was the early favorite of Democratic Party insiders
   and elected officials for the presidential nomination; therefore, he
   was able to rack up scores of superdelegates even before the first
   nominating contests were conducted. In spite of this, Clinton began his
   1992 presidential quest on a sour note by finishing near the back of
   the pack in the Iowa caucus, which was largely uncontested due to the
   presence of favorite-son Senator Tom Harkin, who was the easy winner.
   Clinton’s real trouble, however, began during New Hampshire Primary
   campaign, when revelations of a possible extramarital affair with
   Gennifer Flowers began to surface. Clinton and his wife Hillary decided
   to go on 60 Minutes following the Super Bowl to rebut those charges of
   infidelity, which had started to take their toll, as Clinton had fallen
   way behind former Massachusetts Senator Paul Tsongas in the New
   Hampshire polls. In fact, his campaign was beginning to unravel. Their
   TV appearance was a calculated risk, but it seemed to pay off as
   Clinton regained some of his lost footing. He still finished second to
   Tsongas in the New Hampshire Primary, but the media viewed it as a
   moral victory for Clinton, since he came within single digits of
   winning after trailing badly in the polls. Clinton shrewdly labeled
   himself “The Comeback Kid” on election night to help foster this
   perception and came out of New Hampshire on a roll. Tsongas, on the
   other hand, picked up little or no momentum from his victory.

   Clinton used his new-found momentum to storm through the Southern
   primaries, including the big prizes of Florida and Texas, and build up
   a sizable delegate lead over his opponents in the race for the 1992
   Democratic presidential nomination. However, there were still some
   doubts as to whether he could secure the nomination, as former
   California Governor Jerry Brown was scoring victories in other parts of
   the country and Clinton had yet to win a significant contest outside of
   his native South. With no major Southern state remaining on the primary
   calendar, Clinton set his sights on the delegate-rich New York Primary,
   which was to be his proving ground. Much to the surprise of some,
   Clinton scored a resounding victory in New York. It was a watershed
   moment for him, as he had finally broken through and shed his image as
   a regional candidate and as centrist Democrat whose standing with
   Northern liberals was questionable. Having been transformed into the
   consensus candidate, he took on an air of inevitability and was able to
   cruise to the nomination, topping it off with a victory on Brown’s home
   turf in the California Primary.

Presidential election

   Clinton won the 1992 Presidential election (43.0% of the vote) against
   Republican George H. W. Bush (37.4% of the vote) and billionaire
   populist H. Ross Perot, who ran as an independent (18.9% of the vote)
   on a platform focusing on domestic issues; a large part of his success
   was Bush's steep decline in public approval. Previously described as
   "unbeatable" because of his approval ratings in the 80% range during
   the Persian Gulf conflict, Bush saw his public approval rating drop to
   just over 40% by election time.

   Additionally, Bush reneged on his promise ( "Read My Lips: No New
   Taxes!") not to raise taxes when he compromised with Democrats in an
   attempt to lower the Federal deficits. This hurt him among
   conservatives. Clinton capitalized on Bush's policy switch, repeatedly
   condemning the President for making a promise he failed to keep.

   Finally, Bush's coalition was in disarray. Conservatives had been
   united by anti-communism, but with the end of the Cold War, old
   rivalries re-emerged. The Republican Convention of 1992 was dominated
   by evangelical Christians, alarming some moderate voters who thought
   the Republican Party had been taken over by religious conservatives.
   All this worked in Clinton's favour. Clinton could point to his
   moderate, 'New Democrat' record as governor of Arkansas. Liberal
   Democrats were impressed by Clinton's academic credentials, his
   1960s-era protest record, and support for social causes such as a
   woman's right to choose. Many Democrats who had supported Ronald Reagan
   and Bush in previous elections switched their allegiance to the more
   moderate Clinton.

   His election ended an era of Republican rule, including 12 consecutive
   years in the White House and 20 of the previous 24 years. That election
   also brought the Democrats full control of the political branches of
   the federal government, including both houses of Congress as well as
   the presidency, for the first time since 1980.

Presidency, 1993-2001

   Portrait of President Bill Clinton
   Enlarge
   Portrait of President Bill Clinton

   Clinton's presidency included the longest period of economic growth in
   America's history. Clinton made cutting the deficit a top priority of
   his presidency. He supported and signed the Omnibus Budget
   Reconciliation Act of 1993. The Clinton Administration had a domestic
   agenda that included successful passage of the Family and Medical Leave
   Act of 1993 and the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
   Clinton was unsuccessful in his attempt at a universal health care
   reform program, known as the Clinton health care plan. The foreign
   policy of the Clinton administration dealt with conflicts in Bosnia and
   Herzegovina, Haiti, and most notably the Kosovo War.

Investigation and impeachment

The Lewinsky scandal

   In 1998, as a result of allegations that he had lied during grand jury
   testimony regarding his sexual relationship with Monica Lewinsky, a
   young female White House intern, Clinton was the second U.S. president
   to be impeached by the House of Representatives (the other being Andrew
   Johnson). The House held no serious impeachment hearings before the
   1998 mid-term elections: Republican candidates rarely mentioned the
   issue of impeachment, but Democrats generally came out strongly against
   impeachment. In spite of the allegations against the President, his
   party picked up seats in the Congress. The Republican leadership called
   a lame duck session in December 1998 to hold impeachment proceedings.

   Although the House Judiciary Committee hearings were perfunctory and
   ended in a straight party line vote, the debate on the Floor of the
   House was lively. The two charges that were passed in the House
   (largely on the basis of Republican support but with a handful of
   Democratic votes as well) were for perjury and obstruction of justice.
   The perjury charge arose from Clinton's testimony about his
   relationship to Monica Lewinsky during a sexual harassment lawsuit
   brought by former Arkansas-state employee Paula Jones. The obstruction
   charge was based on his actions during the subsequent investigation of
   that testimony.

Impeachment trial in the Senate

   The Senate refused to convene to hold an impeachment trial before the
   end of the old term, so the trial was held over until the next
   Congress. Clinton was represented by Washington powerhouse law firm
   Williams & Connolly.

   On February 12, the Senate concluded a 21-day trial with the vote on
   both counts falling short of the Constitutional requirement of a
   two-thirds majority to convict and remove an office holder. The final
   vote was generally along party lines, with all of the votes to convict
   being cast by Republicans. On the perjury charge 55 senators voted to
   acquit, including 10 Republicans, and 45 voted to convict; on the
   obstruction charge the Senate voted 50-50. Clinton, like the only other
   president to be impeached, Andrew Johnson, served the remainder of his
   term.

Other controversies

Administrative controversy

   The White House travel office controversy began on May 19, 1993, when
   several longtime employees of the White House Travel Office were fired.
   A whistleblower's letter, written during the previous administration,
   triggered an FBI investigation which revealed evidence of financial
   malfeasance.

   The White House personnel file controversy of June 1996 arose around
   improper access to FBI security-clearance documents. Craig Livingstone,
   head of White House security, improperly requested, and received from
   the FBI, personnel files without asking permission of the subject
   individuals.

Campaign finance and the pardon controversy

   The 1996 United States campaign finance controversy was an alleged
   effort by the People's Republic of China (PRC) to influence the
   domestic policies of the United States, prior to and during the Clinton
   administration and also involved the fund-raising practices of the
   administration itself.

   President Bill Clinton has been criticized for some of his presidential
   pardons and other acts of executive clemency. Clinton issued 140
   pardons on his last day in office ( January 20, 2001). It is common
   practice for Presidents to grant a number of pardons shortly before
   leaving office, but Clinton's last day list was more numerous than
   those of many previous presidents. Most of the controversy surrounded
   Marc Rich and allegations that Hillary Clinton's brother, Hugh Rodham,
   accepted payments in return for influencing the president's
   decision-making regarding the pardons.

Willey and Broaddrick allegations

   Two claims of sexual misconduct on the part of Bill Clinton were
   alleged by Kathleen Willey and Juanita Broaddrick, during the Clinton
   Administration. Neither claim resulted in charges against Clinton.

Public approval

   Clinton's approval ratings throughout his presidential career
   Enlarge
   Clinton's approval ratings throughout his presidential career

   While Clinton's job approval rating varied over the course of his first
   term, ranging from a low of 36 percent in mid-1993 to a high of 64
   percent in late-1993 and early-1994, his job approval rating
   consistently ranged from the high 50s to the high 60s in his second
   term. Clinton's approval rating reached its highest point at 73 percent
   approval in the aftermath of the impeachment proceedings in 1998 and
   1999. A CNN/USA TODAY/Gallup poll conducted as he was leaving office,
   revealed deeply contradictory attitudes regarding Clinton. Although his
   approval rating at 68 percent was higher than that of any other
   departing president since polling began more than seventy years
   earlier, only 45 percent said they would miss him. While 55 percent
   thought he "would have something worthwhile to contribute and should
   remain active in public life", and 47 percent rated him as either
   outstanding or above average as a president, 68 percent thought he
   would be remembered for his "involvement in personal scandal" rather
   than his accomplishments as president, and 58 percent answered "No" to
   the question "Do you generally think Bill Clinton is honest and
   trustworthy?" 47 percent of the respondents identified themselves as
   being Clinton supporters.

   In May 2006 a CNN poll comparing Clinton's job performance with that of
   his successor, George W. Bush, found a majority of respondents said
   Clinton outperformed Bush on every single issue in question.

Public image

   Clinton reading with a child.
   Enlarge
   Clinton reading with a child.

   As the first Baby Boomer president, Clinton was the first president in
   a half century not shaped by World War II. With his sound-bite-ready
   dialogue and pioneering use of pop culture in his campaigning, such as
   playing his saxophone on The Arsenio Hall Show, Clinton was sometimes
   described as the " MTV president". Until his inauguration as president,
   he had earned substantially less money than his wife, and had the
   smallest net worth of any president in modern history, according to My
   Life, Clinton's autobiography. Clinton, a charismatic speaker, tended
   to draw huge crowds during public speeches throughout his terms in
   office. Clinton was also very popular among African-Americans and made
   improving race relations a major theme of his presidency.

   Nobel Prize-winning author Toni Morrison in 1998 called Clinton "the
   first Black president," saying "Clinton displays almost every trope of
   blackness: single-parent household, born poor, working-class,
   saxophone-playing, McDonald's-and-junk-food-loving boy from Arkansas,"
   and, despite his career accomplishments, comparing Clinton's
   scrutinized sex life to the stereotyping and double standards that
   blacks typically endure.
   Hillary Clinton re-enacts being sworn in as a U.S. Senator by Vice
   President Gore as Bill and Chelsea Clinton observe.
   Enlarge
   Hillary Clinton re-enacts being sworn in as a U.S. Senator by Vice
   President Gore as Bill and Chelsea Clinton observe.

Post-presidential career

Public speaking

   Like other former American presidents, Clinton has engaged in a career
   as a public speaker on a variety of issues. In his speaking engagements
   around the world, he continues to comment on aspects of contemporary
   politics. One notable theme is his advocacy of multilateral solutions
   to problems facing the world. Clinton's close relationship with the
   African American community has been highlighted in his
   post-Presidential career with the opening of his personal office in the
   Harlem section of New York City. He assisted his wife, Hillary Clinton,
   in her campaign for office as Senator from New York.

   Clinton's autobiography, My Life, was released in June 2004.

   On July 26, 2004, Clinton spoke for the fifth consecutive time to the
   Democratic National Convention, using the opportunity to praise
   candidate John Kerry. Many Democrats believed that Clinton's speech was
   one of the best in Convention history. In it, he criticized President
   George W. Bush's depiction of Kerry, saying that "strength and wisdom
   are not opposing values."

   He dedicated his presidential library, which is the largest in the
   nation, the William J. Clinton Presidential Centre, in Little Rock,
   Arkansas on November 18, 2004. Under rainy skies, Clinton received
   words of praise from former presidents Jimmy Carter and George H. W.
   Bush, as well as from the current president, George W. Bush. He was
   also treated to a musical rendition from Bono and The Edge from U2, who
   expressed their gratitude at Clinton's efforts to resolve the Northern
   Ireland conflict during his presidency.

   On December 9, 2005, speaking at the United Nations Climate Change
   Conference in Montreal, Clinton publicly criticized the Bush
   Administration for its handling of emissions control. Further, Clinton
   twice visited the University of California, Los Angeles in 2006 to
   promote initiatives concerning the environment. First, on August 1,
   2006, he met with Tony Blair, Ken Livingstone, Antonio Villaraigosa,
   and Gavin Newsom to advertise the Large Cities Climate Leadership
   Group. On October 13, 2006, he spoke in favour of California
   Proposition 87, which was voted down.

Health

   On September 9, 2004, Clinton had an episode of angina and was
   evaluated at Northern Westchester Hospital. It was determined that he
   had not suffered a coronary infarction, and he was sent home, returning
   the following day for angiography, which disclosed multiple vessel
   coronary artery disease. He was transferred to Columbia Presbyterian
   Medical Centre in New York City, where he underwent a successful
   quadruple coronary artery bypass surgery on September 6, 2004. The
   medical team claimed that, had he not had surgery, he would likely have
   suffered a massive heart attack within a few months. On March 10, 2005,
   he underwent a follow-up surgery to remove scar tissue and fluid from
   his left chest cavity, a result of his open-heart surgery.
   Clinton, along with Pres. George W. Bush, Laura Bush, and Pres. George
   H. W. Bush pay their respects to Pope John Paul II before the pope's
   funeral.
   Enlarge
   Clinton, along with Pres. George W. Bush, Laura Bush, and Pres. George
   H. W. Bush pay their respects to Pope John Paul II before the pope's
   funeral.

Humanitarian work

   For more info please see the William J. Clinton Foundation

   While in Sydney to attend a Global Business Forum, Clinton signed a
   memorandum of understanding on behalf of his presidential foundation
   with the Australian government to promote HIV/AIDS programs in the
   Asia-Pacific region.

   On May 3, 2005, Clinton announced through the William J. Clinton
   Foundation an agreement by major soft drink manufacturers to stop
   selling sugared sodas and juice drinks in public primary and secondary
   schools.

Friendship with George H.W. Bush

   There had been reported signs of a friendship growing between Clinton
   and George H.W. Bush. After the official unveiling of his White House
   portrait in June 2004, the Asian Tsunami disaster, Hurricane Katrina,
   and the 2004 election, Clinton and Bush met, although the nature of the
   meetings did not appear to include a reconciliation of political
   opinions.
   Clinton with former President George H.W. Bush in January 2005.
   Enlarge
   Clinton with former President George H.W. Bush in January 2005.

   On January 3, 2005, President George W. Bush named Clinton and George
   H. W. Bush to lead a nationwide campaign to help the victims of the
   2004 Indian Ocean earthquake. On February 1, 2005, he was selected by
   UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan to head the United Nations earthquake
   and tsunami relief and reconstruction effort. Five days later, Clinton
   appeared with Bush on the Super Bowl XXXIX pre-game show on Fox in
   support of their bipartisan effort to raise money for relief of the
   disaster through the USA Freedom Corps, an action which Bush described
   as "transcending politics." Thirteen days later, they traveled to the
   affected areas to see the relief efforts.

   On August 31, 2005, following the devastation of the Gulf Coast by
   Hurricane Katrina, Clinton again teamed with George H. W. Bush to
   coordinate private relief donations, in a campaign similar to their
   earlier one in response to the Indian Ocean tsunami.

Honours and accolades

   In February 2004, Clinton (along with Mikhail Gorbachev and Sophia
   Loren) won a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children for
   narrating the Russian National Orchestra's album Wolf Tracks and Peter
   and the Wolf. Clinton won a second Grammy in February 2005, Best Spoken
   Word Album for My Life.

   On November 22, 2004, New York Republican Governor George Pataki named
   Clinton and the other living former presidents (Gerald Ford, Jimmy
   Carter, and George H. W. Bush) as honorary members of the board
   rebuilding the World Trade Centre.

   In 2005, the University of Arkansas System opened the Clinton School of
   Public Service on the grounds of the Clinton Presidential Centre.

   On March 5, 2006, he received an honorary doctorate of humane letters
   from Pace University, and is the first recipient of the Pace University
   President's Centennial Award. Following reception of the honorary
   degree, he spoke to the students, faculty, alumni and staff of Pace,
   officially kicking off the centennial anniversary of the university.
   Also in 2006 Clinton was awarded the J. William Fulbright Prize for
   International Understanding.

   On May 13, 2006, Clinton was the commencement speaker along with George
   H. W. Bush at Tulane University in New Orleans. They both received
   honorary Doctorates of Laws from Tulane University. Clinton spoke to
   the students, faculty and alumni of Tulane and of the devastation
   caused by Hurricane Katrina that Tulane students had known firsthand.

   In Europe, Bill Clinton remains immensely popular, especially in a
   large part of the Balkans and in Ireland. In Priština, Kosovo, a
   five-story picture of the former president was permanently engraved
   into the side of the tallest building in the province as a token of
   gratitude for Clinton's support during the crisis in Kosovo.

Related miscellanea

                              Political offices
     Preceded by:
   Jim Guy Tucker    Attorney General of Arkansas
                     1977 – 1979                            Succeeded by:
                                                            Steve Clark
     Preceded by:
   Joe Purcell       Governor of Arkansas
                     1979 – 1981                            Succeeded by:
                                                            Frank D. White
     Preceded by:
   Frank D. White    Governor of Arkansas
                     1983 – 1992                            Succeeded by:
                                                            Jim Guy Tucker
     Preceded by:
   Michael Dukakis   Democratic Party Presidential candidate
                     1992 (won), 1996 (won)                  Succeeded by:
                                                            Al Gore
     Preceded by:
   George H. W. Bush President of the United States
                     January 20, 1993 – January 20, 2001    Succeeded by:
                                                            George W. Bush
     Preceded by:
   Jacques Chirac    Chair of the G8
                     1997                                    Succeeded by:
                                                            Tony Blair
                                Other Offices
     Preceded by:
   George H. W. Bush United States order of precedence
                     as of 2006                              Succeeded by:
                                                            Condoleezza Rice
   Presidents of the United States of America

      Washington | J Adams | Jefferson | Madison | Monroe | JQ Adams |
    Jackson | Van Buren | W Harrison | Tyler | Polk | Taylor | Fillmore |
    Pierce | Buchanan | Lincoln | A Johnson | Grant | Hayes | Garfield |
   Arthur | Cleveland | B Harrison | Cleveland | McKinley | T Roosevelt |
    Taft | Wilson | Harding | Coolidge | Hoover | F Roosevelt | Truman |
     Eisenhower | Kennedy | L Johnson | Nixon | Ford | Carter | Reagan |
                        GHW Bush | Clinton | GW Bush

   U.S. presidential seal

   United States Democratic Party Presidential Nominees
   Jackson • Van Buren • Polk • Cass • Pierce • Buchanan • Douglas/
   Breckinridge( SD), McClellan • Seymour • Greeley • Tilden • Hancock •
   Cleveland • Bryan • Parker • Bryan • Wilson • Cox • Davis • Smith •
   Roosevelt • Truman • Stevenson • Kennedy • Johnson • Humphrey •
   McGovern • Carter • Mondale • Dukakis • Clinton • Gore • Kerry
   Governors of Arkansas Arkansas State Flag
   J. Conway • Yell • Adams • Drew • Byrd • Roane • E. Conway • Rector •
   Flanagin • Murphy • Clayton • Hadley • Baxter • Garland • Miller •
   Churchill • Berry • Hughes • Eagle • Fishback • Clarke • Jones • Davis
   • Little • Moore • Pindall • Martin • Donaghey • Robinson • Oldham •
   Futrell • Hays • Brough • McRae • Terral • Martineau • Parnell •
   Futrell • Bailey • Adkins • Laney • McMath • Cherry • Faubus •
   Rockefeller • Bumpers • Riley • Pryor • Purcell • Clinton • White •
   Clinton • Tucker • Huckabee
                              Persondata
   NAME              Clinton, Bill
   ALTERNATIVE NAMES Clinton, William Jefferson (full name)
   SHORT DESCRIPTION 42nd President of the United States (1993–2001)
   DATE OF BIRTH     19 August 1946
   PLACE OF BIRTH    Hope, Arkansas
   DATE OF DEATH     living
   PLACE OF DEATH

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bill_Clinton"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
