   #copyright

Bjørnøya

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: European Geography

   Bjørnøya is located north of mainland Norway and south of Spitsbergen.
   Enlarge
   Bjørnøya is located north of mainland Norway and south of Spitsbergen.

   Bjørnøya ( IPA: [ˈbjøːɳøja]), meaning "Bear Island" in Norwegian, is an
   arctic island of Norway that forms the southernmost part of Svalbard.
   It is located in the western part of the Barents Sea at 74.31° N
   19.01° E, approximately halfway between Spitsbergen and the North Cape.
   It was discovered by Willem Barents and Jacob van Heemskerk on 10 June
   1596, and it was named when a polar bear was seen swimming nearby.
   Bjørnøya was considered terra nullius until the Svalbard Treaty of 1920
   placed it under Norwegian sovereignty. Despite its remote location and
   barren nature, the island has seen some commercial activities in past
   centuries, such as coal mining, fishing and whaling. However, no
   settlements have lasted more than a few years, and Bjørnøya is now
   uninhabited with the exception of the meteorological station personnel.
   Along with the adjacent waters, it was declared a nature reserve in
   2002.

History

   Remnants of whalers' station at Kvalrossbukta
   Enlarge
   Remnants of whalers' station at Kvalrossbukta

   Norwegian seafarers of the Viking era may have known Bjørnøya, but the
   documented history begins in 1596, when Willem Barents sighted the
   island on his third expedition . Further exploration was conducted in
   1603 and 1605 by Steven Bennet, who noted the then rich population of
   walrus. Starting in the early 17th century, the island was used mainly
   as a base for the hunting of walrus and other seal species, as well as
   whaling. Eggs of seabirds were harvested from the large bird colonies
   until 1971.

   There have never been extensive settlements on Bjørnøya. The remnants
   of a whaling station from the early 20th century can be seen at
   Kvalrossbukta ("walrus bay") in the southeast. A coal mine with a small
   settlement named Tunheim on the northeastern coast existed from 1916 to
   1925, but mining was given up as unprofitable. Due to the cold and dry
   climate, the remains of the settlement (including a half-destroyed
   jetty and a steam locomotive) are relatively well preserved.

   The strategic value of Bjørnøya was recognised in the late 19th
   century, when Imperial Russia and Imperial Germany demonstrated their
   interests in the Barents Sea. The German journalist Theodor Lerner
   visited Bjørnøya in 1898 and 1899, and claimed rights of ownership
   there. In 1899, the German fishery association Deutsche
   Seefischerei-Verein (DSV) started investigations of whaling and fishery
   in the Barents Sea. The DSV was secretely in contact with the German
   naval command and the possibility of an occupation of Bjørnøya was
   considered. In reaction to these advances, the Russian Navy sent out
   the protected cruiser Svetlana for an investigation, and the Russians
   hoisted their flag over Bjørnøya on 21 July 1899, leading to protests
   by Lerner. However, no violence occurred and the matter was settled
   diplomatically with no definitive claims of sovereignty over Bjørnøya
   by any nation.

   The whole island was privately owned by the coal mining company
   Bjørnøen AS from 1918 to 1932, when the Norwegian state took over the
   shares. Bjørnøen AS now exists as a state owned company and is jointly
   managed with Kings Bay AS, the company that runs the operations of
   Ny-Ålesund on Spitsbergen. A Norwegian radio station (Bjørnøya Radio,
   callsign: LJB ) was established in Herwighamna on the north coast in
   1919. It was later extended to include a meteorological station.

   As the shipping routes from the Atlantic Ocean to Murmansk and the
   ports of the White Sea pass through the Barents Sea, the waters near
   Bjørnøya have been of great strategic importance in the Second World
   War as well as the Cold War. Although Svalbard was not occupied by
   Germany in the Second World War, German forces erected several weather
   stations there. An automated radio station was deployed on Bjørnøya in
   1941. German forces attacked several arctic convoys with military
   supplies for the Soviet Union in the waters surrounding Bjørnøya. They
   inflicted heavy losses upon Convoy PQ-17 in June/July 1942 but were
   ineffective in the Battle of the Barents Sea on New Year's Eve 1942.
   The waters southeast of Bjørnøya were the scene of more naval battles
   in 1943. In November 1944, the Soviet Union proposed to annul the
   Svalbard Treaty with the intention of gaining sovereignty over
   Bjørnøya. Negotiations with Trygve Lie of the Norwegian
   government-in-exile had however not lead to an agreement by the end of
   the Second World War and the Soviet proposals were never implemented .
   The Soviet Union (and later, Russia) maintained their presence on
   Spitsbergen, however.

   In 2002 a nature reserve was established that covers all of the island,
   except 1.2  km² around the meteorological station; the reserve also
   includes the adjacent waters to four nautical miles (7.4 km) from the
   coast . Today, the only population on the island (approximately ten
   persons) is the staff of the Norwegian meteorological and radio station
   at Herwighamna. The station conducts meteorological observations and
   provides logistic and telecommunication services. It also maintains a
   landing place for use by helicopters of the Norwegian Coast Guard. The
   Norwegian Polar Institute conducts annual expeditions to Bjørnøya,
   mostly concerned with ornithological research. Several other research
   projects, mostly pertaining to geography and climatology, are carried
   out less regularly. There are very few opportunities for individual
   travel to Bjørnøya. A few yachts make landfall, usually en route
   between the Norwegian mainland and Spitsbergen. A small number of
   cruising ships have visited the island, but tourism is otherwise almost
   nonexistent.

Hydrography, geography and climate

   Stappen bird cliff at Bjørnøya
   Enlarge
   Stappen bird cliff at Bjørnøya
   Miseryfjellet is the highest point in the mountainous southern part of
   Bjørnøya, about 536 metres above sea level
   Enlarge
   Miseryfjellet is the highest point in the mountainous southern part of
   Bjørnøya, about 536  metres above sea level

   Hydrographic surveys of the waters of Svalbard have been conducted by
   agencies of the Norwegian government throughout the 20th century,
   namely by "Norges Svalbard- og Ishavsundersøkelser" since 1928, its
   successor, the Norwegian Polar Institute since 1948, and the Norwegian
   Hydrographic Service since 1984 . Land surveying and mapping falls in
   the responsibility of the Polar Institute.

   Bjørnøya lies in the westernmost part of the Barents Sea on Spitsbergen
   Bank which extends southward from Spitsbergen and Edgeøya, forming a
   part of the continental shelf. Water depths near the island and to the
   north and east do not much exceed 100  metres, but become much greater
   to the south, and especially some thirty nautical miles to the west,
   where the continental shelf slopes into the deep water of the Norwegian
   Sea and Greenland Sea.

   The island's outline is an irregular triangle pointing south with a
   greatest north-south extension of 20  km and a greatest east-west
   extension of 15.5 km; its surface area is 178 km². The southern part of
   Bjørnøya is mountainous, the highest top being Miseryfjellet on the
   southeast coast at about 536 metres above sea level. Other notable
   mountains are Antarcticfjellet in the southeast, and Fuglefjellet,
   Hamburgfjellet, and Alfredfjellet in the southwest. The northern part
   of the island forms a lowland plain that comprises some two thirds of
   the surface area. The lowland is strewn with shallow freshwater lakes
   which cover some 19 km² in all. Several streams flow into the sea,
   often as waterfalls in the steeper parts of the coast. There are no
   glaciers on Bjørnøya.

   The coast is mostly steep with high cliffs and notable signs of
   erosion, such as caverns and isolated rock pillars. There are also a
   few sandy beaches. A number of anchorages and landing points exist, as
   well as a small harbour at Herwighamna on the north coast. However,
   none of these are safe in all weather conditions and a ship mooring
   anywhere on Bjørnøya must therefore be prepared to weigh anchor at any
   time.

   A branch of the North Atlantic current carries warm water to Svalbard,
   creating a climate much warmer than that of other regions at similar
   latitude. Bjørnøya's climate is maritime- polar with relatively mild
   temperatures during the winter. January is the coldest month, with a
   mean temperature of −8.1 °C (base period 1961–1990). July and August
   are the warmest months, with mean temperatures of 4.4°C. There is not
   much precipitation, with an average of 371  mm per year in the northern
   lowland area. The weather can be quite stable during the summer months
   although fog is common, with a maximum at 20% of all days in July; it
   develops when warm air from of Atlantic origin passes over cold water.

   A boundary between cold water of polar origin and warmer, Atlantic
   water exists in the western part of the Barents Sea. Thus, the water
   temperature can be quite variable within a few dozen nautical miles of
   Bjørnøya, sometimes reaching 10°C in summer. During the winter there is
   fast ice on the coast, but very rarely on the open sea around Bjørnøya.
   Pack ice is carried to Bjørnøya from the Barents Sea in every winter,
   sometimes as early as October, but a significant amount of ice is not
   common before February.

   The polar night lasts from 8 November to 3 February, and the period of
   midnight sun from 2 May until 11 August.

Flora and fauna

   Purple Saxifrage is well-suited to Bjørnøya's climate.
   Enlarge
   Purple Saxifrage is well-suited to Bjørnøya's climate.

   There is little plant growth, consisting mostly of moss and some scurvy
   grass, but no trees. Despite its name, Bjørnøya is not a permanent
   residence of polar bears although many arrive with the expanding pack
   ice in the winter. Occasionally, a bear will stay behind when the ice
   retreats in spring and stay over the summer months . There are also a
   few arctic foxes but no other indigenous land mammals. Ringed Seal and
   Bearded Seal live in the waters near Bjørnøya, but the formerly common
   walrus has nowadays become a rare guest. The only land birds are the
   snow bunting and ptarmigan, but the island is very rich in guillemot,
   puffin, fulmar, kittiwake, glaucous gull and other seabirds that
   inhabit the vast cliffs in the south. The pink-footed goose and other
   species visit Bjørnøya during their seasonal migration between
   Svalbard's northern islands and mainland Europe. Bjørnøya's freshwater
   lakes are home to a population of arctic char.

Environmental problems

   Although there are currently no industrial activities on Bjørnøya or in
   its immediate vicinity, pollution by toxic and radioactive substances
   remains a threat to the island's virtually untouched nature.
   Exploration in the Barents sea and the recent development of the
   Snøhvit gas field off the northern coast of Norway shows that the
   ecologically sensitive polar and subpolar sea areas of the Norwegian
   and Barents Sea have come into the focus of the petrol and gas industry
   . The environmental organisation Bellona has criticised the Norwegian
   government for licensing these activities without sufficient studies of
   their ecological impact. Organic toxins, specifically PCBs, have been
   found in high concentrations in biological samples from Bjørnøya,
   especially in arctic char of the freshwater lake Ellasjøen . The Soviet
   submarine K-278 Komsomolets sank on 7 April 1989 some 100  nautical
   miles southwest of Bjørnøya . Leakage of radioactive material from the
   reactor and nuclear warheads currently poses a minor problem, but
   severe pollution of the surrounding waters remains possible .
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bj%C3%B8rn%C3%B8ya"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
