   #copyright

Black-footed Cat

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mammals

                iBlack-footed Cat

                             Conservation status

   Vulnerable (VU)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Mammalia
   Order:   Carnivora
   Family:  Felidae
   Genus:   Felis
   Species: F. nigripes

                                Binomial name

   Felis nigripes
   Burchell, 1824

   The Black-footed Cat (Felis nigripes) is a small wild cat distributed
   over South Africa, Namibia, Botswana and marginally into Zimbabwe. The
   habitat of this cat species are arid semi-desert and savannah, like the
   Karoo and parts of the highveld, but it is only sparsely distributued
   in Kalahari Desert. With an average mass of 1.6 kg it is one of the
   smallest living species of cats. Females have an average weight of 1.3
   kg, males 1.9 kg (Sliwa 2004). The head-body length is 36-52 cm, plus
   13-20 cm tail, shoulder height is 25 cm. The head appears oversized
   relative to the rest of the body. The fur is cinnamon buff to tawny or
   off-white with distinct solid blackish spots which are joined to bands
   behind the shoulders and that form rings around the legs and tail. As
   the name implies, the soles of the feet are black. Black-footed cats
   live solitarily, are active at night and thus rarely seen. In the
   daytime they hide in springhaas (Pedetes capensis) burrows, under rock
   slabs and shrubs, and within hollow termitaria.

   Due to its small size the black-footed cats hunts mainly small prey
   species like rodents and small birds, but may also take white-quilled
   bustards and Cape hares, the latter heavier than themselves. Insects
   and spiders provide only less than 1% of the prey mass consumed (Sliwa
   1994, Sliwa 2006). Black-footed cats are shy animals, that seek refuge
   at the slightest disturbance. However, when cornered are known to
   defend themselves fiercely. Due to this habit and their courage they
   are called Miershoopdier or Anthill Tiger in parts of the south african
   Karro, although they rarely use termitaria for cover and for bearing
   their young. In the tales of the San (indigenous hunter-gatherers of
   the Kalahari) the black-footed cats is an extremeny brave animal, that
   attacks even Giraffes by piercing their jugular.

   Some authors state that they may be relatively common in parts of their
   range, however, mostly they are considered rare and they were recently
   listed as vulnereable in the IUCN Red List.

   A litter consists usually of two kittens, but may vary from one to four
   young. A female may have up to two litters during the southern
   hemisphere spring, summer and autumn. Kittens become independent with
   about 5 months of age but may still remain within their mother's range.

   Within one year a female covers an average range of 10 km², a
   territorial male 22 km². The range of an adult male overlaps the ranges
   of 1-4 female Black-footed cats (Sliwa 2004). The animals travel 8 km
   per night in search of prey. Energetic requirements are very high, with
   about 250g of prey / night consumed, which is about a sixth of their
   average body weight.

   There are possibly two subspecies: the smaller and paler Felis nigripes
   nigripes in the northern parts of southern Africa, and Felis nigripes
   thomasi, slightly larger and of darker colour, distributed in the
   south-east of South Africa. Specimens with characteristics of both
   subspecies are found close to Kimberley, central South Africa, where
   these distinctions break down.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black-footed_Cat"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
