   #copyright

Blue Peter

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Television

   Blue Peter
   Image:Bp logo.gif
   The current version of the Blue Peter logo, a stylised galleon based on
   an original design by Tony Hart.
   Genre Children's
   Entertainment
   Created by John Hunter Blair
   Presented by Konnie Huq
   Zoe Salmon
   Gethin Jones
   Andy Akinwolere
   Country of origin Flag of United Kingdom  United Kingdom
   No. of episodes Over 4000
   Production
   Running time 25 min.
   Broadcast
   Original channel BBC One
   BBC Two
   CBBC Channel
   Original run 16 October 1958 –

   Blue Peter is a popular, long-running BBC television programme for
   children, and airs on Children's BBC ( CBBC).

   It is named after the blue-and-white flag hoisted by ships in port when
   they are ready to sail. The reasoning behind the choice of title is
   that the programme is intended to be a voyage of adventure and
   discovery for the viewers, constantly covering new topics.

   The signature tune, in recognition of the origin of the title, is a sea
   shanty called "Barnacle Bill", and the programme's motif is a stylised
   sailing ship designed by Tony Hart. Hart's original design was never
   successfully used in a totally uniform fashion, with several different
   reproductions used in studio, on badges, the Blue Peter books and
   on-screen graphics. This was until the show's redesign in 1999, when
   the ship's rigging and hull detail was removed, and in 2000, the flags
   were subtly reshaped. This version is still in use today, and now
   appears across all media (although the revised badges retain the
   old-style flags).

   On Thursday 16 October 2008, Blue Peter will celebrate its 50th
   birthday.

History

   The programme, devised by John Hunter Blair and edited for many years
   by Biddy Baxter, was first shown on 16 October 1958 with presenters
   Christopher Trace and Leila Williams. The initial format was mainly the
   two presenters demonstrating dolls and model railways, with the male
   presenter concentrating on traditional "boys' toys" such as model
   aeroplanes, and the female restricting herself to domestic tasks, such
   as cookery.

   Over the years, the programme changed to reflect the times. Originally,
   it was a 15-minute weekly programme; now, it is 25 minutes, and shown
   three times a week on BBC One and repeated later on the CBBC Channel.
   The 4000th edition was broadcast on 14 March 2005. Most episodes are
   still broadcast live.
   The specially painted Blue Peter British Airways Boeing 757 landing at
   London Heathrow Airport
   The specially painted Blue Peter British Airways Boeing 757 landing at
   London Heathrow Airport

   Almost every episode from 1964 onwards still exists in the BBC
   archives. This is extremely unusual for programmes of that era, and
   stands as testament to Baxter's foresight and initiative, as she
   personally ensured that telerecordings and, from 1970, video copies
   were kept of the episodes. Among the benefits of this policy is that
   one 1973 episode contains the only known broadcast quality footage of
   the lost final episode of the Doctor Who serial " The Tenth Planet",
   which depicts The Doctor's first regeneration.

   Blue Peter has had a longstanding relationship with Doctor Who, often
   running features on the show with appearances by actors and
   behind-the-scenes personnel. One notable contest in 1967 had viewers
   design a monster in the style of those featured on Doctor Who. A
   similar competition was held in 2005 to help design a new monster for
   one of the episodes, which became the Abzorbaloff in " Love &
   Monsters".

   In addition, long-time host Peter Purves was himself a former co-star
   on the series. One programme asked viewers to help recover the lost
   footage of Doctor Who.

   Many items from Blue Peter's history have passed into television
   legend, especially moments when things have gone wrong, such as the
   much-repeated clip of Lulu the elephant (from a 1969 edition) who
   defecated on the studio floor, trod on presenter John Noakes' foot and
   then proceeded to attempt an exit, dragging her keeper along the ground
   behind her. Other well-remembered and much-repeated items include the
   Girl Guides' bonfire that got out of hand on the 1970 Christmas
   edition, John Noakes' report on the cleaning of Nelson's Column, and
   Simon Groom referring to a previous item on door-knockers with the
   words 'What a beautiful pair of knockers', which has usually been
   explained as an accidental turn of phrase, but which Groom later
   admitted was a deliberate joke. Additionally, Groom is remembered for
   inappropriately reciting, while wearing a suit of armour, 'Once a king
   always a king, but once a (k)night is enough', while Peter Duncan's
   cookery instructions to 'finely chop one raw egg' will also go into the
   annals.

   There have also been times when the show has broadcast breaking news in
   the days before 24-hour news channels. Possibly the most famous is
   showing the first colour images on British television of the sinking of
   the RMS Queen Elizabeth in 1972.

Airtime

   When the show first started it was shown once a week.

   From the 1960s until 1995 it was shown twice a week from 5:10 to 5:35pm
   on Mondays and Thursdays.

   Between 1995 and 2001: Monday, Wednesday and Friday on BBC One from
   5:10 to 5:35pm.

   From 2002, it was aired at 5:00pm, because Newsround was moved to a
   later slot.

   From 2007, still at 5pm but on on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursdays.

   In the Wimbledon tennis season the show moves temporarily to BBC Two.

Content

   Blue Peter's remit is very wide-ranging. Most programmes include a
   filmed report. There will also often be a demonstration of an activity
   in the studio, and/or a music or dance performance. The programme is
   made at BBC Television Centre, and often comes from Studio 1, which is
   the second largest TV studio in Britain and among the largest in
   Europe. This enables Blue Peter to include large-scale demonstrations
   and performances within the live programme. The show is also famous for
   its "makes", which are demonstrations of how to construct a useful
   object or prepare food. These have given rise to the oft-used phrase
   "Here's one I made earlier", as presenters bring out a perfect and
   completed version of the object they are making. Time is also often
   given over to reading letters and showing pictures sent in by viewers.

Appeals

   Enduring features of the programme include the annual charity appeal,
   which involves young viewers by asking them to collect items that can
   be recycled or sold to raise money for the chosen cause. This is always
   a charity project in the UK in odd-numbered years, and abroad in
   even-numbered. The appeal is usually launched in late November and runs
   through to February or March of the following year. One of the most
   popular forms of raising appeal money has been through encouraging
   viewers to hold "Blue Peter Bring And Buy Sales" at which buyers are
   also encouraged to bring their own bric-a-brac or produce to sell. The
   Great Bring And Buy Sale was used every few years or so as a means of
   adding variety to the collecting theme during other years.

   Between 2001 and 2003 a series of "Bring And Buy Appeals" led many
   viewers and the media to voice their concern that the traditional
   method of collecting scrap items to recycle was being abandoned in
   favour of the "easier revenue" generated by the sales. This led to an
   on-air explanation by presenter Konnie Huq during the 2003 Get Together
   Appeal that this particular appeal required the sort of funding that
   only Bring And Buy Sales could raise. The 2004 and 2005 appeals saw a
   return to the collecting theme: the first being to collect old clothes
   that Oxfam could sell in its stores to raise funds for a
   family-searching service in third world countries ravaged by war, and
   the second being the collection of old mobile telephones and coins that
   could be recycled to raise money for ChildLine. Continuing the return
   to collecting unwanted items, Blue Peter launched its Shoe Biz Appeal
   campaign in 2006. In partneship with Unicef, its aim was to collect
   unwanted pairs of shoes or other footwear in order to raise money for
   children orphaned by AIDS and HIV in Malawi.

The Totaliser

   During appeals, a running total of the sum of money or objects
   collected is presented on the Totaliser - a life-sized contraption
   which lights up sums of money at various intervals up to the target
   figure for the appeal at the top. A new Totaliser is constructed for
   each appeal and takes pride of place on the studio floor throughout the
   programme. During appeals, the Totaliser is presented during the
   programme, with new steps lighting up when each landmark flashing as it
   is reached. With recent appeals, a second Totaliser has often been
   introduced immediately after the original target has been met, with the
   aim of providing an incentive to keep on donating.

Pets

   The team of presenters keep pets and bring them onto the show. The
   original idea of this was to show viewers lucky enough to own animals
   how to care for them, and for the creatures to act as surrogate pets
   for children without them. The first pet was a dog named Petra in 1962.
   Other canines have included Patch, Shep the Border Collie, Meg, and
   golden retrievers Goldie and her daughter Bonnie. There also have been
   tortoises, including Freda (originally misidentified as a male and
   called Fred), Maggie, Jim and George, and cats, such as Jason, Jack and
   Jill, Willow, Kari and Oke and the late Smudge. The current animal
   line-up comprises: dogs Lucy and Mabel; Socks the cat; Shelly the
   tortoise, Magic (puppy) and the rarely seen Blue Peter Riding for the
   Disabled horse, Jet, who replaced Rags.

   The programme has had a long association with Guide Dogs, which
   stretches back to 1964 – captivating millions of viewers and helping to
   transform the lives of thousands of visually impaired people. The first
   Blue Peter guide dog puppy was Honey, whose training was charted by
   Valerie Singleton on the programme in 1964. Since then there has been
   Cindy who was puppy walked by Peter Purves in 1968; Prince, whose
   training was followed by Peter Duncan in 1981 and most recently a
   second pup called Honey – named in honour of her predecessor – who was
   trained by presenter John Leslie during 1991. In 2006 Andy Akinwolere
   began puppy walking a new Blue Peter guide dog puppy, named by viewers
   as Magic.

Blue Peter Garden

   The presenters also maintain the famous Blue Peter Garden, adjacent to
   Television Centre, which was designed by Percy Thrower. Its features
   include an Italian sunken garden with a pond, which contains goldfish,
   a vegetable patch, greenhouse and viewing platform. The 2000 Blue Peter
   time capsule, which is due to be dug up in 2029, is buried there.
   George the Tortoise was interred in the garden following his death in
   2004, and there is also a bust of Petra, sculptures of Mabel and the
   Blue Peter ship, and a plaque in honour of Percy Thrower. The garden is
   also available to other programmes for outside broadcasts, and is often
   used for the links between children's programmes during the summer
   months and for BBC One's Breakfast weather broadcasts. In 1984, the
   garden was vandalised, leading to an on-air appeal for viewers to come
   forward with information — which now often appears on clip shows. A
   rumour circulated in the early 1990s that the vandalism had been
   carried out by a gang including the footballers Dennis Wise and Les
   Ferdinand when they were teenagers. Both men have denied direct
   involvement in the actual vandalism, although Ferdinand did later
   confess to "helping a few people over the wall."

Annual events

   The programme also marks annual events, including Chinese New Year, St
   David's Day, Shrove Tuesday, Mothering Sunday, Guy Fawkes Night and
   Christmas. The latter, in particular, is a special occasion with a
   traditional format repeated year on year, featuring the story of the
   Nativity, a last-minute Christmas make, a filmed clip and the grand
   finale, the Chalk Farm Salvation Army Band and children from local
   schools marching "up the hill" and into the studio from the cold
   outside (lanterns in hand!) singing a Christmas carol (usually either "
   Hark the Herald Angels Sing" or " O Come All Ye Faithful") around the
   Blue Peter Christmas tree.

Blue Peter Book Awards

   Blue Peter promotes the Blue Peter Book Awards, a series of literary
   prizes for children's literature awarded annually, and inaugurated in
   2000.

Blue Peter traditions

   The programme maintains its long-standing practice of avoiding using
   commercial names on air. Most famously, this policy led to the
   invention of the phrase "sticky-backed plastic" back in the 1970s for
   the product marketed under the trade name Fablon. Similarly, many makes
   called for the use of a Velcro type material, which was referred to as
   "self sticking material". In today's climate of negativity surrounding
   product placement, the programme's policy of disguising any brand names
   visible on "make necessities" like glue sticks or cereal boxes has
   never been so important. An extreme example of avoiding criticism
   occurred in February 2005, when the show ran a feature on how Nestlé
   Smarties are made, without once mentioning the name of the product.

   The Blue Peter Summer Expedition is another long-running tradition.
   These visits focus on a single country and are filmed while the
   programme is off the air from June to September.

   During the 1950s and 1960s, the programme sometimes included a cartoon
   series as "light relief" from some of the more informative articles.
   One such was Bleep and Booster, which started in 1963 and continued in
   the Blue Peter books until 1977.

   In the early 1960s the "Advent Crown" was introduced. It consists of
   two wire coathangers tied together with garden twine and decorated with
   fireproof tinsel with candles placed at each of the four corners. (Most
   years this appears on-screen as one of the programme's "makes"). Unlike
   a religious advent crown, with one candle lit for each Sunday before
   Christmas, Blue Peter presenters traditionally took it in turns to
   light one candle for each of the last four programmes before Christmas,
   though the last few years have seen a change to a more Christian
   process of lighting one candle on the four Monday programmes during
   Advent. Presumably this will change for 2007 as the programme is no
   longer shown live on Mondays.

   Many of these long-standing traditions were started during the 1960s
   and 1970s by the show's editor, Biddy Baxter, along with producers
   Edward Barnes and Rosemary Gill, and most of them still feature on the
   programme.

The Blue Peter badge

   Children (and occasionally adults) who appear on the show or achieve
   something notable may be awarded the coveted Blue Peter badge. The Blue
   Peter badge allows holders free entry into a number of visitor
   attractions across the UK. In March 2006, this privilege was
   temporarily suspended after a number of badges were discovered for sale
   on the auction site eBay by a number of people. This suspension was
   lifted in June 2006, when a new 'Blue Peter Badge Card' was introduced
   to combat the problem. Each badge winner is now issued with an ID card
   to prove that they are the rightful owners. The original badge was
   slightly smaller in size than the current version, but still featured a
   blue coloured ship logo printed on a white plastic shield. This
   remained unchanged until the 1990s when a revised badge featuring a
   raised moulding of the ship design by Tony Hart was introduced (more
   detailed and neat than the previous printed reproduction). This version
   disappeared in 1997 when the old-style badge returned. It was not until
   2004, coinciding with the show's September revamp, that a new badge was
   introduced. Slightly larger in dimension and with a much bolder
   printing of the new-style traditional ship without its rigging detail
   (though the pre-2000 style flags remain). In October 2003, to celebrate
   the 45th birthday of the programme, a new, limited edition, badge was
   introduced, to last only a year. This moulding was made of rubber and
   larger than the traditional badge. It consisted of a white shield with
   a raised 'bubble ship' applique.

   The presenters almost always wear their badge; the only exception being
   when their apparel is incompatible (for example, a life jacket), in
   which case a sticker with the ship emblem is normally used instead. In
   addition, large prints or stickers of the ship are attached to vehicles
   driven by the presenters during filming assignments. Other badges
   exist, and are awarded for various achievements:
     * Blue Badges (a white shield with a blue ship print) are given to
       viewers who have stories, poems, pictures etc.
     * Silver badges (a blue shield with silver ship print) are given to
       viewers or participants who have already won a blue badge.
     * Green badges (green shield with white ship print) and a Blue Peter
       pedometer are awarded for any correspondence from viewers with a
       conservation, nature or environmental theme (in addition, the
       presenters often wear this badge when their reports deal with such
       issues, or when in the garden).
     * Gold badges (a gold-plated ship-shaped pin brooch) are very rarely
       awarded and are usually given only to people who have performed
       acts of extreme bravery, represented their country in a major event
       and so on. Bizarrely, and perhaps disappointingly, the gold badge
       has been awarded on several occasions to famous film actors or
       sportspeople - slightly at odds with the youth ethos of the
       programme. When presenter Simon Thomas left in 2005, he was awarded
       a gold badge on his last programme which has started a trend in
       which Liz Barker and Matt Baker were also given them when they
       departed. Valerie Singleton was awarded a gold badge during a
       studio interview recorded for the 1990 video release "The Best of
       Blue Peter, the 60's and 70's". Her her fellow presenters John
       Noakes and Peter Purves were given gold badges on the first
       programme in 2000 when the box for the year 2000 was dug up. The
       most recent former presenter to be given a gold badge was Peter
       Duncan in February 2007, whilst appearing on the programme as a
       guest.
     * The Competition badge was previously a round metal disc in white,
       with the blue ship, printed with the words 'Blue Peter Competition
       Winner'. However, after more than 40 years, it has recently been
       redesigned to look similar to the other badges, and is now an
       orange shield with a white ship. These badges are awarded to all
       winners and runners-up of Blue Peter competitions - with the new
       look badges being introduced in September 2006.
     * The new Team Player's badge (a purple shield with white ship
       print), which was introduced in September 2006, will be given to 12
       children every month, who have ideas for the show; these children
       will also win the chance to spend a day working with the Blue Peter
       team. This was the first new badge to be introduced since 1988.
     * The limited edition Birthday Badge (very similar to blue badge but
       has a raised moulding of the Millennium bubble ship used between
       1999-2004, and is made out of rubber) was awarded in the year of
       the 45th Birthday, in place, or with a blue badge. It is a rare
       edition.
     * Blue Peter Badges are only awarded one at a time.

   Another Blue Peter custom is that new presenters first appear on the
   programme with no badge on before it is clarified to the audience that
   they are the new presenter, for example, Zoe Salmon appeared as a
   customer on the show before one week later being introduced as a
   presenter. Simon Groom first appeared during a filming assignment at a
   disco where he was a DJ.

Tributes and honours

   In a list of the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes drawn up by
   the British Film Institute in 2000, voted for by industry
   professionals, Blue Peter was placed 6th.

   Asteroid 16197 Bluepeter is named in its honour. The asteroid was
   discovered on 7 January 2000, the day that the Blue Peter time capsules
   from 1971 and 1984 were unearthed.

The signature tune

   The Blue Peter opening theme was composed by Ashworth Hope (1880-1962),
   who was a successful solicitor as well as a composer.

   The following is a list of all the musicians who have recorded a
   version of the Blue Peter signature tune:
     * Sidney Torch & The New Century Orchestra: October 1958 to January
       1979 — Blue Peter Theme Tune from 1958
     * Mike Oldfield: January 1979 to June 1989 — Blue Peter Theme from
       1979
     * Simon Brint: September 1989 to September 1992 — Blue Peter Theme
       from 1990
     * Simon Brint: September 1992 to Septemer 1994 — Blue Peter Theme
       from 1992
     * The Yes/No People: September 1994 to August 1999 — Blue Peter Theme
       from 1996
     * David Arnold and the BBC Philharmonic Orchestra: September 1999 to
       June 2004 — Blue Peter Theme from 2002
     * Nial Brown: September 2004 to December 2006 — Blue Peter Theme from
       2005
     * Murray Gold: 2006 unused — Video of the Blue Peter Theme being
       recorded from 2006
     * Dave Cooke re-arrangement of Murray Gold: 2007

   Traditionally, the debut of a new version of the famous theme tune
   "Barnacle Bill" is accompanied with an introduction by the presenters
   at the time explaining the reasons behind the new rendition. Mike
   Oldfield appeared on the programme in the late 1970s, and his version
   of the theme tune was so popular with viewers that the producers
   decided to record it for use as a permanent theme.

   Despite a new rendition of the theme music being introduced in 2004, a
   new version was arranged by Murray Gold and recorded in 2006, as part
   of a viewers' competition, with prize winners taking part in the final
   orchestral recording. Viewers were told that this new version of the
   theme would be used when the series returned from its summer break in
   September 2006; however, for unknown reasons, this was not the case,
   save for excerpts being used as incidental music. Instead, when the
   September 2006 series began, a slightly shortened version of the 2004
   arrangement was used, with the opening bars removed. In January 2007,
   Dave Cooke, husband of former presenter Tina Heath, re-arranged Murray
   Gold's version of the signature tune, once again omitting the opening
   bars, and this has been broadcast regularly since, although the Nial
   Brown arrangement is still heard during promotional trailers on
   Children's BBC. Both Nial Brown and Dave Cooke's version of the opening
   signature tune have introduced a ship's whistle and used a slightly
   quieter drum roll to precede the theme. The Blue Peter website in a
   frequently answered questions section, states that "Q. Why aren't you
   using the new theme tune from Blue Peter Music Makers yet? A. We share
   your frustrations, but unfortunately Murray Gold has been insanely
   busy. He is so busy on Dr Who and working on a film in America that we
   need time to get it exactly right. Bear with us, we hope to get it
   ready for you to hear soon. "

   Nearly as famous as the opening music is the closing theme, which has
   been re-arranged in line with the various versions of the opening
   signature tune. However during the period 1999–2004, a shorter version
   of the opening tune was used to close the programme. The editor at the
   time, Steve Hocking, said that he was happy for the same tune to be
   used at the beginning and end of each broadcast, but in recent years
   the traditional finale tune has returned, with Nial Brown rearranging
   the closing tune from 2004 to 2006, and Dave Cooke doing so as of
   January 2007.

Opening Titles

   1958-1989: Traditionally, Blue Peter's titles sequence consisted of
   little more than film footage of the day's filming assignment or
   introductory studio setting footage of that day's edition accompanied
   by the theme music and the superimposing of the "Blue Peter" name and
   presenter credits. The theme music would either play out in full, or
   fade out appropriately depending on the programme's content.

   1989-1997: From 1989, a 2D animation of the Blue Peter ship had been
   developed and used alongside the 1985-introduced word-logo and was used
   as a method of displaying both the ship and Blue Peter name to precede
   any film or episode footage as before. From 1992 a 3D animation was
   used and further replaced by another graphical sequence in 1994. Once
   again, these animations preceded any film, studio or episode footage.
   Occasionally, from the 1994 series onwards, the 3D animation of the
   Blue Peter ship would be followed by a preview of certain items on the
   day's programme with a "coming up" caption and a presenter commentary.
   Again, the theme music would either play in full or fade out at an
   appropriate time.

   1997-1999: From 1997, a more generic title sequence was used with the
   1994 ship and title animation remaining, but was followed by clips of
   different action shots from a variety of the past years’ filming
   assignments intermixed with specially filmed "posing" footage of the
   presenters. The traditional format of episode-specific film or studio
   setting scenes were still used, occasionally on their own, or mixed
   into the generic footage to varying degrees depending on the day's
   edition. The theme music tended to play out in full, and on days when a
   totally generic version of the titles were used, the opening was often
   followed by a "coming up" sequence narrated by the presenters.

   1999-2004: By 1999, a new "bubble ship" symbol and titles sequence had
   been developed to be used alongside the traditional ship emblem. These
   bubble ships was seen floating around the presenters who were displayed
   in specially posed shots, and appeared to be floating above a graphical
   ocean on their own blue coloured ships. This footage was also mixed in
   with episode-specific film, introductory studio setting or more
   predominantly from the 2003 series onwards a preview of many items on
   the day's programme with a return to a "coming up" caption and
   presenter commentary.

   2004-2006: In 2004, a similar approach was adopted with each presenter
   posing with "ship's rigging" in their hands, appearing as though they
   were hoisting the sails of the Blue Peter ship. This sequence, designed
   by BBC Broadcast (now Red Bee Media) saw a return to the sole use of
   the original Blue Peter ship logo and also featured the Blue Peter pets
   in their own poses. Predominantly these titles would be preceded by a
   “coming up” sequence or occasionally clips of the edition’s filming
   assignment. The original version used from 2004-2005 opened with the
   ship logo and featured silhouettes of unidentified children also
   hoisting sails along with the presenters. This was discarded in 2005
   for the last year of the sequences' run and opened with the ship and
   Blue Peter name for the first time in six years - allowing more
   flexibility for when the titles would merge into that day's edition
   without being completed in full, as in the 1950-1990s era - before
   flowing into the rest of the titles (minus children) as before.

   2006-present: From September 2006 a new title sequence was introduced,
   opening with the traditional Blue Peter ship logo, followed by the
   presenters surrounded by "fact file boxes" displaying statistics and
   information about them and also pictures of the pets and snippets of
   previous assignment films. This also marked the end of the traditional
   format of the presenter credits being credited in order of seniority
   (although this is likely to be down to the stylistic dictation of the
   titles in their "girl boy girl boy" arrangement - the only irregularity
   being Gethin Jones appearing before Zoe Salmon who debuted on the show
   five months before him). As in previous years, this new graphical
   sequence precedes a “coming up” sequence or, alternatively, footage of
   that edition’s filming assignment.

   General notes: Traditionally, the opening titles of every programme
   feature the list of the presenters in order of their first appearance
   on Blue Peter, regardless of whether they actually appear in the
   edition in question (since 1995 and the introduction of the fourth
   presenter it is unusual to have all four presenters in the studio at
   the same time, save for special programmes). The only time this rule is
   not adopted is when the programme is a special pre-recorded assignment
   - for example a visit to a foreign country by two of the presenters, in
   which case the usual practice is just to credit the presenters
   appearing. Until 2004, the presenters were always credited by their
   full names. Since September 2004, the opening titles have only featured
   their first names, perhaps in a move to make the presenters appear more
   accessible to the audience.

Closing credits

   1958-1989: Traditionally, the Blue Peter closing credits were always
   flashed up on screen over the final moments of the programme to the
   sound of the closing theme tune. Alternatively, once the programme had
   officially ended (i.e. the presenters had said their 'goodbyes') the
   camera would focus on shots of the pets or aspects of the studio as a
   calmer backdrop against which to flash up the credits. The sequence
   would always end with a rather plain shot of the Blue Peter ship, the
   editor's name (who for the majority of this period was Biddy Baxter)
   and the BBC copyright blurb.

   1989-2003: Once again during this period the credits maintained the
   practice of appearing during the final seconds of the programme's
   presentation or once the script had finished. The major difference
   being that the text was now scrolled along the bottom third of the
   screen from right to left, usually overlaid on a graphical bar themed
   around the style of the opening titles of the time. The exception to
   this rule was when the programme was on permanent Outside Broadcast for
   the whole show. During these occasions the same "theme" of credits
   would be used - i.e. same graphics and background etc. but the typeface
   would always change to the same completely different font and colour,
   regardless of the regular typeface used at the time. Also, the credits
   would flash up on screen one by one, as opposed to scrolling. It is
   unknown why these anomalies occurred, but it is likely to be related to
   the reduced technical abilities whilst transmitting a live O.B. The
   final frame of the credits was always the Blue Peter ship as displayed
   in the opening titles of the time and the editor's credit, along with
   BBC branding.

   2004-present: Early in 2004, the producers experimented with flashing
   up the credits over a background of "on the next Blue Peter" type
   footage. This was discarded later in 2004 when the new arrangement of
   signature tune and titles were introduced and a revised format was
   adopted that has remained in use since. This adaptation shows the same
   flashed up credits along the bottom third of the screen, whilst a photo
   of a recent Blue Peter badge winner, with or without the project that
   won them their badge, is shown above. One of the presenters' voices is
   also heard introducing the winner and explaining what they did to win
   their badge. Occasionally on certain programmes, for example the launch
   of an appeal, special guests in the studio or when out on location, the
   credits will run as pre-2004, over the closing moments of the programme
   with the music fading in. Again, the credits end with the Blue Peter
   ship, editor and BBC credit.

   General notes: The exceptions to the above are during the annual
   Christmas programme, when the credits still scroll from right to left,
   often with Christmassy themed drawings separating each crew member. The
   Christmas programme traditionally ends on a view of the children carol
   singers in the studio in the background, the Nativity scene in the
   foreground, studio lights dimmed, a star of Bethlehem glowing on the
   cyclorama and a sparkling silver Blue Peter ship overlaid on the
   screen.

   When a "make" is featured in the programme, the creator of the item
   (invariably the retired Margaret Parnell or Gillian Shearing) is
   credited first. An example of this would be "Dolls House make by
   Margaret Parnell".

Blue Peter Books

   In 1964, the very first Blue Peter Book was published. Although an
   annual in all but name, the books are rarely referred to as such. Each
   book (published in time for Christmas) features highlights from the
   previous twelve months of Blue Peter features, and chronicles major
   guests who visit the studio, the Summer Expedition, the annual appeal,
   and the pets. The style of the books' contents has changed very little
   over the years, with the only noticeable difference between a 1960s
   book and the current formula being the increase in colour photography
   and digital artwork; otherwise, the principle is the same. There has,
   at a point in the mid-1980s and between 1992-1998, been a break in the
   publication of the books, and the publisher has, in recent years,
   appeared to change almost annually! However, since Pedigree took over
   the books in 2004, there has been a noticeable step up in quality. The
   books are now bigger than ever before, with a far greater number of
   pages, a testament to their enduring popularity and viability.
   Traditionally, the Blue Peter editor and members of the production team
   write the book, and choose its content, though the book is written from
   the presenters' point of view. As for the 'book' or 'annual' debate, it
   is interesting to note that, as of Book 34 in 2004, the cover makes
   reference to it as 'Annual XXXX' and the spine marking it as 'Book XX'.

   A lucrative collectors' market has developed, as a result of the Blue
   Peter Books, with 'Book One' being especially rare and commanding
   triple figures on online auction websites. Books from the late 1960s
   and 1970s are more common, and often turn up for less than a pound in
   second hand bookshops or charity stores. Books from the '80s and later
   '90s tend to be more expensive and rarer, as people realised the value
   of keeping hold of them.

Blue Peter presenters

              Name              Started           Ended             Tenure
   1.  Christopher Trace   16 October 1958   24 July 1967     8 years, 9 months
   2.  Leila Williams      16 October 1958   8 January 1962   3 years, 3 months
   3.  Anita West          7 May 1962        3 September 1962 0 years, 4 months
   4.  Valerie Singleton   3 September 1962  3 July 1972      9 years, 10 months
   5.  John Noakes         30 December 1965  26 June 1978     12 years, 6 months
   6.  Peter Purves        16 November 1967  23 March 1978    10 years, 4 months
   7.  Lesley Judd         5 May 1972        12 April 1979    6 years, 11 months
   8.  Simon Groom         15 May 1978       23 June 1986     8 years, 1 month
   9.  Christopher Wenner  14 September 1978 23 June 1980     1 year, 9 months
   10. Tina Heath          5 April 1979      23 June 1980     1 year, 2 months
   11. Sarah Greene        19 May 1980       27 June 1983     3 years, 1 month
   12. Peter Duncan        11 September 1980 18 June 1984     3 years, 9 months
                           9 September 1985  27 November 1986 1 year, 2 months
   13. Janet Ellis         28 April 1983     29 June 1987     4 years, 2 months
   14. Michael Sundin      13 September 1984 24 June 1985     0 years, 9 months
   15. Mark Curry          23 June 1986      26 June 1989     3 years, 0 months
   16. Caron Keating       13 November 1986  22 January 1990  3 years, 2 months
   17. Yvette Fielding     29 June 1987      29 June 1992     5 years, 0 months
   18. John Leslie         20 April 1989     20 January 1994  4 years, 9 months
   19. Diane-Louise Jordan 25 January 1990   26 February 1996 6 years, 1
                                                              month
   20. Anthea Turner       14 September 1992 27 June 1994     1 year, 9 months
   21. Tim Vincent         16 December 1993  24 January 1997  3 years, 1 month
   22. Stuart Miles        27 June 1994      21 June 1999     5 years, 0 months
   23. Katy Hill           23 June 1995      19 June 2000     5 years, 0 months
   24. Romana D'Annunzio   1 March 1996      20 February 1998 1 year, 11 months
   25. Richard Bacon       21 February 1997  19 October 1998  1 year, 8 months
   26. Konnie Huq          1 December 1997   present          9 years, 4 months
   27. Simon Thomas        8 January 1999    25 April 2005    6 years, 3 months
   28. Matt Baker          25 June 1999      26 June 2006     7 years, 0 months
   29. Liz Barker          23 June 2000      10 April 2006    5 years, 10 months
   30. Zöe Salmon          23 December 2004  present          2 years, 3 months
   31. Gethin Jones        27 April 2005     present          1 years, 11 months
   32. Andy Akinwolere     28 June 2006      present          0 years, 9 months

   For many years, Anita West was not officially recognised as a Blue
   Peter presenter, having stood in for several months between Leila
   Williams leaving the show and a full-time replacement being found. West
   was finally added to the official list of presenters at the time of the
   show's 40th anniversary celebrations in 1998.

   Of the 32 presenters who have fronted the programme during its
   lifetime, one or two have failed to live up to the 'squeaky-clean'
   image required of them. The most infamous scandal involving a presenter
   occurred in 1998, when Richard Bacon had his contract terminated, after
   publicly confessing to having taken cocaine; the BBC's Head of
   Children's Programming, Lorraine Heggessey, addressed viewers on-air
   before the first edition of the programme following his sacking to
   explain to the audience why he had been asked to leave and to apologise
   for his actions (Heggessey explained to viewers that Bacon had
   admitting to "taking an illegal drug"). Ironically, Bacon became a
   successful broadcaster because of the scandal, rather than despite it.
   It was a common conception that, due to such disgrace, Bacon would
   never work for the BBC again, yet a number of his subsequent
   appearances have been with the corporation.

   The programme maintains friendly links with most of its former
   presenters, many of whom have made further appearances on the show
   after leaving, particularly in the show's Christmas specials.

   Other people who have played roles on the show include the zoologist
   George Cansdale, who was the programme's first on-screen vet, and Percy
   Thrower who was the show's resident gardening expert from the 1960s
   until shortly before his death in 1988. He was followed briefly by
   Chris Crowder, and then Clare Bradley, who was replaced by the current
   incumbent, Chris Collins.

   Another contributor, though rarely seen on screen, was Margaret
   Parnell, who created almost all of the show's 'makes' from the early
   1960s until her retirement in 2001. Her role is now filled by Gillian
   Shearing, though Parnell's name still appears in the credits from time
   to time when a classic 'make' is re-used.

Controversy

   It was revealed by the BBC that a phone-in competition supporting the
   Unicef "Shoe Biz Appeal", held in November 2006, was rigged. The
   caller, Ali Zahoor who appeared to be calling in the competition, was
   actually a child who was visiting that day. The visitor pretended to be
   a caller from an outside line who had won the phone-in and the chance
   to select a prize. The competition was rigged due to a technical error
   with receiving the calls.

   Former editor Biddy Baxter, described as still being influential with
   the programme today, described the problem as an issue with a member of
   the production team on the studio floor and the Editor being oblivious
   to the situation in the studio gallery. She also went on to say that
   the programme would not feature premium rate telephone competitions in
   the future.

Trivia

     * The programme is often broadcast live. Former editor Biddy Baxter
       did not encourage presenters' ad-libs, and Simon Groom would
       infuriate her and test his fellow presenters by making ad-libbed
       double-entendres with a straight face.

     * The two most famous phrases associated with Blue Peter — 'And now
       for something completely different' (later made synonymous with
       Monty Python) and 'Here's one I made earlier' — were both coined by
       one of its first presenters, Christopher Trace.

     * Tony Hart originally asked for his design fee for the Blue Peter
       badges to be paid as a royalty of 1p for each badge made, but was
       offered a flat fee of £100 (equivalent to around £1,600 at 2006
       rates).

     * Petra, the first Blue Peter pet, was a mongrel dog introduced in
       1962. She gave birth to eight puppies in 1965, one of which, Patch,
       became John Noakes' pet when he began presenting in 1965.

     * Petra was not actually who she seemed: the first dog, Petra, died
       after the first programme, and was secretly replaced by an
       identical dog, also named Petra, so as not to upset the viewers.
       The facts surrounding Petra II were not revealed until after her
       death in 1977.

     * Queen Elizabeth II visited the studio as part of her Golden
       Jubilee. There she was presented with a Gold badge, which, somewhat
       ironically, allowed her free entrance into places such as the Tower
       of London and the public sections of her own house, Buckingham
       Palace.

     * Blue Peter is referenced in the Half Man-Half Biscuit song "99% of
       Gargoyles Look Like Bob Todd" in the following manner: "They've
       been cooking on Blue Peter, now they're sampling the dishes/'I
       don't normally like tomatoes, John, but this is delicious!'"

     * Yvette Fielding was the youngest presenter on Blue Peter, starting
       at the age of 18.

     * On 3 December 2007, Konnie Huq will overtake Valerie Singleton as
       the longest-serving female (third longest overall) presenter of all
       time, and would also become the first female (third overall)
       presenter to serve for a full ten years.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blue_Peter"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
