   #copyright

Bogotá

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Central & South American
Geography

          This article is about the capital of Colombia; for the town in
          the United States, see Bogota, New Jersey.

   Bogotá
   Downtown view from Colpatria Building
   Downtown view from Colpatria Building

   Official flag of Bogotá

                           Official seal of Bogotá
   Flag                    Seal
   Nickname: "Athens of Latin America"
   Motto: Bogotá, 2600 metros más cerca de las estrellas
   Bogotá, 2600 metres closer to the stars
   Municipalities of Bogotá
   Municipalities of Bogotá
   Country Colombia
   Department Bogotá, D.C.^*
   Foundation August 6, 1538
   Mayor Luís Eduardo Garzón, PDA
   Area
    - City 1,732 km²
   Elevation 2,640 m
   Population
    - City ( 2005 census) 7,321,831 ^
    - Density 4,528/km²
    - Metro 7,881,156 ^
   ^*Bogotá is physically within and is the capital of Cundinamarca
   Department, but as the Captial District is treated as its own
   department.
   Website:
   City Official Site
   Mayor Official Site

   Bogotá—officially named Bogotá, D.C. (D.C. for "Distrito Capital",
   which means "Capital District"), also called Santa Fe de Bogotá—is the
   capital of Colombia, as well as the largest and most populous city in
   the country with 7,321,831 inhabitants (2005 census). Bogotá and Soacha
   have an estimated population of 7,881,156

History

   Colombian National Museum
   Enlarge
   Colombian National Museum

   Originally called Bacatá by the Mexicas, it was the centre of their
   civilization before the Spanish explorers colonized the area, and it
   sustained a large population. The European settlement was founded in
   August 6, 1538, by Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada and was named "Santa Fé
   de Bacatá" after his birthplace Santa Fé and the local name. "Bacatá"
   had become the modern "Bogotá" by the time it was made the capital of
   the Viceroyalty of New Granada, which was then part of the Viceroyalty
   of Peru, and the city soon became one of the centers of Spanish
   colonial power and civilization in South America.

   In 1810- 11 its citizens revolted against Spanish rule and set up a
   government of their own, but had to contend with internal divisions and
   the temporary return to power of Spanish military loyalists, who
   reassumed control of the city from 1816 to 1819, when Simón Bolívar
   captured it after his victory at Boyacá. Bogotá was then made the
   capital of Gran Colombia, a federation combining the territories of
   modern Panama, Colombia, Venezuela, and Ecuador. When that republic was
   dissolved into its constituent parts, Bogotá remained the capital of
   New Granada, which later became the Republic of Colombia. See History
   of Colombia.

   In 1956, the municipality was joined to other neighboring
   municipalities forming a "Special District" (Spanish: Distrito
   Especial). With the Constitution of 1991, Bogotá was confirmed as the
   Capital of Colombia acquiring the name "Santa Fe de Bogotá", and
   changing the category from Special District to "Capital District"
   (Spanish: Distrito Capital).

   In August 2000 the capital's name was officially changed back from
   "Santa Fé de Bogotá" to the more usual "Bogotá". Bogotá Capital
   District The local government consists of a Capital District, the
   current chief of government is Luis Eduardo Garzón.

Flag

   Primate Cathedral
   Enlarge
   Primate Cathedral

   The flag originates from the insurgency movement against the colonial
   authorities, which began on July 20, 1810. During this insurgency, the
   rebels wore armbands with yellow and red bands, as these colours were
   the ones in the Spanish flag which was the one used as the flag for the
   New Kingdom of Granada.

   In October 9, 1952, exactly 142 years after these events, decree 555 of
   1952 officially and definitively adopted the patriotic armband as the
   flag of Bogotá.

   The flag itself is divided horizontally in two, the top band is yellow
   and the bottom band is red. The yellow colour denotes the gold from the
   earth, as well as the virtues of justice, clemency, benevolence, the
   so-called "mundane qualities" (defined as nobility, excellence,
   richness, generosity, splendour, health, steadfastness, joy and
   prosperity), long life, eternity, power and constancy. The red colour
   denotes the virtue of charity, as well as the qualities of bravery,
   nobility, values, audacity, victory, honour and furor, Colombians call
   it the blood of their people.

Coat of Arms

   National Capitol
   Enlarge
   National Capitol

   The coat of arms of the city was granted by emperor Charles V (Charles
   I of Spain) to the New Kingdom of Granada, by royal decree given in
   Valladolid, Spain on December 3, 1548. It contains a black eagle in the
   centre, which symbolises steadfastness. The eagle is also a symbol of
   the Habsburgs, which was the ruling family of the Spanish empire at the
   time. The eagle is crowned with gold and holds a red pomegranate inside
   a golden background. The border contains olive branches with nine
   golden pomegranates in a blue background. The two red pomegranates
   symbolize audacity, and the nine golden ones represent the nine states
   which constituted the New Kingdom of Granada at the time.

   In 1932 the coat of arms was officially recognized and adopted as the
   symbol of Bogotá.

Anthem

   The lyrics to the anthem of Bogotá were written by Pedro Medina
   Avendaño, the melody was composed by Roberto Pineda Duque. The song was
   officially declared the anthem by decree 1000 of July 31, 1974, by then
   Mayor of Bogotá, Aníbal Fernandez de Soto.

Population and Area

Location

   "Sabana de Bogotá", a high plateau
   Enlarge
   "Sabana de Bogotá", a high plateau

   Bogotá is located in the centre of the country, on the eastern of the
   "sabana de Bogotá", 2640 meters (8661 feet) above sea level. Although
   "sabana", as it is popularly called, is literally "savanna", the
   geographical site is actually a high plateau up in the Andes
   mountains..

   The Bogotá River crosses the 'sabana' forming Tequendama falls to the
   south. Tributary rivers form valleys with flourishing villages, whose
   economy is based on agriculture, livestock raising and artisanal
   production.

   The 'sabana' is bordered to the east by the Eastern Cordillera of the
   Andes mountain range. Surrounding hills, which limit city growth, run
   from south to north, parallel to the Guadalupe and Monserrate
   mountains. The western city limit is the Bogotá river; Sumapaz paramo
   borders the south and to the north Bogotá extends over the metioned
   plateau up to the towns of Chía and Sopó.

Climate

   The average temperature on the 'sabana' is 14.0°C, varying from 9 to
   22ºC. Dry and rainy seasons alternate throughout the year. The driest
   months are December, January, February and March; the rainiest are
   April, May, September, October and November. June and July are usually
   rainy periods and August is sunny with high winds.
   Hailstorm
   Enlarge
   Hailstorm

   Climatic conditions are irregular and quite variable due to the El Niño
   and La Niña climatic phenomena, which occur in and around the Pacific
   basin and are responsible for very pronounced climatic changes.

Urban layout and nomenclature

   The urban layout dates back to Colonial times, and is a square layout
   adopted from Spain. The current street layout has calles which run
   perpendicular to the hills heading east-west with numbering increasing
   towards the north, and towards the south from calle 1, and carreras
   which run parallel to the hills in the south-north direction with
   numbering increasing east and west from carrera 1. New urban sectors
   incorporate diagonal – similar to streets – and transversal – similar
   to carreras. Streets are numbered.

   It has over one thousand neighborhoods or divisions forming the
   developed urban network. Neighborhoods of higher economic status are
   primarily located to the north and north-east. Poorer neighborhoods are
   located to the south and south-east, many of them squatter areas. The
   middle classes usually inhabit the central,western and north-western
   sections of the city.

Demographics

   The largest and most populous city in Colombia, Bogotá has 7,321,831
   inhabitants (2005 census).

Government

   City Hall
   Enlarge
   City Hall

   Bogotá is the capital of the Republic of Colombia, and houses the
   national legislature, the Supreme Court of Justice , and the centre of
   the executive administration as well as the residence of the President
   of the Republic. The Principal Mayor and District Council – both
   elected by popular vote – are responsible for city administration.

   The city divided into 20 localities: Usaquén, Chapinero, Santa Fe, San
   Cristóbal, Usme, Tunjuelito, Bosa, Kennedy, Fontibón, Engativá, Suba,
   Barrios Unidos, Teusaquillo, Los Mártires, Antonio Nariño, Puente
   Aranda, La Candelaria, Rafael Uribe Uribe, Ciudad Bolívar, Sumapáz.

   Each of the 20 localities is governed by an administrative board
   elected by popular vote, made up of no less than seven members, as
   determined by the District Council. The Principal Mayor designates
   local mayors from a trio proposed by the respective administrative
   board.

Economy

   Bogotá is Colombia's largest economic centre, followed by Medellín,
   Cali, and Barranquilla. Most companies in Colombia have their
   headquarters in Bogotá, as it is home to most foreign companies doing
   businesses in Colombia as well as Colombia's main stock market. Bogotá
   is a major centre for import and export of goods for Colombia.
   Justice Palace
   Enlarge
   Justice Palace

Manufacturing, Commerce and Trade

   Bogotá is the hub of Colombian business. It has a busy banking and
   insurance sector and a Stock exchange. Engineering firms provide
   services for many regions of Colombia and Central America. Bogotá
   houses the central governmental institutions and military headquarters.
   It is the centre of the telecommunications network and has the biggest
   industrial facilities in the country.
   Bogotá's financial district at Chile Avenue
   Enlarge
   Bogotá's financial district at Chile Avenue

   Some services are public and others are private. The public services
   include energy, sewer and phones. Energy and sewer bills are stratified
   based on the location of owner's residence. Thus, the wealthier
   sections of society help subsidize the energy bills of the poorer
   sections of society. Telephone service is provided by both "Empresa de
   Telecomunicaciones de Bogotá" (ETB), a city-owned company, and
   "Capitel", owned by Colombia Telecomunicaciones and "EPM Bogotá", owned
   in turn by the Medellín public services company (Empresas Públicas de
   Medellín - EPM) . Coin or card-operated payphones are also available,
   along with cell phone providers. There are (as of May 2005) three main
   operators of wireless phones: Movistar (owned by Spanish firm
   Telefónica), Comcel (owned by Telmex) and Ola (co-owned by ETB and
   EPM).

   Bogotá also receives money from exports like flowers and emeralds. In
   downtown Bogotá, millions of dollars in domestically produced rough and
   cut emeralds are bought and sold daily. Other important industries
   include financial services, especially banking. Bogotá is headquarters
   to major commercial banks, and to the Banco de la República, Colombia's
   central bank. Bogotá is also a printing and publishing centre. The city
   is a major convention destination with many major convention centers:
   Centro Ferial de Convenciones Corferias, Centro de Convenciones y
   Eventos Cafam, Centro de Convenciones Gonzalo Jiménez De Quezada, among
   others. Because of its status as site of the country's capital, it is
   home to a number of government agencies, which represent another major
   component of the city's economy.

   The city's industrial base include staples of the Colombian economy
   such as GM Colmotores, Compañía Colombiana Automotriz, and Ecopetrol.

Transportation and Communications

   Street arrangement of Bogota based on the Cartesian coordinate system.
   Enlarge
   Street arrangement of Bogota based on the Cartesian coordinate system.

   Bogotá is a modern city with a modern transportation system. It
   includes an international airport, bus lines, taxis, the TransMilenio
   bus rapid transit system, and even a train that serves as
   transportation for the outskirts of the city.

   Buses are the main means of mass transportation. There are two bus
   systems: the traditional system and the trasmilenio. The traditional
   system runs a variety of bus types, operated by several companies on
   normal streets and avenues:
     * bus; large buses.
     * buseta; medium size buses.
     * microbus or colectivo; vans or minivans.

   The buses are divided into two categories: "ejecutivo", which is
   supposed to be a deluxe service and is not supposed to carry standing
   passengers, and "corriente" or normal service. Bus fares range, as of
   March 2006, from COP 900 to 1250 (US$ .40 aprox.)

   In addition, Bogotá has several types of taxis. Yellow taxis (cabs) are
   by far the most common. People often use them in order to get to their
   destination faster, although they are more expensive. Bogotá also has
   white taxis, used mostly as shuttles by hotels or companies to
   transport customers.

Airports

   Bogotá's principal airport is El Dorado International Airport. Several
   national airlines ( Avianca, AeroRepública, AIRES and SATENA), and
   international airlines (such as Iberia, American Airlines, Varig, Copa,
   Continental, Delta, Air Canada, Aerogal, TAME, TACA) operate from El
   Dorado. Bogotá's airport is one of the largest and most expensive in
   Latin America. Because of its central location in Colombia and America,
   it is preferred by national land transportation providers, as well as
   national and international air transportation providers.

   Currently, a major expansion of El Dorado airport is in the planning
   stage. This stage will be finished on January 2008.

Bus Terminals

   Bogotá is a hub for national and international bus routes. This
   terminal serves routes to the majority of cities and towns in Colombia
   and is the largest in the country. International services are provided
   to Ecuador and Venezuela by certain bus companies.

TransMilenio

   TransMilenio is a bus rapid transit system, a network combining modern
   articulated buses that operate on exclusive roads (busways) and smaller
   buses (feeders) that operate in residential areas, bringing passengers
   to the main grid. TransMilenio's main routes are: Caracas Avenue, 80th
   Street, Avenue of the Americas, Northern Highway (Autopista Norte),
   Jiménez Avenue, and 30th Avenue (also referred to as Norte Quito Sur or
   N.Q.S. for short). The Suba Avenue routes and the southern leg of the
   30th Avenue route were opened in April 2006. The third phase of the
   system will cover 7th Avenue, 10th Avenue, and 26th Street (or Avenida
   El Dorado). The system is expected to cover the entire city by 2030.

   The Transmilenio rapid bus service is extremely cheap, clean and
   efficient and carries commuters to numerous corners of the city. While
   the Transmilenio is expansive, there are some main routes that are not
   yet reached.

Security on Transmilenio

   As in any other highly crowded area, users of TransMilenio must be
   aware that when riding the system they are exposed to pickpockets.
   Isolated instances of people getting mugged have been reported as well.
   Security on buses and in stations is handled by police officers
   employed by the city. However, most of the time the officers assigned
   are recently graduated highschool students serving their mandatory year
   with the armed forces ('Policía Bachiller'). Higher ranking officers
   are assigned as supervisors and respond when a Policía Bachiller
   requests assistance.

Bike Paths Network

   Bogotá's network of bike paths, also called ciclorutas, is one of the
   most extensive dedicated bike path networks of any city in the world,
   with a total extension of 303 km. It extends from the north of the
   city, 170th Street, to the south, 27th Street, and from Monserrate on
   the east, to the Bogotá River on the west. The cicloruta was started by
   the Antanas Mockus administration (1995-1998), and considerably
   extended during the administration of Mayor Enrique Peñalosa.

   On Sundays, many people ride a popular tourist train with their family.
   On weekends, the train runs from Bogotá to Zipaquirá and Nemocón, towns
   on the outskirts of Bogotá.

   A lack of security on bike paths has caused many would-be riders to
   search for more traditional means of transportation.

Colleges and Universities

   Beaux Arts Building at National University
   Enlarge
   Beaux Arts Building at National University

   Bogotá's colleges and universities have a major impact on the city and
   region's economy. Not only are they major employers, but they also
   attract national and international industries to the city and
   surrounding region, including highly needed technology industries. The
   city is Colombia's educational "Mecca"; it boasts more schools,
   colleges, and universities than any other city in Colombia.

Parks and Recreation

     * There are many parks and most of them have facilities for concerts,
       plays, movies, storytellers and other activities. "Simón Bolívar
       Metropolitan Park", for instance, is a big park which is regularly
       used to stage free concerts (such as the annual Rock al Parque, a
       free festival in which new and popular Latin rock bands play for
       free). The park is also frequented in the month of August and used
       for kite flying, a national tradition.

     * Another public park is Parque Nacional (National Park), one of the
       biggest in Bogotá. The park has many trees and green spaces, as
       well as ponds, games for children, many foot and bicycle paths, and
       venues for entertainment such as public screenings of movies and
       concerts and events organized by the Council of Bogotá. It is
       located between two main streets, the Circunvalar Avenue and the
       7th Avenue.

   Simón Bolívar Metropolitan Park
   Enlarge
   Simón Bolívar Metropolitan Park
     * The Bogotá Botanical Garden (Jardín Botánico de Bogotá).

     * There are many other parks around the city of Bogotá. Each
       neighborhood has its own park. Some of these parks are private and
       others are public. Some private parks demand that people from the
       neighbourhood have a card to be able to get into the park. Public
       parks are for everybody. Some of them have watchmen. These parks
       also have sporting venues, which provide sports programs for
       children and adults, such as volleyball, basketball, taekwondo,
       football (soccer)|football, and other sports.

     * The most active park (in both leisure activity, promotion of
       high-end products and nightlife) is the "Parque de la 93" located
       between 93rd and 93Ath street, and 12th and 13th avenue. Several of
       the top restaurants and bars in the city are located in this park
       or in the "Zona T" (T-zone) in the 82nd street. Recently,
       restaurant activity has begun in the "Zona G" (69th and 70th
       Streets, in the Los Rosales zone) and La Macarena.

     * Bogotá has not only natural parks but also amusement parks like
       Mundo Aventura and Salitre Mágico. There is a special rate to get
       into these parks and people have to buy tickets to be able to play
       mechanical games. Mundo Aventura park has mechanical games such as
       sky-coaster, roller coaster, hammer, and other adult amusements.
       For children there are some mechanical games like little roller
       coaster, carousel, turtles, and so on. In this park, people can
       find both amusements and nature, with animals such as goats for
       children to feed. Besides, there is a "Cerdodromo", which is a
       place where pigs race.

   Plaza de Toros de Santamaria
   Enlarge
   Plaza de Toros de Santamaria
     * The other amusement park is "Salitre Mágico", which is one of the
       entertainment centers for children and adults. The are many
       mechanical games like pirate ship, apocalypse, 3 roller coasters
       and other games. The park is next to the Simón Bolívar park, which
       is a well known place in Bogotá (used also for concerts through the
       year).

     * For relaxing and finding peace from the stress of city life, the
       Parque del Chicó, with trees, gardens, artificial creeks and ponds,
       and a colonial style house converted into a museum, is worth a
       visit.

     * Not so far from the city, up north, the Parque Jaime Duque offers a
       cultural encounter for visiting families. It has rides, a giant map
       of Colombia, popular exhibits, and a zoo. A big hand holding the
       world symbolizes God, and a reproduction of the Taj Mahal provides
       a picture collection with reproductions of famous paintings.

     * Bogotá has an interactive museum of sciences called Maloka.

Zoos and Gardens

Trivia

   Our Lady of Lourdes Church
   Enlarge
   Our Lady of Lourdes Church
     * Bogotá hosts the Iberoamerican Theatre Festival, the biggest
       theatre festival in the world, every two years.
     * Bogotá is also known as the Athens of Latin America, given the
       locals' penchant for education and manners.
     * In 2007, Bogotá will be the Book Capital of the World.
     * The city also celebrates the International Book Fair, one of the
       three major book fairs of the Spanish-speaking Americas.
     * The tallest building in the city is the Colpatria Tower.
     * The former motto of the city was "2600 metres closer to the stars"
       (in reference to its altitude above sea level).
     * The city has institutionalized a day without cars on the streets,
       called "El Día sin Carro" (The day without cars). It takes place
       every first Thursday of February. See Car Free Days and United
       Nations Car Free Days.
     * Bogotá has the highest quality as well as the most expensive
       potable water in Latin America.
     * The Federal District as a whole has the largest economy in Colombia
       and ranks eighth in Latin America.
     * The Gold Museum has the biggest gold handicraft collection in the
       world.
     * Bogotá has one of the most extensive dedicated Bike Paths Network
       of any city in the world, with a total of 300km.

Gallery

   View of downtown Bogotá from nearby Monserrate

   An Eastern view of Bogotá's International Business District with
   Monserrate looming above

   Transmilenio's 19th Street Station

   Station at Jiménez Avenue and Seventh Carrera

   Bavaria Central Park

   Overview of Bavaria Central Park

   Santamaría Bullring with Park Towers behind

   Bullfighting in Bogotá

   Colpatria Bank Building

   Colpatria Tower at night

   Negret Sculpture at National Museum

   Saint Francis of Assisi Church

   Panoramic view of downtown Bogotá from nearby Monserrate

   Monserrate Church

   Candelaria Church

   View of the Maloka Museum dome theatre from the museum

   The Maloka Museum from the sidewalk

   View of the Maloka dome theatre

   Maloka Dome theatre facade

   Maloka Dome theatre facade

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bogot%C3%A1"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
