   #copyright

Boston Terrier

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mammals

              Boston Terrier
   Boston Terrier with brindle coat
   Enlarge
   Boston Terrier with brindle coat
             Alternative names
   Boston Bull
   Boston Bull & Terrier
             Country of origin
   United States
    Classification and breed standards
     FCI:   Group 9 Section 11 #140 Stds
     AKC:   Non-sporting            Stds
    ANKC:   Group 7 (Non-Sporting)  Stds
     CKC:   Group 6 - Non-Sporting  Stds
   KC (UK): Utility                 Stds
    NZKC:   Non-sporting            Stds
     UKC:   Companion Breeds        Stds

   The Boston Terrier is a breed of dog originating in the United States
   of America.

Appearance

   14 month-old Boston Terrier; 10 lb
   Enlarge
   14 month-old Boston Terrier; 10 lb

   Boston Terriers are typically small, compactly built, well
   proportioned, dogs with erect ears, short tails, and a short muzzle
   that should be free of wrinkles. Boston terriers can weigh from 10 to
   25 lb, typically in the vicinity of 15 lb. The breed is known for its
   gentle, alert, and intelligent expression. Boston Terriers usually
   stand 15-17 inches at the withers.

   The Boston Terrier is characteristically marked with white in
   proportion to either black, brindle, seal, or a combination of the
   three. Seal is a color specifically used to describe Boston Terriers
   and is defined as a black colour with red highlights when viewed in the
   sun or bright light. Ideally white should cover its chest, muzzle, band
   around the neck, half way up the forelegs, up to the hocks on the rear
   legs, and a white blaze between but not touching the eyes. In show
   dogs, symmetrical markings are preferred. Due to the Boston Terrier's
   markings resembling formal wear, in addition to its refined and
   pleasant personality, the breed is commonly referred to as the
   "American Gentleman."
   Young Boston Terrier pup with black coat and white markings
   Enlarge
   Young Boston Terrier pup with black coat and white markings

   Frequently, variations on the standard are seen depending on the
   ancestry of the individual dog. At various times, the English Bulldog,
   English Mastiff, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, and French Bulldog—among
   other breeds—have been crossbred with Boston Terrier lines to minimize
   inbreeding in what is necessarily a small gene pool.

Temperament

   While originally bred for fighting, they were later down bred for
   companionship. The modern Boston Terrier can be gentle, alert,
   expressive, and well-mannered. Many still retain the spunky attitude of
   the typical terrier. They were originally a cross-breed between the
   White English Terrier (now extinct) and an English Bulldog. Some
   Bostons enjoy having another one for companionship. Both females and
   males generally bark only when necessary. Having been bred as a
   companion dog, they enjoy being around people, and if properly
   socialized get along well with children, other canines, and non-canine
   pets. Boston Terriers can be very cuddly, while others are more
   independent. Boston Terriers are known to lick the faces of their
   owners excessively.

Health

   Many Bostons cannot tolerate excessive heat and humidity due to the
   shortened muzzle, so hot weather combined with demanding exercise
   brings the danger of heat exhaustion.

   They can live 15 years or more, but the average is around 13 years.

   The Boston, like other short-snouted breeds have an elongated palate.
   When excited, they are prone to a "reverse sneeze" where the dog will
   quickly, and seemingly laboriously, gasp and snort. This is caused by
   air or debris getting caught under the palate and irritating the throat
   or limiting breathing. "Reverse sneezing" episodes won't hurt a Boston
   in the least, but it will scare the dog, and maybe its owners, a good
   deal. The quickest way to stop these episodes is to talk to them
   calmly, and cover their nose with the palm of your hand, which will
   force the dog to breath more slowly and deeply through its mouth.

   Because of their short snouts, they do tend to snort and snore. These
   can be signs of serious health issues.Surgery is available to correct
   the defects that can cause trouble with breathing,(i.e.elongated
   palate,narrow trachea and pinched nares). There are risks attached to
   the surgery so it is suggested that you put your dog through such
   surgery only if its health is compromised. You can adjust their heads
   so the dog's airway is straight and the snoring should cease but does
   not cure more serious problems as mentioned before. Due to the Boston's
   prominent eyes, some are prone to ulcers or minor injuries to their
   cornea.

History

   The Boston Terrier breed originated around 1870, when Robert C. Hooper
   of Boston purchased a dog known as Hooper's Judge, a cross between an
   English Bulldog and an English White Terrier.

   Judge weighed over 30 pounds (13.5 kg.). He was bred down in size with
   a smaller female and one of those male pups was bred to yet a smaller
   female. Their offspring interbred with one or more French Bulldogs,
   providing the foundation for the Boston Terrier. Bred down in size from
   pit-fighting dogs of the bull and terrier types, the Boston Terrier
   originally weighed up to 44 pounds (20 kg.) (Olde Boston Bulldogge).
   Their weight classifications were once divided into lightweight,
   middleweight, and heavyweight.

   The breed was first shown in Boston in 1870. By 1889 the breed had
   become sufficiently popular in Boston that fanciers formed the American
   Bull Terrier Club, but this proposed name for the breed was not well
   received by the Bull Terrier Fanciers. The breed's nickname,
   roundheads, was similarly inappropriate. Shortly after, the breed was
   named the Boston Terrier after its birthplace.

   In 1893, the American Kennel Club (AKC) admitted the Boston Terrier
   breed and gave the club membership status, making it the first American
   breed to be recognized. It is one of a small number of breeds to have
   originated in the United States that it recognizes.

   The Boston Terrier was the first non-sporting dog bred in America.

   In the early years, the color and markings were not very important, but
   by the 1900s the breed's distinctive markings and colour were written
   into the standard, becoming an essential feature. Terrier only in name,
   the Boston Terrier has lost most of their ruthless desire for mayhem,
   preferring the company of humans, although some males will still
   challenge other dogs if they feel their territory is being invaded.

   Boston Terriers enjoyed particular popularity during the 1920's in
   America.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boston_Terrier"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
