   #copyright

Boston RFC

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Sports teams

   Boston RFC
   Full name Boston Rugby Football Club
   Founded 1960
   Union USA Rugby
   Ground Franklin Park
   Capacity ~500
   President Dennis Gaffney
   Coach Bill Good
   League Rugby Super League

   Team colours Team colours Team colours
   Team colours
   Team colours
   　
   Home colours
   Team colours Team colours Team colours
   Team colours
   Team colours
   　
   Away colours
   Official Website
   www.brfc.org

   Boston Rugby Football Club (also known as BRFC) is a rugby union team
   based in Boston, Massachusetts. The club competes in, and is governed
   by, the New England Rugby Football Union (their LAU), the Northeast
   Rugby Union (their TAU), and USA Rugby.

   The club was established in 1960, but they would not be recognized as a
   nationally competitive club until they were accepted into Super League,
   the premier division of club rugby in the United States. The club has
   also contributed numerous international players to the United States
   national side.

History

1960-1998

   BRFC was formed in 1960 but was not considered a nationally competitive
   club until 1996 when Beacon Hill Rugby Football Club, a spawn of BRFC
   that separated from the parent club in 1968, rejoined BRFC to ensure
   depth and competitiveness . Prior to the merge, the club had been one
   of the top regional clubs in New England. From 1970 through 1998, the
   club won twenty-two New England Rugby Football Union championships, but
   it was never able to attain consistent success at the national level.
   During that same time period, it reached the national competition four
   times and earned fourth place finishes in both 1983 and 1985. During
   the 1970s and 1980s, Boston RFC was the home club for many forwards,
   particularly locks, who played for the USA Eagles in international
   tests.

1998-present: The Super League Years

   The Super League was formed in 1996 by USA Rugby to create a national
   competition amongst the premier clubs in the United States. During its
   first expansion in 1998, Boston RFC was one of two teams invited to
   join the competition (the other being Philadelphia Whitemarsh RFC).
   Since joining the competition, Boston has been one of the weakest clubs
   in Super League play. The club has amassed a 19-40-2 record as of the
   beginning of the 2007 season. From 2004 through 2006, Boston recorded a
   2-18-0 record, and was outscored by 598 points (an average of thirty
   points per game). Other clubs that compete in the Premier Division have
   fared much better than Boston against Super League clubs during that
   period. Despite failing in the Super League competition, BRFC has
   remained one of the better clubs in regional competitions and
   tournaments since entering the Super League. They have won four New
   England Rugby Football Union Division I Championships since becoming a
   member of the Super League. The club fields four sides, which compete
   at various regional and national levels. The third XV has been met with
   some success at the national level, having won the USA Rugby National
   Third Division Competition in 2000.

International Tours

   Since 1977, BRFC has embarked on several international tours, the most
   recent being to the Cayman Islands in 2000. They have also toured Great
   Britain (twice), Ireland (three times), Wales, France (three times),
   New Zealand, and Australia.

Honours

   Boston RFC has been recognized with many regional honours. In the
   club's forty-six year history, Boston has won twenty-five NERFU
   championships. They have also attained moderate national success,
   reaching the USA Rugby Premier Division Competition four times, most
   recently in 2000.

Sponsorship

   The SuperLeague's primary sponsor is Michelob Amber Bock and as such,
   each individual team receives a portion of those revenues. In addition
   to Amber Bock, Boston RFC has individual sponsorships. These consist of
   several secondary sponsorships from local and regional businesses.

Notable Players

   The following is a list of former and current BRFC players that have
   earned caps for international tests

Australia

   Bob Egerton, scrum-half

Canada

     * Jim Yeganagi, flanker, two international caps

England

     * Frank Sykes

USA

     * Gary Brackett, second row, three international caps
     * Jack Clark, second row, two international caps
     * Dave Horton, flyhalf, three international caps
     * Tom Kelleher, second row, five international caps
     * Pat Malloy, second row, one international cap,
     * Gerry McDonald, hooker, three international caps
     * Boyd Morrison, outside centre, two international caps
     * Tim Moser, second row, one international cap

     * Manus O'Donnell, prop, one international cap
     * Brian Swords, second row, three international caps
     * Kevin Swords, second row, thirty-six international caps
     * Tom Vinick, centre, three international caps
     * Lin Walton, wing, four international caps
     * Mike Waterman, centre, one international cap
     * Barry Williams wing, five international caps
     * Mark Williams, flyhalf/centre/fullback, thirty-six international
       caps

Wales

     * Mike Roberts, lock, eight international caps.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boston_RFC"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
