   #copyright

Brisbane

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Oceania
(Australasia)

   Brisbane
   Queensland
   location of Brisbane
   Population:
   • Density:   1,810,943 ( 3rd)
                353.8/km²
   Established: 1824
   Area:        4768 km²
   Time zone:   AEST ( UTC+10)

   Brisbane ( pronounced /ˈbɹɪz.bən/) is the capital and most populous
   city of the Australian state of Queensland, and is the third largest
   city in Australia, with a population of just under 2.0 million and an
   urban agglomeration of over 2.4 million people. It is a city set close
   to the Pacific Ocean, and is situated beside the Brisbane River on
   plains between Moreton Bay and the Great Dividing Range in
   south-eastern Queensland.

   Named in honour of Sir Thomas Brisbane, the city grew from a harsh
   penal colony established in 1824 at Redcliffe, 40 km to the north. The
   colony was moved to Brisbane in 1825 and free settlers were permitted
   from 1842. It was chosen as the capital of Queensland when it was
   proclaimed a separate colony in 1859. The city developed slowly until
   after World War II, when it played a central role in the Allied
   campaign as the South West Pacific headquarters for General Douglas
   MacArthur.

   More recently, Brisbane hosted the 1982 Commonwealth Games and 1988
   World's Fair, as well as the Goodwill Games in 2001.

History

   The Windmill built by convicts in 1828 — the heritage notice at the
   Windmill states that it is Queensland's oldest surviving building
   Enlarge
   The Windmill
   built by convicts in 1828 — the heritage notice at the Windmill states
   that it is Queensland's oldest surviving building
   Queensland's first Government House located in the QUT Gardens Point
   Campus grounds.
   Enlarge
   Queensland's first Government House located in the QUT Gardens Point
   Campus grounds.
   The AMP Building (now the MacArthur Central building), was the Allied
   Pacific Headquarters of General Douglas MacArthur during World War II
   (photograph taken in 1938).
   Enlarge
   The AMP Building (now the MacArthur Central building), was the Allied
   Pacific Headquarters of General Douglas MacArthur during World War II
   (photograph taken in 1938).

   The area now known as Brisbane was inhabited before European settlement
   by the Turrbul and Jagera people whose ancestors originally migrated to
   the region from across the Torres Strait.

   In 1823 an exploration party led by John Oxley explored Moreton Bay and
   sailed up the Brisbane River as far as Goodna, some 20 km upstream from
   what is now Brisbane central business district.

   In 1824, the colonial administration of New South Wales established a
   penal settlement at what is now Redcliffe, on the shores of Moreton
   Bay. However, the Redcliffe settlement was abandoned after only one
   year and the colony was moved south to a peninsula on the Brisbane
   River (today the Brisbane CBD), which offered a more reliable water
   supply. Non-convict European settlement of the Brisbane region
   commenced in 1838.

   Queensland was proclaimed a separate colony in June 1859 and Brisbane,
   which was named in honour of Sir Thomas Brisbane (who was, at that
   time, Governor of New South Wales), was chosen as its capital. However,
   Brisbane was not incorporated as a city until 1902. Over twenty small
   municipalities and shires were amalgamated in 1925, to form the City of
   Greater Brisbane which is governed by the Brisbane City Council.

   Historic buildings include The Windmill, which was built by convicts in
   1828. According to the heritage notice at the Windmill, it is
   Queensland' oldest surviving building. The Windmill was originally
   intended for the grinding of grain. Another historic building is the
   Shrine of Remembrance, which was dedicated on 11 November 1930. The
   Shrine of Remembrance is Brisbane's main memorial of remembrance to
   Australia's war dead.

   During World War II, Brisbane played a central role in the Allied
   campaign when the AMP Building (now called MacArthur Central) was used
   as the South West Pacific headquarters for General Douglas MacArthur,
   the chief of the Allied Pacific forces. Approximately 1,000,000 US
   troops passed through Australia during the war, as the primary
   coordination point for the South West Pacific.

   Brisbane staged both a successful Commonwealth Games during 1982, and
   World's Fair during 1988. These events were accompanied by a scale of
   public expenditure, construction and development not previously seen in
   the state of Queensland.

   In the new millennium, Brisbane is one of Australia's fastest growing
   centres, receiving large numbers of migrants from other Australian
   states and territories. Despite strong economic growth, Queensland
   government statistics show unemployment rates of over 12% amongst
   migrants to Brisbane statistical division from interstate and overseas.

Geography

   Brisbane central business district with New Farm Park in the
   foreground.
   Enlarge
   Brisbane central business district
   with New Farm Park in the foreground.
   Landsat image of the Brisbane region.
   Enlarge
   Landsat image of the Brisbane region.

   Brisbane city centre is situated in the southeast corner of Queensland,
   Australia, at a latitude and longitude of 27°28′S 153°02′E. The city
   straddles the Brisbane River, and its eastern suburbs line the shores
   of Moreton Bay. The greater Brisbane region lies on the coastal plain
   east of the Great Dividing Range, although the urban area is dotted by
   large hills reaching up to 300 metres such as Mount Coot-tha, Mount
   Gravatt, Whites Hill and Stephens Mountain.

   Generally, the city is a low-lying floodplain and susceptible to severe
   flooding. Many suburban creeks also criss-cross the city, increasing
   the risk of localised flooding. The city has suffered two major floods
   since colonisation, in 1893 and 1974. The 1974 Brisbane flood occurred
   partly as a result of " Cyclone Wanda". Continual non-stop heavy rain
   had fallen during the three weeks leading up to the flood, which
   occurred during the Australia Day weekend (26–27 January, 1974). The
   flood damaged many parts of the city, especially in the suburbs of
   Oxley, Bulimba, Rocklea, Coorparoo and New Farm. The City Botanic
   gardens were also inundated, leading to a new colony of mangroves to
   form in the City Reach of the Brisbane River.
   Map of Brisbane CBD.
   Enlarge
   Map of Brisbane CBD.

   The Brisbane central business district is situated in a curve of a
   river. Covering only 2.2 square kilometres, it is easily walkable. The
   central streets are named for members of the House of Hanover. Streets
   named after female members ( Adelaide, Alice, Ann, Charlotte,
   Elizabeth, Margaret, Mary) run parallel to Queen Street and Queen
   Street Mall (named in honour of Queen Victoria) and perpendicular to
   streets named after male members ( Albert, Edward, George, William).

   Brisbane has a lower inner city population density than Australia's two
   largest cities, Sydney and Melbourne, although constant population
   growth occurring in Brisbane is closing the gap between Brisbane and
   Melbourne. The lower population density reflects the fact that most of
   Brisbane's housing stock consists of detached houses. Early legislation
   decreed a minimum size for residential blocks resulting in few terrace
   houses being constructed in Brisbane. The high density housing that did
   exist came in the form of miniature Queenslander-style houses which
   resemble the much larger traditional styles but are sometimes only 1/4
   the size. These miniature Queenslanders are becoming scarce but can
   still be seen in the inner city subrubs. Multi residence accommodations
   (such as apartment blocks) are relative newcomers to Brisbane, with few
   such blocks built before 1970, other than in inner suburbs such as New
   Farm. Pre-1950 housing stock was often built in a distinctive
   architectural style known as a Queenslander, featuring timber
   construction with large verandahs and high ceilings. The relative
   cheapness of timber in South-East Queensland meant that until recently
   most residences were constructed of timber, rather than brick or stone.
   Many of these houses are elevated on stumps (incorrectly referred to as
   stilts), that were originally timber, but are now frequently replaced
   by steel or concrete.

   Overall the city has a density of 379.4 people per square kilometre,
   which is comparable to that of Sydney. Recently the density of the city
   and inner city neighbourhoods has increased with the construction of
   apartments, with the result that the population of the central business
   district has doubled over the last 5 years.

Climate

   Brisbane has a typical subtropical climate with hot, humid summers and
   dry, mild winters. From late Spring through to early Autumn,
   thunderstorms are common over the greater Brisbane area, with the more
   severe events accompanied by large damaging hail stones, torrential
   rain and destructive winds.

   The city's highest recorded temperature was 43.2 °C (109.8 °F) on the
   26 January 1940, while the lowest temperature of 2.3 °C (36.1 °F) was
   recorded on 12 July 1894 and 2 July 1896. Brisbane's wettest day was 21
   January 1887, when 465 mm (18.3 in) of rain fell on the city, the
   highest maximum daily rainfall of any of Australia's capital cities.

   CAPTION: Climate Table

     Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Year
   Mean daily maximum temperature ( °C) 29.4 29.0 28.0 26.1 23.2 20.9 20.4
   21.8 24.0 26.1 27.8 29.1
   Mean daily minimum temperature ( °C) 20.7 20.6 19.4 16.6 13.3 10.9 9.5
   10.3 12.9 15.8 18.1 19.8
   Mean monthly rainfall ( mm) 159.6 158.3 140.7 92.5 73.7 67.8 56.5 45.9
   45.7 75.4 97.0 133.3 1146.4
   Source: Bureau of Meteorology

Governance

   Brisbane City Hall houses the Museum of Brisbane and offices of the
   Brisbane City Council.
   Enlarge
   Brisbane City Hall houses the Museum of Brisbane and offices of the
   Brisbane City Council.

   Brisbane City Council logo.

   Unlike other Australian capital cities, a large portion of the greater
   metropolitan area of Brisbane is controlled by a single local
   government entity, the Brisbane City Council. Since the creation of the
   Brisbane City Council in 1925 the urban areas of Brisbane have expanded
   considerably past the City Council boundaries.

   The City of Brisbane is divided into 26 wards, with each ward electing
   a Councillor as their community representative. The Lord Mayor of
   Brisbane and Councillors are elected every four years by popular vote,
   in which all residents must participate. The current Lord Mayor of
   Brisbane is Campbell Newman, who was elected to the position in March
   2004.

   Brisbane City Council is the largest local government body (in terms of
   population and budget) in Australia. The Council, formed by the merger
   of twenty smaller councils in 1925, has jurisdiction over an area of
   1367 km². The Council's annual budget is approximately $1.6 billion,
   and it has an asset base of $13 billion.

   The Brisbane metropolitan area now covers parts of several adjoining
   local government areas including Beaudesert Shire, Caboolture Shire,
   Gold Coast City, Ipswich City, Logan City, Pine Rivers Shire, Redcliffe
   City and Redland Shire.

Economy

   Brisbane city by night, looking north along the Brisbane River towards
   the CBD.
   Enlarge
   Brisbane city by night, looking north along the Brisbane River towards
   the CBD.
   Queen Street Mall, Brisbane CBD.
   Enlarge
   Queen Street Mall, Brisbane CBD.

   Brisbane's economy has white-collar and blue-collar industries.
   White-collar industries include information technology, financial
   services, higher education and public sector administration generally
   concentrated in and around the central business district and recently
   established office areas in the inner suburbs. Blue-collar industries
   include petroleum refining, stevedoring, paper milling, metalworking
   and QR railway workshops tend to be located on the lower reaches of the
   Brisbane River and in new industrial zones on the urban fringe. Tourism
   is an important part of the Brisbane economy, both in its own right and
   as a gateway to other areas of Queensland.

   Since the late 1990s and early 2000s, the Queensland State Government
   has been developing technology and science industries in Queensland as
   a whole, and Brisbane in particular, as part of its "Smart State"
   initative. The government has invested in several biotechnology and
   research facilities at several universities in Brisbane. The Institute
   for Molecular Bioscience at the University of Queensland (UQ) Saint
   Lucia Campus is a large CSIRO and Queensland state government
   initiative for research and innovation that is currently being emulated
   at the Queensland University of Technology (QUT) Campus at Kelvin Grove
   with the establishment of the Institute of Health and Biomedical
   Innovation (IHBI).

   Brisbane is also considered one of the major business hubs in
   Australia. Most major Australian and International companies have
   either a major or minor contact office in Brisbane. Many electronics
   companies also take advantage of the strategic port and airports by
   choosing to have distribution hubs in the city. LG, Panasonic, Samsung
   are just a few practical examples. DHL Global have their Oceanic
   distribution warehouse located in Brisbane, while Asia Pacific
   Aerospace their headquarters.

   The Port of Brisbane is on the lower reaches of the Brisbane River and
   on Fisherman's Island at the rivers mouth, and is the 3rd most
   important port in Australia for value of goods. Container freight,
   sugar, grain, coal and bulk liquids are the major exports. Most of the
   port facilities are less than three decades old and some are built on
   reclaimed mangroves and wetlands. The Port is a part of the Australia
   TradeCoast, the country's fastest-growing economic development area, is
   a marketing partnership between the Queensland Government, the city of
   Brisbane, Brisbane airport and its seaport, originally proposed by a UK
   marketer who had also developed the Amsterdam airport Area zone.
   Geographically, Australia TradeCoast occupies a huge swathe of land
   around the airport and port. Commercially, the area has attracted a mix
   of companies from throughout the Asia Pacific region.

   Home grown major companies from Brisbane include Suncorp-Metway
   Limited, Flight Centre, SunSuper, Orrcon, Credit Union Australia, Donut
   King, Wotif.com, WebCentral, PIPE Networks, Mincom Ltd. and Virgin Blue
   are headquartered in Brisbane, while the city has regional presences of
   Alcan, Oracle, Boeing and Red Hat.

   Brisbane has many shopping centres. The Queen Street Mall has
   restaurants, souvenirs and shopping centres, including: Wintergarden,
   Broadway on the Mall, Queens Plaza, Brisbane Arcade and The Myer
   Centre. The majority of consumer commerce is generally done within the
   suburbs of Brisbane, via massive shopping centre hubs which include
   major departments chains. There are 4 major shopping centres in
   Brisbane located in the suburbs of Chermside, Indooroopilly, Mt Gravatt
   and Carindale. Smaller, yet significant shopping centres are also
   littered around the other suburbs of the city. For a full listing of
   shopping centres in Brisbane CBD, and Brisbane suburbs, see the
   Brisbane, Queensland section of the List of shopping centres in
   Australia article

Demographics

                         Brisbane
   Population by year
   1825 47        (convict settlement)
   1831 1,241
   1839 2,212
   1846 6,257     (free settlement)
   1851 8,375
   1891 104,276   (gold rush)
   1925 260 000
   1950 442,000
   1960 603,000
   1970 798,000   (interstate migration)
   1980 1,067,000
   1990 1,303,000
   2000 1,591,000
   2004 1,810,943 (2005 estimate)
   2030 2,597,400 (projected)
   2100 5,997,400 (projected, Largest City In Australia)

   The population of Brisbane city is estimated at 971,757 (as of June
   2005). Greater Brisbane has an estimated urban population of 1.81
   million. Brisbane City Council as Australia's largest (by area)
   predominantly urban Local Government Area, is the most populous LGA in
   Australia. Brisbane is claimed to have Australia's highest rate of
   capital city population growth. The urban population reportedly grew by
   11.5% between 1999 and 2004 .

   The last Australian Census in 2001 showed that 1.7% of Brisbane's
   population are of indigenous origins, while 21.0% were born overseas.
   Approximately 13.5% of households speak a language other than English,
   with the most common being Chinese, Vietnamese and Italian. The median
   age across the city is 32 years old.
   Part of the Brisbane central business district
   Enlarge
   Part of the Brisbane central business district

Education

   The Forgan Smith Building and the Great Court University of Queensland
   Enlarge
   The Forgan Smith Building and the Great Court University of Queensland

   Brisbane has multi-campus universities and colleges including the
   University of Queensland (A member of the Group of Eight), Queensland
   University of Technology and Griffith University. Other universities
   which have campuses in Brisbane include the Australian Catholic
   University, Central Queensland University, James Cook University, the
   University of Canberra, the University of New South Wales and the
   University of Southern Queensland.

   Brisbane also has TAFE colleges including the Bremer Institute of TAFE,
   Brisbane North Institute of TAFE, Metropolitan South Institute of TAFE
   and the Southbank Institute of TAFE. Other independent tertiary
   education providers include the Australian College of Natural Medicine,
   the Brisbane College of Theology, QANTM and Jschool: Journalism
   Education & Training.

   Brisbane is covered under the jurisdiction of Education Queensland
   regarding public primary and high schools. For information about
   schools in Brisbane, see the List of schools in Queensland article.

Culture

   Brisbane skyline taken from the South Bank Parklands
   Enlarge
   Brisbane skyline taken from the South Bank Parklands

Arts and entertainment

   Brisbane has a thriving live music scene, as well as museums and
   theatres, performing arts and creative arts. It is the birthplace of
   internationally acclaimed singers, music bands, authors, actors,
   artists and sculptors. Many of Brisbane's singers and musicians (both
   popular and classical) have performed overseas, and have received
   international awards and recognition.

   There are popular entertainment pubs and clubs within both the City and
   Fortitude Valley.

   There is also the Queensland Cultural Centre at South Bank, which
   includes the Queensland Performing Arts Centre (with the Lyric Theatre,
   Concert Hall, Cremorne Theatre and the Playhouse), Queensland Museum,
   Queensland Art Gallery, State Library of Queensland, and soon to be
   completed Queensland Gallery of Modern Art. Close to the Queensland
   Performing arts Centre are the Queensland Conservatorium Griffith
   University and Suncorp Piazza, which are both located at South Bank
   Parklands, and the Brisbane Convention & Exhibition Centre.

   Major cultural events include the Ekka (the Royal Queensland Show) is
   held each year in August, at the Brisbane Exhibition Ground,
   Riverfestival (which includes Riverfire), is held each year in
   September at South Bank Parklands and surrounding areas; Warana,
   (meaning Blue Skies), was a former spring festival which began in 1961
   and was held in September each year. Run as a celebration of Brisbane,
   Warana was similar in many ways to Melbourne's Moomba festival. Warana
   was changed, in 1996, to a biennial Brisbane Festival, as a lower key
   event with a focus on the performing arts. Also, the Paniyiri festival
   at Musgrave Park (corner of Russell and Edmonstone Streets, South
   Brisbane) an annual Greek cultural festival held on the first weekend
   in May.

Tourism and recreation

   Popular areas for tourism and recreation include the South Bank
   Parklands, the Roma Street Parkland (which has an outdoor
   amphitheatre), the Brisbane City Botanic Gardens (a colonial era
   botanic gardens founded in 1855 in the Brisbane CBD), and the Mount
   Coot-tha state forest (which includes a lookout over the city), the
   Brisbane Botanic Gardens (contemporary botanical gardens) which
   includes the Sir Thomas Brisbane Planetarium and the
   "Tsuki-yama-chisen" Japanese Garden, as well as Lone Pine Koala
   Sanctuary and Brisbane Forest Park, the rock-climbing cliffs which are
   located at the southern approach to the Story Bridge at Kangaroo Point,
   and the more than 27 km of bicycle pathways which line both sides of
   the river east and west of the city centre. Another new Brisbane
   attraction is the Story Bridge Adventure Climb. The Story Bridge is one
   of only three legally climbable bridges in the world. The latest
   addition to Brisbane tourism is the $750 million Portside Wharf.

Sport

   Brisbane has teams in all interstate competitions including the
   Brisbane Broncos in the National Rugby League; the Queensland Reds in
   the Super 14 competition in Rugby union; the Brisbane Lions in the
   Australian Football League; the Queensland Roar FC in the soccer
   A-League; the Queensland Bulls in Cricket; the Brisbane Bullets in the
   National Basketball League and the KFC Queensland Breakers in the
   National Water Polo League .

   With the closure of the Milton Tennis grounds in 1994, Brisbane was
   without major tennis facility until recently. In 2005, a new A$65
   million tennis stadium, to be located in the suburb of Tennyson was
   approved by the State government and in conjunction with Mirvac
   constructions is to be constructed starting in May 2006, with a
   completion date scheduled for December 2008.

   Brisbane has hosted several major sporting events including the 1982
   Commonwealth Games and the 2001 Goodwill Games. Brisbane also hosted
   games during the 1987 Rugby World Cup, 2000 Sydney Olympics and the
   2003 Rugby World Cup.

Infrastructure

Health

   Brisbane is covered under Queensland Health's "Central" and "Southern"
   zones. There are 8 major public hospitals in the greater Brisbane area,
   as well as 4 major private hospitals, and numerous smaller facilities
   both public and private. Specialist and GP practises are also located
   in most suburbs and localities in the city.

Transport

   CityCat catamaran ferry on the Brisbane River.
   Enlarge
   CityCat catamaran ferry on the Brisbane River.

   As Queensland's largest city and state capital, Brisbane has an
   extensive transportation network within the city, as well as
   connections to regional centres, interstate and to overseas
   destinations. Public Transport in Brisbane is provided by bus, rail and
   ferry services. Bus services are operated by public and private
   operators whereas trains and ferries are operated by public agencies.
   The Brisbane central business district (CBD) is the central hub for all
   public transport services with services focusing on Queen Street Bus
   Station, Roma Street and Central railway stations, and various city
   ferries wharves. Brisbane's CityCat high speed ferry service, popular
   with tourists and commuters, operates services along the Brisbane River
   and in this regard is unusual among Australian cities.

   The CityTrain urban rail network consists of 7 suburban lines and
   covers mostly the west, north and east sides of the city. It also
   provides the route for an AirTrain service between the City and
   Brisbane Airport (the AirTrain, itself, is owned by a company). Since
   2000, Brisbane has been developing a network of busways to provide
   faster bus services. " TransLink", an integrated ticketing system
   operates across the public transport network.

   The Brisbane River has created a barrier to transport. In total there
   are six road bridges, mostly concentrated in the inner city area. This
   has intensified the need for transport routes to focus on the inner
   city. There are also three railway bridges and one pedestrian bridge.
   The Eleanor Schonell Bridge is under construction between the
   University of Queensland and Dutton Park and is for use by buses,
   pedestrians and as a bicycle bridge. There are currently multiple
   tunnel and bridge projects underway as part of the TransApex plan. For
   further information about Brisbane's bridges, see the article Bridges
   of Brisbane.
   Riverside Expressway. Captain Cook Bridge and Victoria Bridge
   Enlarge
   Riverside Expressway. Captain Cook Bridge and Victoria Bridge

   Brisbane is served by several freeways. The Pacific Motorway connects
   the central city with the Gold Coast to the south. The Ipswich Motorway
   connects the city with Ipswich to the west via the southern suburbs,
   while the Western Freeway provides a connection between Brisbane's
   inner-west and the outer south-west, connecting with the Ipswich
   Motorway south of the Brisbane River. The Bruce Highway is Brisbane's
   main route north of the city to the rest of the State. The Bruce
   Highway terminates 1700km away in Cairns and passes through most major
   cities along the Queensland coast. The Gateway Motorway is a private
   toll road which connects the Gold Coast and Sunshine Coasts by
   providing an alternate route avoiding Brisbane's inner city area. The
   tollroad crosses the Brisbane River to the east of the city over the
   Gateway Bridge. The Gateway Motorway connects with Bruce Highway and
   the Pacific Motorway. A duplicate of the bridge is planned to be built
   in parallel to cope with the area's growing population.

   Brisbane's population growth placed strains on South East Queensland's
   transport system. The State Government and Brisbane City Council have
   responded with infrastructure plans and increased funding for
   transportation projects, such as the South East Queensland
   Infrastructure Plan and Program. Most of the focus has been placed on
   expanding current road infrastructure, particularly tunnels and
   bypasses, as well as improving the public transport system.

   The city is served by two airports. Brisbane Airport (IATA code: BNE)
   is the city's main airport and the third busiest in Australia. It is
   located at Eagle Farm, north-east of the city centre and provides
   domestic and international passenger services. Archerfield Airport (in
   Brisbane's southern suburbs) acts as a general aviation airport.

Utilities

   Water storage, treatment and delivery for Brisbane is handled by SEQ
   Water, which sells on to Brisbane Water for distribution to the greater
   Brisbane area. Water for the area is stored in one of three dams;
   Wivenhoe, Somerset and North Pine, all of which are at all time lows,
   causing councils in the South East Queenland area to devise some of the
   strictest water restrictions in Australia. Brisbane Water also handles
   sewage treatment and recycled water distribution.

   Electricity and Gas in Brisbane are handled by Energex, a state
   government organisation, and Origin Energy, a private company that also
   handles the gas line grid within the city.

   Metropolitan Brisbane is serviced by all major and most minor
   telecommunications companies and their networks. Brisbane has the
   largest number of enabled DSL telephone exchanges in Queensland. An
   increasing number are also enabled with special hardware ( DSLAMs)
   which enable ultra high speed ADSL2+ internet access. The Brisbane CBD
   also features a complete underground fibre optics network, with
   numerous connections to the inner suburbs provided by various service
   providers.

   Cable via two major networks provided and serviced by Telstra and
   Optus. These provide both high speed internet as well as Pay TV
   services for the bulk of the city's metropolitan area. Both of these
   providers also host wireless networks with hotspots within both the
   inner and suburban areas.

   In addition, Hutchinson, Telstra, Optus and Vodafone all operate both
   2.5G and 3G mobile phone networks citywide.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brisbane"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
