   #copyright

Britney Spears

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Actors, models and
celebrities

   Britney Spears
   Britney Spears performing at the National Mall in Washington, D.C. in
   2003.
   Britney Spears performing at the National Mall in Washington, D.C. in
   2003.
   Background information
   Birth name Britney Jean Spears
   Born December 2, 1981 (age 24)
   Origin United States Kentwood, Louisiana, United States
   Genre(s) Pop, dance, urban pop
   Years active 1998–present
   Label(s) Jive (1998–present)
   Website Official website (Jive)

   Britney Jean Spears (born December 2, 1981) is an American pop singer,
   generational icon, occasional actress, author and songwriter. She is
   best known for her studio albums, music videos, and songs such as "
   ...Baby One More Time", " Oops!...I Did It Again" and " Toxic".

   Spears has sold over seventy-six million records worldwide according to
   TIME magazine. Having sold over 31 million albums in the U.S., Spears
   ranks as the eighth best-selling female artist in American music
   history.

   Spears first came to fame as a member of the Mickey Mouse Club in the
   early 1990s, after which she took a five-year break from entertainment.
   She subsequently emerged at the forefront of the pop music scene in
   late 1998, thanks to her chart-topping debut album, ...Baby One More
   Time, which was crafted by producer- songwriter Max Martin. Her second
   album, Oops!...I Did It Again, which was released the following year,
   was a similarly huge hit.

   In the early 2000s, Spears' success as a singer led her way to
   high-profile advertising deals, most notably for Pepsi, as well as
   forays into other forms of media, including film and reality
   television. Along with her highly-publicized relationship with 'N
   Sync's Justin Timberlake, her third and fourth albums were released
   during this era and included more artistic input from Spears, but
   yielded lower sales.

   In 2004, she married dancer and aspiring rap artist Kevin Federline and
   the following year she gave birth to their son, Sean Preston. Their
   second son, Jayden James, was born in 2006. Eight weeks after the birth
   of her second child, Spears filed for divorce from Federline, citing
   irreconcilable differences. Spears' fifth studio album is due to be
   released in early 2007.

Biography

Childhood and discovery

   Spears was born in McComb, Mississippi and raised Southern Baptist in
   Kentwood, Louisiana. Her parents are James Parnell Spears, a building
   contractor, and Lynne Irene Bridges (born 1956), a former grade school
   teacher. Spears' brother, Bryan (born 1977), is one of her managers,
   and her sister, Jamie-Lynn (born 1991), is an actress and singer. Her
   maternal grandmother, Lillian Woolmoore (1924–1993), was an English
   war-bride, who met Spears's maternal grandfather, Barnett O'Field
   Bridges (1919–1978), in England during WWII, and subsequently moved
   with him to the US. Her paternal grandparents were June Austin Spears
   (born 1930) and Emma Jean Forbes (1934–1966).

   Spears was an accomplished gymnast, attending gymnastics classes until
   age nine and competing in state-level competitions. She performed in
   local dance revues and her local Baptist church choirs, and was
   auditioning for the Disney Channel's The New Mickey Mouse Club by the
   time she was eight. Although she was considered too young to join the
   series at the time, a producer on the show introduced her to a New York
   agent. Spears subsequently spent three summers at NYC's Professional
   Performing Arts School and also appeared in a number of off-Broadway
   productions, including 1991's Ruthless!. In 1992, she landed a spot on
   Star Search, and though she won the first round, she lost in the second
   (her opponent would later appear on a 2001 episode of the game show
   I've Got a Secret with his "secret" being the win against Spears).
   Spears then returned to the Disney Channel for a spot on the New Mickey
   Mouse Club and was accepted. She was featured in the 1993–1994 seasons
   from the ages of 11–13. She performed several backflips for the New
   Mickey Mouse Club, which she would later repeat for the " ...Baby One
   More Time" video. Other performers on the show included Justin
   Timberlake, future boyfriend of Spears, and Joshua Chasez (both of whom
   later became members of the pop group 'N Sync), Keri Russell (star of
   the TV show Felicity), fellow pop singer Christina Aguilera, and actor
   Ryan Gosling. After the show ended, Spears and her five friends ( Jenny
   Morris, Veronica Finn, Mandy Ashford, Danay Ferrer, and her MMC co-star
   Nikki DeLoach) co-formed American pop-dance group Innosense. Finally,
   once Spears was not part of the group, she could go as a solo artist in
   1997. A few years later, Spears recorded a demo tape, which landed in
   the hands of Jive Records. She was signed to their label and began
   touring American venues for a series of concerts sponsored by American
   teen magazines, before joining *NSYNC and becoming their opening act.

1998–2000: Early commercial success

   Towards the end of 1998, Spears' debut single " ...Baby One More Time"
   began to appear on MTV. Led by a music video that featured the 1.63 m
   (5 ft 4 in) pop princess in a Roman Catholic Schoolgirl outfit, the
   song became an international success, earning platinum sales and going
   to number two in the UK, as well as going number one in a large number
   of countries throughout the world. Released in early 1999, her debut
   album ...Baby One More Time topped the charts in several countries,
   including Ireland (where it is certified 15x Platinum ).

   Spears was featured on the cover of Rolling Stone magazine in April
   1999. The photo shoot triggered widespread speculation (denied by her
   representatives) that the still-seventeen-year-old had opted to have
   breast implants. That summer, she kicked off her first headlining tour,
   the ...Baby One More Time Tour. By late 1999, Spears had become one of
   the year's biggest stars, a claim backed-up by the amount of award
   nominations she received that season. In December, she took home four
   Billboard Music Awards including one for Female Artist of the Year, and
   the next month won for Favorite Pop/Rock New Artist at the American
   Music Awards. At the Grammy Awards, held in February 2000, Spears
   received two nominations, including one for Best New Artist, losing out
   to Christina Aguilera. The other was for Best Female Pop Vocal
   Performance for ...Baby One More Time but she lost that to Sarah
   McLachlan.

   Following the short-lived Crazy 2K Tour, the lead single from Spears'
   second album, " Oops!... I Did It Again", was released. The song broke
   a record for most radio station adds in a single day and quickly became
   a U.S. top ten hit and number one single in other countries. Released
   in May 2000, the album Oops!... I Did It Again debuted at number one in
   the U.S., where it sold over 1.3 million units during its first week
   (breaking the record for biggest first-week sales of an album by a
   female artist). Concerning both musical content and sales, the album
   was very similar to Spears' debut, although it fared better with
   critics. "Oops..." also had input from country queen Shania Twain, who
   penned the track Don't Let Me Be the Last to Know with husband Mutt
   Lange. Twain, arguably the most successful female in terms of album
   sales and exposure in the late 90s, contributed her adult-40 brand of
   country-crossover infusion to the record. The lyrics of the song also
   pay homage to fellow blonde superstar Madonna, as in "come on baby,
   come on darling," an obvious ode to Madonna's " Borderline."

   Spears kicked off her first world tour (titled the Oops!... I Did It
   Again World Tour) in the summer of 2000, and co-wrote the book Britney
   Spears' Heart-to-Heart with her mother, Lynne which was a bestseller.
   During a performance at the 2000 MTV Video Music Awards, she ripped off
   a black suit to reveal a provocative nude-colored and crystal-adorned
   outfit that generated controversy due to her young age. In late 2000,
   she won two Billboard Music Awards, and in early 2001, she was
   nominated for two American Music Awards. At the Grammys, her two
   nominations were for Oops!... I Did It Again in the categorys of Best
   Pop Vocal Album and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance but again she did
   not win.

2001–2003: Career development

   In early 2001, Spears struck a USD$7–8 million promotional deal with
   the soft drink giant Pepsi. In September of the same year, she
   performed at the MTV Video Music Awards, and in addition to criticism
   for being scantily clad, she angered animal rights organization PETA
   for the use of animals, including an albino python, in her performance.

   In November, she released her third album Britney. It debuted at number
   one on both the U.S. and Canadian charts, selling over 740,000 units
   during its first week in the U.S. The success of this album made Spears
   the only female artist in SoundScan history to have her first three
   albums debut at number one. Although four million copies of the record
   have been sold in the U.S. , it was a decline from the sales of her
   first two albums, and the lead single " I'm a Slave 4 U" was the
   album's only hit in the U.S. Britney was the first album on which
   Spears assumed some creative control; she co-wrote five of the album's
   tracks. To help promote the album, Spears embarked on the Dream Within
   a Dream Tour during the same year. Spears was nominated for two Grammy
   Awards, Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for Overprotected and Best
   Pop Vocal Album for Britney which she lost both to Norah Jones.

   Britney recorded a Christmas song for Now That's What I Call Christmas!
   called My Only Wish (This Year).

   In 2001, Fort Worth, Texas KEGL-FM DJs Kramer and Twitch on created a
   panic for her fans when they falsely reported that she and her
   then-boyfriend, 'NSYNC's Justin Timberlake, were in a car accident
   involving a pretzel truck and that she had died in the crash. In
   reality, they were both alive and well and had not been in any car
   wreck. Later, in October 2001, a website spoofing CNN also stated that
   she had been killed in a car crash.

   In February 2002, Spears had her first starring role in the film,
   Crossroads. The next month, Spears' four-year relationship with Justin
   Timberlake ended. The break-up was publicized, with rumors circulating
   that Spears had been unfaithful. Timberlake himself left the impression
   that she had cheated on him through his song " Cry Me a River", and its
   subsequent music video. In response to this, Spears later said, "I'm
   not technically saying he's wrong, but I'm not technically saying he's
   right, either." Afterward, despite Spears' claims that she had remained
   a virgin ― and wished to remain one until marriage ― Timberlake
   insisted they had sex during their relationship. Spears later
   acknowledged this to be true, saying, "It was two years into my
   relationship with Justin, and I thought he was the one. But I was
   wrong!"

   In June 2002, Spears branched out as a restaurateur with the opening of
   a New York City eatery, NYLA, which was named for its mix of New York
   and Louisiana cuisine. It was not a success and closed the following
   year but Spears apparently had very little to do with management. In
   2002 Spears received at least some good news when Forbes named her the
   most powerful celebrity in the world.

   Spears returned to the spotlight in August 2003 when she performed at
   the MTV Video Music Awards with her idol Madonna, pop singer Christina
   Aguilera and rapper Missy Elliott. Spears and Aguilera performed
   Madonna's song " Like a Virgin", danced suggestively and each locked
   lips with Madonna (see Madonna at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards).
   Spears' kiss with Madonna attracted publicity that lasted several
   months, while Aguilera's kiss with Madonna attracted less publicity.

   In 2003, Britney Spears began studying Jewish mysticism, also called
   Kabbalah, and became a member of the Kabbalah Centre after having been
   introduced to Jewish mysticism by friend and mentor Madonna. Soon after
   joining, Britney's mother Lynne became a member, and Britney had a
   Hebrew tattoo inked onto her neck (מהש) representing one of the
   seventy-two names of God in Kabbalah. Britney previously had a
   Kabbalah-inspired Hebrew tattoo inked onto her neck that was proved to
   be meaningless in an incident that was her second tattoo-related
   mishap; in the first, she had Japanese characters inked onto her leg
   that she thought to mean "mysterious" - it actually said "strange."

   November 2003 saw the release of Spears' fourth studio album, In the
   Zone. Jettisoning the Max Martin-produced synthpop of her earlier
   releases, the album took in lesser-known producers such as RedZone and
   big names including Moby and R. Kelly. Spears co-wrote nine of the
   album's thirteen songs and co-produced some of her material for the
   first time. In the Zone went to the top of the U.S. charts in its debut
   week, selling over 609,000 copies. This made Spears the only female in
   music history to have her first four albums debut at number one. The
   album spawned the international number one and U.S. top ten hit, "
   Toxic", which won Spears her first Grammy in the category of Best Dance
   Recording.

2004–2006: Career hiatus, children and divorce

   On January 3, 2004, Spears married her childhood friend Jason Allen
   Alexander at The Little White Wedding Chapel on the Las Vegas Strip in
   Las Vegas, Nevada. Spears wore jeans and a baseball cap and the bellhop
   walked her down the aisle. An annulment was promptly arranged (at the
   behest of manager Larry Rudolph and her family) and was granted on
   January 5, ending their fifty-five hour marriage. The annulment request
   stated that Spears "lacked understanding of her actions to the extent
   that she was incapable of agreeing to marriage because before entering
   into the marriage the Plaintiff and Defendant did not know each others
   likes and dislikes, each others desires to have or not have children,
   and each others desires as to State of residency". Spears later
   explained, "Honestly, I really wanted to see what it was like to be
   married".

   In 2004, Spears embarked on her fourth world tour, The Onyx Hotel Tour.
   The tour grossed over US$37 million and was seen by over 650,000 fans
   in North America and Europe, but the remaining dates were cancelled in
   June, after Spears injured her knee during the filming of the video for
   the single " Outrageous". She was taken to an undisclosed hospital,
   where she received an MRI that showed floating cartilage in her knee.
   The following thirty-seven stops on the tour were canceled, costing
   Spears US$750,000 to US$1,000,000 a night in guaranteed fees from
   concert promoters.

   In July 2004, Spears announced her engagement to dancer Kevin
   Federline, three months after they met at a club in Hollywood. Their
   whirlwind romance sparked criticism due to the fact that Federline had
   very recently been in a relationship with actress Shar Jackson, who was
   still pregnant with their second child. On the night of September 18,
   2004, Spears married Federline before twenty-seven guests in a
   surprise, non-denominational ceremony at a residence in Studio City,
   California. The legitimacy of the marriage was initially questioned,
   but on November 18, 2004, a representative of the Los Angeles County
   registrar's office confirmed Spears and Federline had successfully
   filed their marriage license with the county within ten days of their
   ceremony, and were therefore legally married.

   The exact sequence of events surrounding the marriage took a further
   turn for the unusual when it was later revealed by the website The
   Smoking Gun that the wedding ceremony that occurred on September 18 was
   a "faux" ceremony, and that the real date of the start of their wedding
   was October 6, 2004.

   According to some reports, Spears initially refused to sign a
   prenuptial agreement with Federline but her family and manager Larry
   Rudolph forced her to sign the prenup. A short time after the wedding,
   Spears fired Rudolph for allegedly interfering with her marital
   affairs. After initially spending their honeymoon in Spears' hometown
   of Kentwood, Louisiana, Spears wrote on her official site that,
   "Unfortunately, we couldn't take our honeymoon right after the wedding
   because of the closing on our new house." In October 2004, they flew to
   Fiji.

   During the later half of 2004, Spears announced she would be taking
   another career break in order to start a family. Immediately after her
   marriage to Federline, she had told People, "I want to be a young mom.
   Next year, at 23, I'm so there." Although she made few public
   appearances, the 'Britney Spears industry' continued to run itself.

   Spears fragrance, " Curious", for which she earned a reported US$12
   million. After one year of sales, the product netted more than US$100
   million. Curious was named the best selling perfume of 2004. Following
   the success of "Curious", Spears released her next Elizabeth Arden
   fragrance, " Fantasy", in September 2005 which was another big hit at
   department stores. In April 2006, Spears released a third fragrance
   Curious: In Control. The perfume was limited edition and has sold
   moderately well since its release. Spears will launch another perfume,
   Midnight Fantasy, in the near future.

   Spears' first hits collection, Greatest Hits: My Prerogative, was
   released in late 2004. The album debuted at number four on the U.S.
   charts with 240,000 copies sold. In addition to her biggest hits, it
   featured three new songs, including " My Prerogative" and " Do
   Somethin'". During the spring of 2005, Spears' reality show with
   husband Kevin Federline, Britney and Kevin: Chaotic, premiered on MTV
   in the U.S. The five-episode series credited Spears and Federline as
   executive producers. Chaotic was panned by most critics and between 2-3
   million people watched the shows 5 episodes. The series was later
   released on DVD in September 2005. The DVD included a bonus music disc
   which featured her newest song and music video at that point in her
   career, " Someday (I Will Understand)".

   Spears announced her pregnancy via her official website in April 2005.
   That month she was rushed to a hospital in Destin, Florida, where she
   spent forty-eight hours under a doctor's surveillance. Spears later
   told People, "There was just a little bit of bleeding, but we went
   there, and everything was fine." Despite her eagerness to have a baby,
   she admitted to ELLE magazine that, "I have a feeling I'm going to have
   an operation. I don't know why. But I hope so. I don't want to go
   through the pain". On September 14, 2005, 6 lb. 11oz. baby boy Sean
   Preston Federline was born in the Santa Monica UCLA Medical Centre in
   Santa Monica, California, by a scheduled caesarean section. Two days
   later, Spears and her son were released from the hospital and back at
   home in their 9,000-sq.-ft. Malibu, California mansion. The birth of
   Spears' son was the inspiration behind a statue by Daniel Edwards,
   Monument to Pro-Life: The Birth of Sean Preston, which was unveiled in
   March 2006. The statue features an idealised Spears giving birth in a
   provocative pose while hunched on all fours and clutching a bearskin
   rug. Controversy was further stoked by it being partly supported by the
   Manhattan Right to Life Committee. The statue has in no way been
   recognized by Spears and is therefore unofficial. It has also sparked
   controversy as Spears gave birth by caesarean section, unlike the
   natural birth depicted in the statue.

   Since the birth of her first child, Spears' career had remained
   relatively low-profile. In late 2005, Jive released a remix album
   entitled B in the Mix: The Remixes. It lacked promotion of any kind in
   the U.S. and debuted outside the top one hundred, with about 16,000
   copies sold in its first week of release. The remix album spawned the
   international and U.S. Hot Dance Airplay hit single, " And Then We
   Kiss", and a remix of Spears' most recent single "Someday (I Will
   Understand)". The remix album was more successful overseas and has
   since sold over a million copies.

   Spears made a guest appearance on Will & Grace in April 2006. In May
   2006, she announced her second pregnancy with a surprise appearance on
   The Late Show with David Letterman.

   Spears appeared on Dateline NBC in June 2006 to discuss tabloid rumors
   about an impending divorce from her husband, future career plans, her
   emotional state and motherhood. In response to the controversy over her
   driving with her infant son unrestrained in her lap, Spears told The
   Today Show's Matt Lauer that, "I did it with my dad. I'd sit on his lap
   and I drive. We're country." She also addressed the concerns over her
   parenting skills, saying, "I know I'm a good mom." It was confirmed in
   the interview that she will not release a studio album for at least
   another year, saying that she would like to wait until her children get
   older. She also confirmed a new baby clothes line, entitled "Baby's All
   Rock 'n' Roll".

   Following Dateline NBC, Spears posed nude for the August 2006 cover of
   Harper's Bazaar. In the interview with the magazine, Spears stated that
   she is not ready to retire from performing, saying, "I can't wait to do
   that again." Spears also plans to get back in shape after the birth of
   her second child, saying, "After this baby, I'm going to get really
   intense with it." In the August 28, 2006 issue of People, Spears
   confirmed that her next studio album is due in 2007 and described it as
   "cooler than ever—fun, upbeat, and sexy." In the article Spears had
   also commented that her impending childbirth, a second scheduled
   caesarean section, "[would] be a piece of cake."

   On August 20, 2006, Spears introduced her husband, Kevin Federline, at
   the Teen Choice Awards. This was her first appearance at an awards show
   in almost two years. Spears and Federline also appeared via satellite
   at the 2006 MTV Video Music Awards to present the award for Best R&B
   Video. They performed a quick skit, though, in subsesquent replays of
   the VMA's on MTV, the skit is completely edited out and goes right from
   Jack Black introducing Spears and Federline to them announcing the
   nominees.

   On September 12, 2006, Spears gave birth to their second son, Jayden
   James Federline. He was born at the Cedars-Sinai Medical Centre in Los
   Angeles, California, again by a scheduled caesarean section.

   Spears was featured on Federline's debut album, Playing with Fire, on a
   song entitled "Crazy", which leaked onto the internet three days before
   its release. The album ended up debuting poorly at number 151 on the
   Billboard charts On November 7, 2006, Spears filed for divorce from her
   husband Kevin Federline, citing irreconcilable differences and asking
   for both physical and legal custody of their two children, with
   visitation rights for Federline. The following day Federline filed a
   response to Spears' divorce petition, seeking both physical and legal
   custody of their two children. Laura Wasser has been hired to represent
   Spears in the case. According to a rep for Federline's lawyer, the
   divorce filing "caught Kevin totally by surprise."

Public image

   Britney Spears' personal life has attracted considerable media
   attention. Some people feel that she has courted it by cultivating, in
   her early years at least, a chaste, God-fearing and "wholesome" image.
   It was somewhat at odds, not only with the traditional pressures,
   temptations and opportunities of "pop 'n' roll," but with the
   increasingly sexualized content of her own image and songs. Spears'
   kiss with Madonna at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards received much
   media attention, as have her romantic relationships.

   It began in April 1999 when a then 17 year-old Spears was featured on
   the cover of Rolling Stone magazine in a sexually suggestive
   Lolita-themed photo shoot which triggered widespread speculation
   (denied by her representatives) that the singer had opted to have
   breast implants.

   In August 2003 the artist reached more controversy with a photoshoot by
   photographer Michael Thompson which appeared on W Magazine. The photos
   display Britney in a heavy dominatrix inspired shoot, and sexually
   suggestive poses. In the interview by Rob Haskell which accompanied the
   photos, Spears admitted to having lost her virginity to Justin
   Timberlake two years into their relationship. She also stated that she
   in fact smokes, and she did kiss Colin Farrell but had no relationship
   with him.

   The sexualized public image of Spears once again became a topic of
   debate as a result of her November 2003 semi- nude photo spread for the
   men's magazine, Esquire. Prompted by this, Playboy reportedly offered
   the star over one million USD to pose nude for their magazine, but
   Spears publicly declined. In an interview with Diane Sawyer, she was
   asked if she had ever gone further than she wished she had with the
   sexualized photo shoots. Spears responded, "No, I don't think so, no."
   After the Esquire photos were held up in front of her, she said, "Okay.
   Now those are a little much. Yeah, those are a little much. That's one
   picture, I must say, that I felt kind of weird about, yeah."

   The 2004 Onyx Hotel Tour brought new criticism. While Spears and her
   on-stage dancers performed her songs " Touch of My Hand" and " Breathe
   on Me", they were seemingly nude and were performing routines
   simulating gay sex, orgies and masturbation. As there were underage
   fans in the audience, there was some outrage at the alleged lack of
   decency of the performances, as well as reports of adult chaperones
   angrily storming out with children they brought to the concert. Spears
   has responded to parents' concerns by stating she is "not their
   babysitter. It's the parents' responsibility. If you don't like it,
   then just change the channel. The only person I want to be a role model
   to is my sister, Jamie Lynn." (From ABC's Primetime interview with
   Diane Sawyer)

   In December 2005, Spears sued US Weekly for a story the magazine
   published in the column "HOTstuff" of their October 2005 publication.
   The column, with the headline "Brit & Kev: Secret Sex Tape? New parents
   have a new worry: racy footage from 2004." claimed that Spears and her
   husband had made a sex video and feared it would be distributed. Spears
   denies the existence of any such tape while the magazine claims to have
   a credible source, which they failed to mention in the article. In
   November 2006 it was reported that the case was dismissed.

   On June 28, 2006, after her televised Dateline interview a pregnant
   (and brunette) Spears posed nude for the August 2006 cover of Harper's
   Bazaar, in a photo similar to Demi Moore's September 1991 cover of
   Vanity Fair. In one photo, Spears is shown with only a g-string and
   open fur coat, and in another she is completely nude with her hands
   covering her breasts. Her son, Sean, is also featured in the
   photospread.

   In August 2006, a video of Britney began circulating the Internet. In
   the 3-minute video, which was already released as a bonus on the
   Britney & Kevin: Chaotic DVD, Britney is seen having a conversation
   with her husband Kevin, who is filming Spears as she is sitting at a
   table eating. In the video, Spears seems very disoriented and confused.
   She also casually burps throughout the clip. The video begins with
   Spears making random comments about herself before she instructs Kevin
   to put the camera down and to "stop acting like a cameraman". She then
   begins to ask to go to the movie theatre to see a film which, according
   to Kevin, has already been out on DVD for 4 months and has already been
   played "on the bus". Spears then begins to claim that she is "missing
   out on life" and that she is generally behind everyone else. Kevin
   tells her it is because of all the partying, to which Spears strongly
   disagrees with and begins to bang the table. Britney then begins to try
   and legitimately convince Kevin that the concept of time travel that is
   portrayed in the Back to the Future series is real. Kevin says that if
   it's possible, that the people responsible wouldn't tell anyone.

   At the end of September 2006, Britney was one of 20 influential music
   acts chosen to pose for the covers of music magazine 'Q's 20th Birthday
   edition. The magazine released 20 different collectible covers
   featuring each act. Britney's cover showed the then-pregnant superstar
   sporting long blonde hair, a red and white polka-dot bikini and licking
   a red lollipop. The magazine contained new photos of the pop princess
   and an exclusive new interview in which she talked of her favourite
   artists, songs and moments of the past 20 years. She also mentioned
   that she would be returning to the spotlight next year, stating 'It's
   been two years since I've performed, but next year I'm going to try and
   get it on again. So we'll see...'.

With Paris Hilton

   In late November 2006, Britney has been spotted hanging with socialite
   Paris Hilton and A-List actress Lindsay Lohan. Spears and Hilton were
   seen partying in Las Vegas at a club in the Tryst in the Wynn hotel
   where Britney was spotted getting down and dirty on the dance floor to
   several Paris Hilton songs.

In pop culture

   Spears is the highest selling female artist of the 2000s, with over 85
   million albums sold worldwide. In 2002, she was ranked as the most
   powerful celebrity in the world by Forbes Magazine. Spears was ranked
   number 20 out of the 200 top pop culture icons of all time by VH1 and
   People. She topped FHM magazine's 2004 "FHM-U.S.'s 100 Sexiest Women
   2004" and "FHM 100 Sexiest Women in the World 2004" polls for sexiest
   woman. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Spears was a notable
   trend-setter within the U.S. and the world, inspiring several fashion
   crazes and fads, such as the use of low-rise jeans lower back tattoos,
   navel piercings, and the whale tail among young women. She has also
   topped Yahoo!'s annual list of the most-searched names three times in
   the past four years.

Discography

Albums

    1. ...Baby One More Time ( January 12, 1999)
    2. Oops!... I Did It Again ( May 16, 2000)
    3. Britney ( November 6, 2001)
    4. In the Zone ( November 18, 2003)
    5. Greatest Hits: My Prerogative ( November 9, 2004)
    6. B in the Mix: The Remixes ( November 22, 2005)

Number-one singles

   The following singles reached number one in the U.S., the United
   Kingdom, Canada and/or Australia
   Year                 Single                   Peak positions
                                                U.S. UK CAN AUS
   1998 " ...Baby One More Time"                 1   1   1   1
   1999 " Born to Make You Happy"                –   1  21   –
   2000 " Oops!...I Did It Again"                9   1   4   1
   2003 " Me Against the Music" (feat. Madonna)  35  2   2   1
   2004 " Toxic"                                 9   1   1   1
        " Everytime"                             15  1   2   1
                         Total                   1   5   2   5

Filmography

   Year            Title                  Role       Other notes
   2002 Crossroads                  Lucy Ann Wagner  Soundtrack
   2002 Austin Powers in Goldmember Robot/Herself

                                                     Soundtrack
   2000 Longshot                    Flight Attendant

Products

   Britney Spears has had four books published including A Mother's Gift.
   She has also had seven DVDs including her 2005 reality series Britney
   and Kevin: Chaotic, a Doll, one video game, and participated in seven
   tours including The Onyx Hotel Tour in 2004. She has grossed over $145
   million USD from tour ticket sales and over $35 million USD in
   merchandise from her tours.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Britney_Spears"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
