   #copyright

British Virgin Islands

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Central & South American
Countries; Countries

   CAPTION: British Virgin Islands


   Flag of the British Virgin Islands Coat of arms of the British Virgin
                                      Islands
                 ( Flag)                       ( Coat of Arms)
   National motto:
   Vigilate (Be Watchful)
   Image:LocationBritishVirginIslands.png
   Official language English
   Political status Non- sovereign, British overseas territory
   Capital Road Town
   Monarch Queen Elizabeth II
   Governor David Pearey
   Chief Minister Orlando Smith
   Area
    - Total
    - % water Ranked 216th
   153 km²
   1.6%
   Population
    - Total (2005)
    - Density Ranked 215th
   22,016
   260/km²
   Currency US dollar
   Time zone UTC -4
   National anthem " God Save the Queen"
   Internet TLD .vg
   Calling Code 1-284
   Map of British Virgin Islands
   Enlarge
   Map of British Virgin Islands

   The British Virgin Islands (BVI) is a British overseas territory,
   located in the Caribbean to the east of Puerto Rico. The islands make
   up part of the Virgin Islands archipelago (the remainder constituting
   the U.S. Virgin Islands; see also Spanish Virgin Islands).

   The British Virgin Islands consist of the main islands of Tortola,
   Virgin Gorda, Anegada and Jost Van Dyke, along with over 50 other
   smaller islands and cays. Around 15 of the islands are inhabited. The
   largest island, Tortola, is approximately 12 miles (19 km) long and 3
   miles (5 km) wide. The islands have a total population of about 22,000.
   Road Town, the capital, is situated on Tortola.

History

   The Virgin Islands were first settled by Arawak Indians from South
   America around 100 BC (though there is some evidence of Amerindian
   presence on the islands as far back as 1500 BC ). The Arawaks inhabited
   the islands until the 15th century when they were displaced by the more
   aggressive Caribs, a tribe from the Lesser Antilles islands, after whom
   the Caribbean Sea is named. (Some historians, however, believe that
   this popular account of warlike Caribs chasing peaceful Arawaks out of
   the Caribbean islands is rooted in simplistic European stereotypes, and
   that the true story is more complex.)

   The first European sighting of the Virgin Islands was by Christopher
   Columbus in 1493 on his second voyage to the Americas. Columbus gave
   them the fanciful name Santa Ursula y las Once Mil Vírgenes (Saint
   Ursula and her 11,000 Virgins), shortened to Las Vírgenes (The
   Virgins), after the legend of Saint Ursula.

   The Spanish Empire acquired the islands in the early 16th century,
   mining copper on Virgin Gorda, and subsequent years saw the English,
   Dutch, French, Spanish and Danish all jostling for control of the
   region, which became a notorious haunt for pirates. During the process
   of colonisation the native Amerindian population was decimated.

   The Dutch established a permanent settlement on the island of Tortola
   in 1648. In 1672, the English captured Tortola from the Dutch, and the
   British annexation of Anegada and Virgin Gorda followed in 1680.
   Meanwhile, over the period 1672–1733, the Danish gained control of the
   nearby islands of St. Thomas, St. John and St. Croix.

   The British islands were considered principally a strategic possession,
   but were planted when economic conditions were particularly favourable.
   The British introduced sugar cane which was to become the main crop and
   source of foreign trade, and slaves were brought from Africa to work on
   the sugar cane plantations. The islands prospered economically until
   the growth in the sugar beet crop in Europe and the United States
   significantly reduced sugar cane production.

   In 1917, the United States purchased St. John, St. Thomas and St. Croix
   from Denmark for US$17 million, renaming them the United States Virgin
   Islands. Subsequently, the British renamed the islands they controlled
   as the British Virgin Islands.

   The British Virgin Islands were administered variously as part of the
   Leeward Islands Colony or with St. Kitts and Nevis, with an
   Administrator representing the British Government on the Islands.
   Separate colony status was gained for the Islands in 1960 and the
   Islands became autonomous in 1967. Since the 1960s, the Islands have
   diversified away from their traditionally agriculture-based economy
   towards tourism and financial services, becoming one of the richest
   areas in the Caribbean.

Politics

   Executive authority in British Virgin Islands is invested in The Queen
   and is exercised on her behalf by the Governor of the British Virgin
   Islands. The Governor is appointed by the Queen on the advice of the
   British Government. Defence and Foreign Affairs remain the
   responsibility of the United Kingdom.

   The Constitution of the Islands was introduced in 1971. The Head of
   Government is the Chief Minister, who is elected in a general election
   along with the other members of the ruling government as well as the
   members of the opposition. An Executive Council is nominated by the
   Chief Minister and appointed by the Governor. There is a unicameral
   Legislative Council made up of 13 seats.

   The current Governor is David Pearey (since 2006). The current Chief
   Minister is Orlando Smith (since June 17, 2003) who is a member of
   ruling National Democratic Party (NDP). The main opposition is the
   Virgin Islands Party (VIP).

Geography

   Road Town, Tortola, British Virgin Islands
   Enlarge
   Road Town, Tortola, British Virgin Islands
   Tortola, British Virgin Islands
   Enlarge
   Tortola, British Virgin Islands

   The British Virgin Islands comprise around 60 semi-tropical Caribbean
   islands, ranging in size from the largest, Tortola (approximately 12
   miles by 3 miles), to tiny uninhabited islets. They are located in the
   Virgin Islands archipelago, a few miles east of the U.S. Virgin
   Islands. The North Atlantic Ocean lies to the north of the islands, and
   the Caribbean Sea lies to the south. Most of the islands are volcanic
   in origin and have a hilly, rugged terrain. Anegada is geologically
   distinct from the rest of the group and is a flat island composed of
   limestone and coral.

   In addition to the four main islands of Tortola, Virgin Gorda, Anegada,
   and Jost Van Dyke, other islands include:
     * Beef Island
     * Cooper Island
     * Ginger Island
     * Great Camanoe
     * Great Thatch
     * Guana Island
     * Mosquito Island
     * Necker Island
     * Norman Island
     * Peter Island
     * Salt Island

Climate

   The British Virgin Islands enjoy a sub-tropical climate, moderated by
   trade winds. Temperatures vary little throughout the year: typical
   daily maxima are around 29°C (84°F) in the summer and 25°C (77°F) in
   the winter. Rainfall averages about 115 cm (45 in) per year, higher in
   the hills and lower on the coast. Rainfall can be quite variable, but
   the wettest months on average are September to December. Hurricanes
   occasionally hit the islands, with the hurricane season running from
   June to October.

Subdivisions

Economy

   The British Virgin Islands enjoys one of the more prosperous economies
   of the Caribbean region, with a per capita GDP of around $38,500 (2004
   est.) .

   The British Virgin Islands is highly dependent on tourism, which
   accounts for 45% of national income. The islands are a popular
   destination for U.S. citizens, with around 350,000 tourists visiting
   annually (1997 figures). Tourists frequent the numerous white sand
   beaches, visit The Baths on Virgin Gorda, snorkel the coral reefs near
   Anegada, experience the well-known bars of Jost Van Dyke, or charter
   yachts to explore the less accessible islands.

   Substantial revenues are also generated by the registration of offshore
   companies. As of 2004, over 550,000 companies were so registered. In
   2000 KPMG reported in its survey of offshore jurisdictions for the
   United Kingdom government that over 41% of the world's offshore
   companies were formed in the British Virgin Islands. Since 2001,
   financial services in the British Virgin Islands have been regulated by
   the independent Financial Services Commission.

   Agriculture and industry account for only a small proportion of the
   islands' GDP. Agricultural produce includes fruit, vegetables, sugar
   cane, livestock and poultry, and industries include rum distillation,
   construction and boatbuilding.

   Since 1959, the official currency of the British Virgin Islands has
   been the US dollar, also used by the United States Virgin Islands.

Demographics

   The population of the Islands is around 21,730 at 2003. The majority of
   the population (83%) are Afro-Caribbean, descended from the slaves
   brought to the Islands by the British. Other large ethnic groups
   include those of British and European origin.

   The 1999 census reports:

          Black 83.36%
          White 7.28% (includes British, Portuguese, & Syrian/Lebanese)
          Mixed 5.38%
          East Indian 3.14%
          Others 0.84%

   The islands are predominantly Protestant Christian (86%). The largest
   individual denominations are Methodist (33%), Anglican (17%), and
   Catholic (10%).

Transport

   Being a small group of islands, transportation is limited. There are
   113km of roads. The main airport (Terrence B. Lettsome Airport, also
   known as Beef Island Airport) is located on Beef Island, which lies off
   the eastern tip of Tortola. Virgin Gorda and Anegada have their own
   smaller airports. The main harbour is in Road Town.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/British_Virgin_Islands"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
