   #copyright

Brothers Grimm

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Writers and critics

   Wilhelm (left) and Jacob Grimm (right) from an 1855 painting by
   Elisabeth Jerichau-Baumann
   Enlarge
   Wilhelm (left) and Jacob Grimm (right) from an 1855 painting by
   Elisabeth Jerichau-Baumann

   The Brothers Grimm (Brüder Grimm, in their own words, not Gebrüder -
   for there were five surviving brothers, among them Ludwig Emil Grimm,
   the painter) were Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Hessian professors who were
   best known for publishing collections of folk tales and fairy tales,
   and for their work in linguistics, relating to how the sounds in words
   shift over time ( Grimm's Law).

Biography

   Jakob Ludwig Carl Grimm and Wilhelm Karl Grimm were born in 1785 and
   1786, respectively, in Hanau near Frankfurt in Hesse. They were
   educated at the Friedrichs- Gymnasium in Kassel and later both read law
   at the University of Marburg.

   The two brothers were in their early twenties when they began the
   linguistic and philological studies that would culminate in both
   Grimm's Law and their collected editions of fairy and folk tales.
   Though their collections of tales became immensely popular, they were
   essentially a byproduct of the linguistic research which was the
   Brothers' primary goal.

   In 1830, they formed a household in Göttingen where they were to become
   professors.

   In 1837, the Brothers Grimm joined five of their colleague professors
   at the University of Göttingen to protest against the abolition of the
   liberal constitution of the state of Hanover by King Ernest Augustus I
   of Hanover. This group came to be known in the German states as Die
   Göttinger Sieben (The Göttingen Seven). Invoking their right to resist
   on reasons of natural and constitutional justice, they protested
   against the King's hubris to abrogate the constitution. For this, all
   professors were fired from their university posts and some even
   deported. Though politically divided by borders of duchies and kingdoms
   at that time, public opinion and academia in German realms almost
   unanimously supported the Grimms and their colleagues against the
   monarch.
   Graves of the Brothers Grimm in the St Matthäus Kirchhof Cemetery in
   Schöneberg, Berlin.
   Enlarge
   Graves of the Brothers Grimm in the St Matthäus Kirchhof Cemetery in
   Schöneberg, Berlin.

   Wilhelm died in 1859; his elder brother Jacob died in 1863. They are
   buried in the St Matthäus Kirchhof Cemetery in Schöneberg, Berlin. The
   Grimms helped foment a nationwide democratic public opinion in Germany
   and are cherished as the progenitors of the German democratic movement,
   whose revolution of 1848/1849 was crushed brutally by the Kingdom of
   Prussia, where there was established a constitutional monarchy.

The Tales

   The Brothers Grimm began collecting folk tales around 1807, in response
   to a wave of awakened interest in German folklore that followed the
   publication of Ludwig Achim von Arnim and Clemens Brentano's folksong
   collection Des Knaben Wunderhorn ("The Boy's Magic Horn"), 1805-8. By
   1810 the Grimms produced a manuscript collection of several dozen
   tales, which they had recorded by inviting storytellers to their home
   and transcribing what they heard.

   In 1812, the Brothers published a collection of 86 German fairy tales
   in a volume titled Kinder- und Hausmärchen ( "Children's and Household
   Tales"). They published a second volume of 70 stories in 1814 ("1815"
   on the title page), which together make up the first edition of the
   collection, containing 156 stories. A second edition followed in
   1819-22, expanded to 170 tales. Five more editions were issued during
   the Grimms' lifetimes, in which stories were added or subtracted, until
   the seventh edition of 1857 contained 211 tales. (It has long been
   recognized that many of these later-added stories were derived from
   printed rather than oral sources.)

   These editions, equipped with scholarly notes, were intended as serious
   works of folklore. The Brothers also published the Kleine Ausgabe or
   "small edition," containing a selection of 50 stories expressly
   designed for children (as opposed to the more formal Grosse Ausgabe or
   "large edition"). Ten printings of the "small edition" were issued
   between 1825 and 1858.

   The Grimms were not the first to publish collections of folktales. The
   1697 French collection by Charles Perrault is the most famous, though
   there were various others, including a German collection by Johann Karl
   August Musäus published in 1782-7. The earlier collections, however,
   made little pretense to strict fidelity to sources. The Brothers Grimm
   were the first workers in this genre to present their stories as
   faithful renditions of the kind of direct folkloric materials that
   underlay the sophistications of an adapter like Perrault. In so doing,
   the Grimms took a basic and essential step toward modern folklore
   studies, leading to the work of folklorists like Peter and Iona Opie
   and others.

   A century and a half after the Grimms began publishing, however, a
   sweeping, skeptical, and highly critical re-assessment disproved the
   Grimms' basic claims about their work. The Brothers did not in fact use
   exclusively German sources for their collection; and far from
   maintaining fidelity to those sources, they rewrote and revised and
   adapted their stories, just as Perrault and their other predecessors
   had done. The different printed versions of the tales display the
   latter fact; and the 1810 manuscripts, published in 1924, 1927, and
   1974, accentuate the Brothers' consistent habit of changing and
   adapting their original materials. The irony is that the Brothers Grimm
   helped create a serious scholarly discipline that they themselves never
   practiced.

   (In fairness, it should be noted that the Grimms' method was common in
   their historical era. Arnim and Brentano edited and adapted the
   folksongs of Des Knaben Wunderhorn; in the early 1800s Brentano
   collected folktales in much the same way as the Grimms. The good
   academic practices violated by these early researchers had not yet been
   codified in the period in which they worked. The Grimms have been
   criticized for a basic dishonesty, for making false claims about their
   fidelity—for saying one thing and doing another; whether and to what
   degree they were deceitful, or self-deluding, is perhaps an open
   question.)

Linguistics

   In the very early 19th century, the time in which the Brothers Grimm
   lived, the Holy Roman Empire had just met its fate, and Germany as we
   know it today did not yet exist; it was basically an area of hundreds
   of principalities and small or mid-sized countries. The major unifying
   factor for the German people of the time was a common language. There
   was no significant German literary history. So part of what motivated
   the Brothers in their writings and in their lives was the desire to
   help create a German identity.

   Less well known to the general public outside Germany is the Brothers'
   work on a German dictionary, the Deutsches Wörterbuch. Indeed, the
   Deutsches Wörterbuch was the first major step in creating a
   standardized "modern" German language since Martin Luther's translation
   of the Bible to German; being very extensive (33 volumes, weighing 84
   kg) it is still considered the standard reference for German etymology.

   The brother Jacob is recognized for enunciating Grimm's law, Germanic
   Sound Shift, that was first observed by the Danish philologist Rasmus
   Christian Rask. Grimm's law was the first non-trivial systematic sound
   change ever to be discovered.

Selection of fairy tales by the Brothers Grimm

     * The Almond Tree
     * The Blue Light
     * The Valiant Little Tailor
     * Brother and Sister
     * Cinderella
     * The Bremen Town Musicians
     * The Elves and the Shoemaker
     * The Fisherman and His Wife
     * The Five Servants
     * The Frog Prince
     * The Gallant Sailor
     * The Golden Bird
     * The Golden Goose
     * The Goose Girl
     * The Grateful Beasts
     * Hansel and Gretel
     * Iron John
     * Jorinde and Joringel
     * The Juniper Tree
     * King Thrushbeard
     * The Little Peasant
     * Little Red Riding Hood
     * Mother Hulda
     * Old Sultan
     * The Pied Piper of Hamelin
     * Rumpelstiltskin
     * Rapunzel
     * The Raven
     * The Salad
     * Simeli mountain
     * Six Soldiers of Fortune
     * The Six Swans
     * ( Sleeping Beauty) Briar Rose
     * Snow White
     * Snow White and Rose Red
     * The Spirit in the Bottle
     * The Three Little Men in the Woods
     * The Three Spinners
     * Tom Thumb
     * The Twelve Brothers
     * The Twelve Dancing Princesses
     * The Water of Life
     * The White Snake
     * The Wonderful Musician

   The Brothers Grimm (1982). Fairy Tales. Julian Messner. ISBN
   0-671-45648-2.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brothers_Grimm"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
