   #copyright

Bruce Lee

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Actors, models and
celebrities

   Bruce Lee
   Bruce Lee in Enter the Dragon
   Born          November 27, 1940
                 San Francisco, California
   Died          July 20, 1973
                 Hong Kong, China
   Height        5'7 1/2" (1.72 m.)
   Official site www.bruceleefoundation.com
   Notable roles Lee in Enter the Dragon
   Spouse(s)     Linda Lee Cadwell

   Bruce Jun Fan Lee (Chinese: 李振藩 Cantonese: Lee Jun Fan Pinyin: Lǐ
   Zhènfān); November 27, 1940 - July 20, 1973) was an American-born
   Chinese martial artist, instructor, actor, father of the combat
   philosophy known as Jeet Kune Do and originator of the martial art
   called Jun Fan Gung Fu. Bruce Lee is widely regarded as one of the most
   influential and famous martial artists of all time. He is also widely
   known as the greatest icon of martial arts cinema and a key figure of
   modern popular culture .

   Lee's films elevated the traditional Hong Kong martial arts film to a
   new level and sparked a greater interest in Chinese martial arts in the
   West. Lee also became iconic to Chinese, as he portrayed Chinese
   national pride and Chinese nationalism in his movies. His pioneering
   efforts paved the way for future martial artists and martial arts
   actors such as Jackie Chan, Jet Li and Chuck Norris, bringing martial
   arts films and actors to the mainstream .

   Bruce Lee's evaluation of traditional martial arts doctrines is
   nowadays seen as one of the first steps into the modern style of mixed
   martial arts. Dana White, President of UFC, has referred to Lee as the
   "father of mixed martial arts".

Early life

   Bruce Lee was an American Born Chinese (ABC) born at the Chinese
   Hospital in San Francisco, California in 1940 to his Chinese father Lee
   Hoi-Chuen and Chinese- German mother Grace Lee. Lee's parents were on a
   one-year U.S. tour with the Cantonese Opera Company.

Names

   Bruce's Cantonese given name, 振藩 (Jun Fan Cantonese: Janfàan Pinyin:
   Zhènfán), literally means "invigorate San Francisco." At birth, he was
   given the English name "Bruce" by Dr. Mary Glover. Mrs. Lee had not
   initially planned on an American name but deemed it appropriate and
   concurred with Dr. Glover. Interestingly the name "Bruce" was never
   used within his family until he enrolled in La Salle College, a Hong
   Kong high school, at 12 years of age, and then again at another
   Catholic boys' school, St Francis Xavier's College.

   In addition, Lee initially had a birth name 李炫金 ( Cantonese: Léi Yùngām
   Pinyin: Lǐ Xuànjīn) given by his mother, as at the time Lee's father
   was away on a Chinese opera tour. After several months, when Lee's
   father returned, the name was abandoned because of a conflict with the
   name of Lee's grandfather. Lee was then renamed Jun Fan. Finally, Lee
   was also given a feminine name, 李細鳳 ( Cantonese: Léi Saifung Pinyin: Lǐ
   Xìfèng), literally "small phoenix". It was used throughout his early
   childhood in keeping with a Chinese custom traditionally thought to
   hide the child from evil spirits.

   Bruce Lee's screen name was 李小龍 ( Cantonese: Léi Síulùng Pinyin: Lǐ
   Xiǎolóng) which literally means "Lee Little Dragon". He was commonly
   known by this name in Asia. These were first used by the directors of
   the early Cantonese movies in which Lee performed. It is possible that
   the name "little dragon" was chosen based on his childhood name "small
   phoenix". In Chinese tradition, the Chinese dragon and phoenix come in
   pairs to represent the male and female genders. However, it is more
   likely that he was called Little Dragon because he was born in the Year
   of the Dragon in the Hour of the Dragon, according to the Chinese
   zodiac.

Education and family

   At age 14, Bruce Lee entered La Salle College in Hong Kong, a high
   school, under the wing of Brother Henry. Then, he attended St Francis
   Xavier's College from 1957-1959.

   In 1959, Bruce got into a fight with a feared Triad gang member's son.
   His father became concerned about his safety and Bruce was sent to the
   United States to live with an old friend of his father's. All he had
   was $100 and the title of 1958 Crown Colony Cha Cha Champion of Hong
   Kong. After living in San Francisco, he moved to Seattle to work for
   Ruby Chow, another friend of his father's. In 1959, Lee completed his
   high school education in Seattle and received his diploma from Edison
   Technical School. He enrolled at the University of Washington as a
   Philosophy Academic major. There he met his future wife Linda Emery.

   Bruce and Linda married in 1964 and had two children together, Brandon
   Lee (born 1965) and Shannon Lee (born 1969). Brandon, an actor like his
   father, died on a movie set while filming The Crow on March 31, 1993.

Acting career

   Lee's father was a famous opera star. Through his father he was
   introduced into films at a very young age.

   In 1964 at a demonstration in Long Beach, California, Lee met Karate
   champion Chuck Norris. In 1972, Lee introduced Norris to the big
   screen, as an opponent in Return of the Dragon (aka Way of the Dragon).

   Lee went on to star as Kato in the TV series The Green Hornet, which
   ran from 1966 to 1967. Lee often used film cameras to teach and
   demonstrate his martial arts fighting techniques and theories.

   He also appeared in the film Marlowe in 1969 and a few episodes of the
   TV series Longstreet in 1971.

   Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, a student of Bruce Lee, starred in Game of Death,
   Lee's last film. In the film, Lee, wearing the now famous yellow track
   suit, took on the 7 foot 2 giant basketball player in a climatic fight
   scene. Unfortunately, Lee died before the film was finished. However,
   the film was finished using a Bruce Lee look-alike in 1978.

Filmography

   Lee starred in a number of films that were released in the U.S., three
   of which ( Enter the Dragon, Way of the Dragon, and Game of Death)
   premiered after his death.
   Released Chinese and English title of original release U.S. title Note
   1941 Golden Gate Girl Plays an infant
   1946 The Birth of Mankind
   1948 Fu gui fu yun, aka Wealth is Like a Dream
   1949 Meng li xi shi, aka Sai See in the Dream Plays "Yam Lee"
   1950 Xi lu xiang, aka The Kid My Son, Ah Chung Plays "Lee Siu Lung"
   1951 Ren zhi cue aka Infancy Plays "Ngau".
   1953 Qian wan ren jia
   1953 Fu zhi guo aka Blame it on Father Father's Fault
   1953 Ku hai ming deng aka The Guiding Light
   1953 Ci mu lei aka A Mother's Tears
   1953 Wei lou chun xiao aka In the Face of Demolition
   1955 Gu xing xue lei
   1955 Gu er xing
   1955 Ai aka Love
   1955 Ai xia ji aka Love Part 2
   1955 Er nu zhai aka We Owe It to Our Children
   1956 Zhia dian na fu
   1957 Lei yu aka The Thunderstorm
   1960 Ren hai gu hong aka The Orphan Plays "Ah San".
   1971 The Big Boss Fists of Fury Plays "Cheng Chao-an". Fights against a
   drug lord in Thailand.
   1972 Fist of Fury The Chinese Connection Plays "Chen Zhen" 陳真. Fights
   against Japanese tyrants to avenge his master in Shanghai.
   1972 Way of the Dragon Return of the Dragon Plays "Tang Long". Fights
   crime in Rome, Italy. Released after 'Enter the Dragon' in the U.S.;
   hence the title.
   1973 Enter the Dragon same Plays Shaolin martial arts master "Mr. Lee".
   Sent as a spy into a tournament, hosted by a
   rogue-monk-turned-drug-lord.
   1979 Game of Death same Plays "Billy Lo". Lee acts only in the last
   third of the movie, due to it being pieced together after his death.

   Note: The title The Chinese Connection (a play on the
   then-recently-released The French Connection) was originally intended
   for The Big Boss due to the drugs theme of the story.

   Yuen Lo, known later as Jackie Chan, was a member of the Seven Little
   Fortunes. He also was a stunt double for the villain Mr. Suzuki in
   Lee's Fist of Fury. In the film Enter the Dragon, Chan was one of the
   henchmen disposed of in the underground lair.

   Yuen Wah, also a member of the Seven Little Fortunes, and later to
   become a well known actor in his own right (notably starring in 2005's
   Kung Fu Hustle), was Lee's stunt double in Lee's last few films.

   Bruce Lee's first formal, organized bout came as a teenager at his high
   school in Hong Kong. He was to fight a young British boxer, a reigning
   two-time boxing champion. Bruce knocked his opponent out with repeated
   strikes, using the Wing Chun technique jik chung chuy.

Jun Fan Gung Fu

   Lee began the process of creating his own martial arts system after his
   arrival in the United States in 1959. Lee called his martial arts Jun
   Fan Gung Fu (literally Bruce's Gung Fu), which consisted mostly of Wing
   Chun, with elements of Western Boxing and fencing. Lee taught friends
   he met in Seattle, starting with Judo practitioner Jesse Glover as his
   first student and who later became his first assistant instructor.
   Before moving to California Lee opened his first martial arts school,
   named the Lee Jun Fan Gung Fu Institute, in Seattle.

   At the invitation of Ed Parker, Lee appeared in the 1964 Long Beach
   International Karate Championships and performed repetitions of
   two-finger pushups (using the thumb and the index finger) with feet
   approximately shoulder-width apart. At the same Long Beach event he
   also performed the " One inch punch". The description of which is as
   follows: Lee stood upright, his right foot forward with knees bent
   slightly, in front of a standing, stationary partner. Lee's right arm
   was partly extended and his right fist approximately an inch away from
   the partner's chest. Without retracting his right arm, Lee then
   forcibly delivered the punch to his partner while largely maintaining
   his posture, sending the partner backwards and falling into a chair
   placed behind the partner (to prevent injury), though the force of the
   impact caused his partner to soon after fall onto the floor.

   In 1964, Lee was challenged by Wong Jack Man, a practitioner of
   Northern Shaolin. Lee claimed that, after arriving in San Francisco,
   his theories about martial arts and his teaching of "secret" Chinese
   martial arts to non-Asian students gave him enemies in the martial arts
   community. In contrast, Wong stated that he requested a bout with Lee
   as a result of Lee's open challenge during a demonstration at a
   Chinatown theatre; Lee had claimed to be able to defeat any martial
   artist in San Francisco, according to Wong. The two fought in December,
   1964, at a kung fu school in Oakland, California. Lee and Wong provided
   significantly different accounts of the private bout, which was not
   filmed. Afterwards, Lee stated in an interview, without naming Wong as
   the loser, that he had defeated an unnamed challenger. In response,
   Wong wrote his description of the fight as well as an invitation to Lee
   for a public match, which was printed on the front page of Chinese
   Pacific Weekly, a Chinese-language newspaper in San Francisco. Lee did
   not fight Wong again.

Jeet Kune Do

   The match with Wong influenced Lee's philosophy on fighting. Lee
   believed that the fight had lasted too long and that he had failed to
   live up to his potential. He took the view that traditional martial
   arts techniques were too rigid and formalistic to be practical in
   scenarios of chaotic street fighting. Lee decided to develop a system
   with an emphasis on "practicality, flexibility, speed, and efficiency".
   He started to use different methods of training such as weight training
   for strength, running for endurance, stretching for flexibility, and
   many others which he constantly adapted.
   The Jeet Kune Do Emblem. The Chinese characters around the Taijitu
   symbol indicate: "Using no way as way" & "Having no limitation as
   limitation" The arrows represent the endless movement and change of the
   universe.
   Enlarge
   The Jeet Kune Do Emblem. The Chinese characters around the Taijitu
   symbol indicate: "Using no way as way" & "Having no limitation as
   limitation" The arrows represent the endless movement and change of the
   universe.

   Lee emphasized what he called "the style of no style". This consisted
   of utilizing a non-formalized approach which Lee claimed was not
   indicative of traditional styles. Because Lee felt the system he called
   Jun Fan Gung Fu was too restrictive, it was transformed to what he
   would come to describe as Jeet Kune Do or the Way of the Intercepting
   Fist, a term he would later regret because Jeet Kune Do implied
   specific parameters that styles connotate whereas the whole point of
   the system was to exist outside of parameters and limitations. Some
   confuse the Jeet Kune Do system with the personal version that Bruce
   Lee practised. Jeet Kune Do can be seen as both a process and a
   product, the latter deriving from the former.

   Bruce Lee certified three instructors: Taky Kimura, James Yimm Lee (no
   relation to Bruce Lee) and Dan Inosanto. James Yimm Lee, a close friend
   of Bruce Lee, died without certifying additional students. Taky Kimura,
   to date, has certified one person in Jun Fan Gung Fu: his son and heir
   Andy Kimura. Not all other instructors are certified, although Dan
   Inosanto has certified some (e.g. Dwight Woods and others). Prior to
   his death, Lee told his then only two living instructors Inosanto and
   Kimura (James Yimm Lee had died in 1972.) to dismantle his schools.
   Both Taky Kimura and Dan Inosanto were allowed to teach small classes
   thereafter without using the name Jeet Kune Do.

   As a result of a lawsuit between the estate of Bruce Lee (also known as
   Concord Moon) and the Inosanto Academy, the name "Jun Fan Jeet Kune Do"
   was legally trademarked, and the rights were given solely to the Lee
   estate. "The name is made up of two parts: 'Jun Fan' (Bruce's given
   Chinese name) and 'Jeet Kune Do' (the Way of the Intercepting Fist).
   The development of Bruce Lee's art from 1961 until the end of his life
   was one smooth and indivisible path. In the beginning, he referred to
   his teachings simply as Jun Fan Gung Fu.

   Some martial arts instructors, in an effort to promote themselves or
   their martial arts schools, make dubious claims about learning from or
   teaching Bruce Lee. Yet, only three were certified by Lee.

Physical fitness and nutrition

   Bruce Lee felt that many martial artists of his day did not spend
   enough time on physical conditioning. He at first resorted to
   traditional bodybuilding techniques to build mass, then upon further
   education realised that a different sort of training was needed to
   increase his speed and power.

   The weight training program that Lee used during a stay in Hong Kong in
   1965 indicated biceps curls of 36kg (79 lbs) and eight repetitions for
   endurance. This translates to an estimated one repetition maximum of
   50kg, (110 lbs) placing Lee in approximately the 100th percentile for
   the 55 to 64 kilogram weight class (121-141 Lbs).

   Lee believed that the abdominal muscles were one of the most important
   muscle groups for a martial artist, since virtually every movement
   requires some degree of abdominal work. Perhaps more importantly, the
   "abs" are like a shell, protecting the ribs and vital organs. Bruce
   Lee's washboard abs did not come from mere abdominal training; he was
   also a proponent of cardiovascular conditioning and would regularly
   run, jump rope, and ride a stationary bicycle. A typical exercise for
   Lee would be running two to six miles in fifteen to forty-five minutes.

   Another element in Bruce Lee's quest for abdominal definition was
   nutrition. According to Linda Lee, soon after he moved to the United
   States, Bruce started to take nutrition seriously and developed an
   interest in health foods and high-protein drinks. He ate lean meat
   sparingly and consumed large amounts of fruits and vegetables.

Bruce Lee's feats

     * Bruce Lee's striking speed from 60cm (24 inches) away was five
       hundredths of a second. (Glover)
     * Bruce did one-hand push ups using only 2 fingers.
     * Bruce was able to break a 70 kg (154 lbs) bag with a sidekick.
       (Coburn)
     * Bruce's famous "One Inch Punch" was able to knock back and off
       balance a 200lb man into a chair, using only 1 inch of striking
       distance. The target stands with their feet squared and is unable
       to turn to a sideways stance because of the chair being in the way,
       thus being knocked off balance.
     * Bruce's last movie Enter the Dragon was made for US$850,000 in 1973
       ($3.74 million in 2005 currency. BLS). To date, Enter the Dragon
       has grossed over $100,000,000. (IMDB.com)
     * Bruce was able to hold a 57 kg (125 lb) barbell at arms length in
       front of him (with elbows locked) for several seconds. (Little)

Quotes

   These are some quotes from Bruce Lee's students and people who trained
   with him, about his feats of strength:
     * Leo Fong
          + "Yes, I was on the receiving end of his side kick. It was like
            getting hit with a truck."
     * Mito Uhera
          + "Bruce always felt that if your stomach wasn't developed, then
            you had no business doing any hard sparring."

Philosophy

   Although Bruce Lee is best known as a martial artist and actor, Lee
   majored in philosophy at the University of Washington. Lee's books on
   martial arts and fighting philosophies are well-known both for their
   philosophical assertions both inside and outside of martial arts
   circles. His philosophy often mirrored his fighting beliefs, though he
   was quick to claim that his martial arts were solely a metaphor for
   such teachings. His influences include Taoism, Buddhism, and the
   writings of Krishnamurti.

   The following are some of Bruce Lee's quotes that reflect his fighting
   philosophy.
     * "Be formless... shapeless like water. If you put water into a cup,
       it becomes the cup. You put water into a bottle; it becomes the
       bottle. You put it into a teapot; it becomes the teapot. Water can
       flow, and it can crash. Be water, my friend..."
     * "The more relaxed the muscles are, the more energy can flow through
       the body. Using muscular tensions to try to 'do' the punch or
       attempting to use brute force to knock someone over will only work
       to opposite effect."
     * "Mere technical knowledge is only the beginning of Kung Fu. To
       master it, one must enter into the spirit of it."
     * "There are lots of guys around the world that are lazy. They have
       fat guts. They talk about chi power and things they can do, but
       don't believe it."
     * "I'm not a master. I'm a student-master, meaning that I have the
       knowledge of a master and the expertise of a master, but I'm still
       learning. So I'm a student-master. I don't believe in the word
       'master.' I consider the master as such when they close the
       casket."
     * "Do not deny the classical approach, simply as a reaction, or you
       will have created another pattern and trapped yourself there."
     * "Jeet Kune Do: it's just a name; don't fuss over it. There's no
       such thing as a style if you understand the roots of combat."
     * "Unfortunately, now in boxing people are only allowed to punch. In
       Judo, people are only allowed to throw. I do not despise these
       kinds of martial arts. What I mean is, we now find rigid forms
       which create differences among clans, and the world of martial art
       is shattered as a result."
     * "I think the high state of martial art, in application, must have
       no absolute form. And, to tackle pattern A with pattern B may not
       be absolutely correct."
     * "True observation begins when one is devoid of set patterns."
     * "The other weakness is, when clans are formed, the people of a clan
       will hold their kind of martial art as the only truth and do not
       dare to reform or improve it. Thus they are confined in their own
       tiny little world. Their students become machines which imitate
       martial art forms."
     * "Some people are tall; some are short. Some are stout; some are
       slim. There are various different kinds of people. If all of them
       learn the same martial art form, then who does it fit?"
     * "Ultimately, martial art means honestly expressing yourself. It is
       easy for me to put on a show and be cocky so I can show you some
       really fancy movement. But to express oneself honestly, not lying
       to oneself, and to express myself honestly enough; that my friend
       is very hard to do."
     * "Use no way as way; use no limitation as limitation."
     * "The Most powerful fighter, is an ordinary man with laser precision
       focus."
     * "One great cause of failure is lack of concentration."
     * "If you spend too much time thinking about a thing, you'll never
       get it done."

   See Wikiquotes for more quotes by Bruce Lee.

Bruce Lee and popular culture

   There exists many references to Bruce Lee in popular culture, which are
   covered in a separate article.

Awards and honours

   Bruce Lee statue in Hong Kong
   Enlarge
   Bruce Lee statue in Hong Kong
     * With his ancestral roots coming from Gwan'on in Seundak, Guangdong
       province of China (广东顺德均安, Guangdong Shunde Jun'An), a street in
       the village is named after him where his ancestral home is
       situated. The home is open for public access.
     * Bruce Lee was named TIME Magazine 's 100 Most Important People of
       the Century and as one of the greatest heroes & icons and among the
       influential martial artists of the 20th century.

     * The 1993 film Dragon: The Bruce Lee Story is a fictionalized
       biographical film about Bruce Lee.

     * On July 21, 2003, to his 30th year of death, "Things Asian"
       published an article: Lee´s Legend remains strong 30 years after
       his death and in the process establish his place in martial arts as
       "the greatest martial artist of all time"
     * In 2004, UFC president Dana White credited Bruce Lee as the "father
       of mixed martial arts".

     * In September 2004, a a BBC story stated that the Bosnian city of
       Mostar was to honour Lee with a statue on the Spanish Square, as a
       symbol of solidarity. After many years of war and religious splits,
       Lee's figure is to commend his work: to successfully bridge culture
       gaps in the world. The statue, placed in the city park, was
       unveiled on November 26, 2005 (One day before the unveiling of the
       statue in Hong Kong, below).

     * In 2005, Lee was remembered in Hong Kong with a bronze statue to
       mark his sixty-fifth birthday. The bronze statue, unveiled on
       November 27, 2005, honored Lee as Chinese film's bright star of the
       century.

     * Lee has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in the category Motion
       Picture, at 6933 Hollywood Blvd

     * On November 27, 2006, it was announced that Bruce Lee will get his
       own theme park that will be located in his Chinese ancestral home
       of Shunde. It will contain a statue, memorial hall, martial arts
       academy, and conference centre. Actress Betty Ting Pei donated a
       set of nunchaku that Lee once used.

Martial arts lineage

   Lineage in Wing Chun / Jeet Kune Do
   Sifu in Wing Chun Yip Man (葉問)
   Other instructors Sihing Wong Shun Leung (黃淳樑) Sihing William Cheung
   (張卓興)
   Notable Sparring partner Toe Dai Hawkins Cheung Note: He was Bruce
   Lee's friend at the time.

   Bruce Lee (李小龍)
   Creator of Jeet Kune Do

   Known students in Jun Fan
   Gung Fu/Jeet Kune Do Jesse Glover
   Steve Golden
   Dan Inosanto
   Taky Kimura
   Jerry Poteet
   Ted Wong
   James Yimm Lee
   Numerous others...
   Famous students taught
   Jun Fan/Jeet Kune Do Kareem Abdul-Jabbar
   James Coburn
   Joe Lewis
   Roman Polanski
   Lee Marvin
   Steve McQueen
   Chuck Norris
   Stirling Silliphant
   Numerous others...

Death by "misadventure"

   Bruce Lee's death was officially attributed to cerebral edema.

   On July 20, 1973, Lee was in Hong Kong, due to have dinner with former
   James Bond star George Lazenby, with whom he intended to make a film.
   According to Lee's wife Linda, Bruce met producer Raymond Chow at 2
   P.M. at home to discuss the making of the movie Game of Death. They
   worked until 4 P.M. and then drove together to the home of Betty Ting
   Pei, a Taiwanese actress (claimed by some to be Lee's mistress) who was
   to have a leading role in the film. The three went over the script at
   her home, and then Chow left to attend a dinner meeting.

   A short time later, Lee complained of a headache, and Ting Pei gave him
   a prescription analgesic known as Equagesic.

   At around 7:30 P.M., he laid down for a nap. After Lee didn't turn up
   for the dinner, Chow came to the apartment but could not wake Lee up. A
   doctor was summoned, who spent ten minutes attempting to revive him
   before sending him by ambulance to Queen Elizabeth Hospital. However,
   Lee was dead by the time he reached the hospital. There was no visible
   external injury; however, his brain had swollen considerably, from
   1,400 to 1,575 grams (13%). Lee was 32 years old. The medical staff
   examining him concluded that the immediate cause of death was Cerebral
   Edema. Dr. R. R. Lycette of Queen Elizabeth Hospital determined that
   the swelling in the brain, and Lee's untimely death, was the result of
   an adverse reaction to one of the compounds in the prescription
   equagesic tablet. On October 15, 2005, Chow stated in an interview that
   Lee was allergic to Equagesic. When the physicians announced Bruce
   Lee's death officially, it was pronounced "death by misadventure".
   However, the exact details of Lee's death were controversial from the
   moment it was announced. Bruce Lee's iconic status and unusual death at
   a young age led to several conspiracy theories about Lee's death, such
   as a murder involving Triads seeking protection money, vengeful rival
   martial artists, or other enemies like Chinese and American directors
   and producers — but none of these is supported by any evidence. His
   sudden death has since passed into the realm of legend, with one legend
   claiming that Lee faked his death, and will return when he has
   perfected his martial arts.

Burial

   Bruce Lee is interred in Lake View Cemetery, Seattle, Washington, USA.

   Plot: Lot 276, east side of the circular driveway in the centre of the
   cemetery.

   GPS coordinates: 47.6333, -122.3158

Books authored

     * Bruce Lee's Fighting Method 1-4
     * Chinese Gung-Fu: The Philosophical Art of Self Defense
     * The Tao of Jeet Kune Do

Books about Bruce Lee and/or JKD

     * Bruce Lee Between Wing Chun and JKD - written by Jesse Glover
     * Bruce Lee: Dynamic Becoming - a book about Bruce Lee's philosophy
     * Bruce Lee: Fighting Spirit - a biography by Bruce Thomas
     * The Tao of Bruce Lee - written by Davis Miller mostly about Bruce
       Lee.

Bruce Lee documentaries

     * Bruce Lee: The Curse of the Dragon - Includes interviews with Bruce
       Lee students, and cast and crew members.
     * Bruce Lee: The Immortal Dragon - Documentary from the Biography
       Channel
     * Bruce Lee: The Man, the Myth - Biographical film.
     * Jeet Kune Do - Documentary by Wah Chan. More about JKD but contains
       much Bruce Lee footage.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bruce_Lee"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
