   #copyright

Brunei

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Asian Countries;
Countries

   برني دارالسلام
   Negara Brunei Darussalam

   Flag of Brunei Darussalam Coat of arms of Brunei Darussalam
   Flag                      Coat of arms
   Motto: "Always in service with God's guidance" (translation)
   Anthem: Allah Peliharakan Sultan
   ("God Bless the Sultan")
   Location of Brunei Darussalam
   Capital
   (and largest city) Bandar Seri Begawan
   4°55′N 114°55′E
   Official languages Malay (national), English
   Government Absolute monarchy
    - Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah
   Independence
    - from British protectorate January 1, 1984
   Area
    - Total 5,765 km² ( 170th)
   2,226 sq mi
    - Water (%) 8.6
   Population
    - 2005 estimate 374,000 ( 174th)
    - 2001 census 332,844
    - Density 65/km² ( 127th)
   168/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total $9.009 billion ( 138th)
    - Per capita $24,826 ( 26th)
   HDI  (2003) 0.866 (high) ( 33rd)
   Currency Brunei ringgit ( BND)
   Time zone ( UTC+8)
   Internet TLD .bn
   Calling code +673^1
   ^1 Also 080 from Malaysia.

   Brunei, officially the Sultanate of Brunei ( Malay: Negara Brunei
   Darussalam, Arabic: سلطنة بروناي‎, Jawi: برني دارالسلام), is a country
   located on the island of Borneo, in Southeast Asia. Apart from its
   coastline with the South China Sea, it is completely surrounded by the
   state of Sarawak, East Malaysia. Brunei, the remnant of a very powerful
   sultanate, became independent from Great Britain in 1984.

History

   The Sultanate of Brunei was very powerful from the 14th through the
   16th century. Its realm covered the whole island of Borneo and the
   southern Philippines. European influence gradually brought an end to
   this regional power. Later, there was a brief war with Spain, in which
   Brunei was victorious. The decline of the Bruneian Empire culminated in
   the 19th century when Brunei lost much of its territory to the White
   Rajahs of Sarawak, resulting in its current small landmass and
   separation into two parts. Brunei was a British protectorate from 1888
   to 1984.

   There was a small rebellion against the monarchy during the 1960s,
   which was prevented by the United Kingdom. This event became known as
   the Brunei Revolt and was partly responsible for the failure to create
   the North Borneo Federation. The rebellion also affected Brunei's
   decision to opt out of the Malaysian Federation and was the first stage
   of the Indonesia-Malaysia confrontation.

Politics

   Hassanal Bolkiah, Sultan of Brunei
   Enlarge
   Hassanal Bolkiah, Sultan of Brunei

   Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah of Brunei, whose title has passed within the
   same dynasty since the 15th century, is the head of state and head of
   government in Brunei. The Sultan is advised by several councils and a
   cabinet of ministers although he is effectively the supreme ruler. The
   media is extremely pro-government and the Royal family retains a
   venerated status within the country. There is no elected legislative
   body. In September 2004, the Sultan convened an appointed Parliament
   which had not met since independence in 1984, although it lacks any
   capacity beyond advising the monarch. Due to the absolute rule of the
   Sultan, Brunei is one of the most politically stable countries in Asia.

   The country has been under hypothetical martial law since a rebellion
   occurred in the early 1960s and was put down by British troops from
   Singapore.

   Brunei claims territory in Sarawak, such as Limbang, and is one of many
   nations to lay claim to the disputed Spratly Islands. Several small
   islands situated between Brunei and Labuan, including Kuraman island,
   are contested between Brunei and Malaysia. However, they are
   internationally recognised as part of the latter.

Administrative divisions

   Administrative division.
   Enlarge
   Administrative division.

   Brunei is divided into four districts, called daerah. These are:
     * Belait
     * Brunei and Muara
     * Temburong
     * Tutong

   The districts are sub-divided into 38 mukims.

Geography

   Brunei consists of two unconnected parts; 97% of the population lives
   in the larger western part, only about 10,000 live in the mountainous
   eastern part, the district of Temburong. The total population of Brunei
   is 383,000 and out of that number about 46,000 people live in the
   capital Bandar Seri Begawan. Some major towns are the capital Bandar,
   the port town Muara, the oil producing town of Seria and its
   neighboring town, Kuala Belait (K.B). In the Belait district, the
   Panaga area is home to large numbers of expatriates due to Royal Dutch
   Shell and British Army housing and recreational facilities. The
   well-known Panaga Club is situated here.

   The climate in Brunei is equatorial Tropical climate tropical, with
   high temperatures, a high humidity , sunshine and heavy rainfall
   throughout the year.

Economy

   This small, wealthy economy is a mixture of foreign and domestic
   entrepreneurship, government regulation, welfare measures, and village
   tradition. Crude oil and natural gas production account for nearly half
   of GDP. Substantial income from overseas investment supplements income
   from domestic production. The government provides for all medical
   services and subsidizes rice and housing. Brunei's leaders are
   concerned that steadily increased integration in the world economy will
   undermine internal social cohesion although it became a more prominent
   player by serving as chairman for the 2000 APEC (Asian Pacific Economic
   Cooperation) forum. Stated plans for the future include upgrading the
   labour force, reducing unemployment, strengthening the banking and
   tourist sectors, and, in general, further widening the economic base.
   The national airline, Royal Brunei is trying to make Brunei a hub for
   international travel between Europe and Australia/New Zealand. It also
   has services to major Asian destinations.

Demographics

   About two-thirds of the Brunei population are of Malay origin. The most
   important ethnic minority group who dominated the nation's economy are
   the Chinese, with about 15%. These groups also reflect the most
   important languages: Malay (Malay: Bahasa Melayu), which is the
   official language, and Chinese. English is also widely spoken and there
   is a relatively large expatriate community with large numbers of
   British and Australian citizens.

   Islam is the official religion of Brunei, and the sultan is the head of
   the religion in the country. Other faiths practised are Buddhism
   (mainly by the Chinese), Christianity and (in very small communities)
   indigenous religions.

Culture

   The culture of Brunei is predominantly Malay, with heavy influences
   from Hinduism and Islam, but is seen as more conservative than
   Malaysia. The sale and public consumption of alcohol is banned, with
   foreigners and non-Muslims allowed to bring in 12 cans of beer and two
   bottles of spirits every time they enter the country. After the
   introduction of prohibition in the early 1990's, all pubs and
   nightclubs were forced to close.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brunei"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
