   #copyright

Bucharest

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: European Geography

   CAPTION: Municipiul Bucureşti
   (Bucharest)


   Coat of Arms of Municipiul Bucureşti(Bucharest) Location of Municipiul
                                                    Bucureşti(Bucharest)

   Status Capital of Romania
   Mayor Adriean Videanu, since 2005
   Area 228 km²
   Population ( 2003) 1,929,615
   Density 9131.5 inh/km²
   Geographical coordinates 44°25′N 26°06′E
   Web site http://www1.pmb.ro/pmb/index.html

   Bucharest ( Romanian: Bucureşti /bu.kuˈreʃtʲ/ ) is the capital city and
   industrial and commercial centre of Romania. It is located in the
   southeast of the country, at 44°25′N 26°06′E, and lies on the banks of
   the Dâmboviţa River.

   By European standards Bucharest is not an old city, its existence first
   being referred to by scholars as late as 1459. Since then it has gone
   through a variety of changes, becoming the state capital of Romania in
   1862 and steadily consolidating its position as the centre of the
   Romanian mass media, culture and arts. Its eclectic architecture is a
   mix of historical, interbellum, Communist-era, and modern. In the
   period between the two World Wars, the city's elegant architecture and
   the sophistication of its elite earned Bucharest the nickname of the
   "Paris of the East" or "Little Paris" (Micul Paris). Although many
   buildings and districts in the historic centre were damaged or
   destroyed by war, earthquakes and Nicolae Ceauşescu's program of
   systematization, much survived. In recent years, the city has been
   experiencing an economic and cultural boom.

   According to the 2002 census, Bucharest proper has a population of
   1,921,751. There are approximately 2.3 million inhabitants in the
   greater metropolitan area. Economically, the city is by far the most
   prosperous in Romania and is one of the main industrial centres and
   transportation hubs of Eastern Europe. As the most important city in
   Romania, Bucharest also has a broad range of educational facilities.

   The city is administratively known as the Municipality of Bucharest
   (Municipiul Bucureşti), and has the same administrative level as a
   county, being further subdivided into six sectors.

Geography

   Satellite view of Bucharest with written landmarks
   Enlarge
   Satellite view of Bucharest with written landmarks

   Bucharest is situated on the banks of the Dâmboviţa River, which flows
   into the Argeş River, a tributary of the Danube. Several lakes – the
   most important of which are Lake Floreasca, Lake Tei and Lake Colentina
   – stretch across the city, along the Colentina River, a tributary of
   the Dâmboviţa. In addition, in the centre of the capital there is a
   small artificial lake – Lake Cişmigiu – surrounded by the Cişmigiu
   Gardens. The Cişmigiu Gardens have a rich history, being frequented by
   famous poets and writers. Opened in 1847 and based on the plans of
   German architect Carl F.W. Meyer, the gardens are currently the main
   recreational facility in the city centre.
   Central Bucharest at Night
   Enlarge
   Central Bucharest at Night

   Besides Cişmigiu, Bucharest contains several other large parks and
   gardens, including Herăstrău Park and the Botanical Garden. Herăstrău
   is a large public park located in the north of the city, and the site
   of the Village Museum, while the Bucharest's botanical garden is the
   largest in Romania and contains over 10,000 species of plants, many of
   them exotic; it was once a pleasure park for the royal family.

   Bucharest is situated in the south eastern corner of the Romanian
   Plain, in an area once covered by the Vlăsiei forest, which, after it
   was cleared, gave way to a fertile flatland. As with many cities,
   Bucharest is traditionally considered to have seven hills, in the
   tradition of the seven hills of Rome. Bucharest's seven hills are:
   Mihai Vodă, Patriarchy Hill, Radu Vodă, Cotroceni, Spirei, Văcăreşti
   and Sf. Gheorghe Nou.

   The city has a total area of 226 km². The altitude varies from 55.8
   metres at the Dâmboviţa bridge in Căţelu, south-eastern Bucharest and
   91.5 m at the Militari church. The city has a relatively round shape,
   with the centre situated approximately in the cross-way of the main
   north-south/east-west axes at the University Square. The milestone for
   Romanian's kilometre zero is placed just south of University Square in
   front of the New St. George Church (Sfântul Gheorghe Nou) at St. George
   Square (Piaţa Sfântul Gheorghe). Bucharest's radius, from University
   Square to the city limits in all directions, varies from about 10 to 12
   km.

   Until recently, the regions surrounding Bucharest were largely rural,
   but after 1989, new suburbs started to be built around Bucharest, in
   the surrounding Ilfov county. Further urban consolidation is expected
   to take place when the Bucharest metropolitan area is formed in 2006,
   which will incorporate various communes and cities of Ilfov and
   surrounding counties.

Climate

   Cişmigiu Garden in winter
   Enlarge
   Cişmigiu Garden in winter

   Bucharest has a continental climate, characterised by hot dry summers
   and cold winters. Due to its position on the Romanian Plain, the city's
   winters could get windy, even though some of the winds are mitigated
   due to urbanisation. Winter temperatures are often below 0°C, even
   though they rarely drop below -10°C. In summer, the average temperature
   is approximately 23°C (the average for July and August), despite the
   fact that temperatures sometimes reach 35-40°C in mid-summer in the
   city centre. Although average precipitation and humidity during summer
   is low, there are infrequent yet heavy and often violent storms. During
   spring and autumn, temperatures vary between 18-22°C, and precipitation
   during this time tends to be higher than in summer, with more frequent
   yet milder periods of rain.

   CAPTION: Climate Table

   Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
   Mean Temperature ( °C) –2 1 6 11 17 21 23 22 17 11 4 –1
   Mean Total Precipitation ( mm) 40 36 38 46 70 77 64 58 42 32 49 43
   Mean Number of Precipitation Days 6 6 6 7 6 6 7 6 5 5 6 6
   Note: A precipitation day is counted as a day where there is at least 1
   mm of precipitation (rain, snow, sleet, etc.)
   Sources: World Meteorological Organisation, SouthTravels

Law and government

Administration

   The Bucharest City Hall
   Enlarge
   The Bucharest City Hall

   Bucharest has a unique status in Romanian administration, since it is
   the only municipality that is not part of a county. Its population,
   however, is larger than that of any Romanian county, and hence the
   power of the Bucharest General City Hall (Primăria Generală), which is
   the city's local government body, is about the same as, if not greater
   than, that of Romanian county councils.

   The city government is headed by a General Mayor (Primar General),
   currently (as of 2006) Adriean Videanu. Decisions are approved and
   discussed by the General Council (Consiliu General) made up of 55
   elected councillors. Furthermore, the city is divided into six
   administrative sectors (sectoare), each of which has their own 27-seat
   sectorial council, town hall and mayor. The powers of local government
   over a certain area are therefore shared by the Bucharest City Hall and
   the local sectorial councils with little or no overlapping of
   authority. The general rule is that the main City Hall is responsible
   for citywide utilities such as the water system, the transport system
   and the main boulevards, while sectorial town halls manage the contact
   between individuals and the local government, secondary streets, parks,
   schools and cleaning services.
   The six administrative sectors of Bucharest
   Enlarge
   The six administrative sectors of Bucharest

   The six sectors are numbered from one to six and are disposed radially
   so that each one has under its administration an area of the city
   centre. They are numbered clockwise and are further divided into
   districts without any form of administration (cartiere):
     * Sector 1: Băneasa, Pipera, Floreasca
     * Sector 2: Pantelimon, Colentina, Iancului, Muncii, Tei
     * Sector 3: Vitan, Dudeşti, Titan, Centrul Civic
     * Sector 4: Berceni, Olteniţei, Văcăreşti
     * Sector 5: Rahova, Ferentari, Cotroceni
     * Sector 6: Giuleşti, Drumul Taberei, Militari, Crângaşi

   Like all other local councils in Romania, the Bucharest sectorial
   councils, the city's General Council and the mayors are elected every
   four years by the population. Additionally, Bucharest has a prefect,
   who is appointed by Romania's central government. The prefect is not
   allowed to be a member of a political party. The prefect's role is to
   represent the national government at local level, acting as a liaison
   and facilitating the implementation of National Development Plans and
   governing programmes at local level. The current prefect of Bucharest
   (as of 2006) is Mioara Mantale.

   The Municipality of Bucharest, along with the surrounding Ilfov county,
   forms the Bucharest development region, which is equivalent to NUTS-II
   regions in the European Union and is used by the European Union and the
   Romanian Government for statistical analysis and regional development.
   The Bucharest development region is not, however, an administrative
   entity.

Justice system

   Bucharest's judicial system is similar to that of the Romanian
   counties. Each of the six sectors has their own local tribunal, while
   appeals from these tribunals' verdicts, and more serious cases, are
   directed to the Bucharest Court of Appeals, the city's municipal court.
   Bucharest is also home to Romania's supreme court, the High Court of
   Cassation and Justice, as well as other national courts such as the
   Constitutional Court of Romania and the National Military Tribunal.

   Bucharest has its own municipal police force, the Bucharest Police
   (Poliţia Bucureşti), which is responsible for policing of crime within
   the whole city, and operates a number of special divisions. The
   Bucharest Police are headquartered on Ştefan cel Mare Blvd in the city
   centre, and has a number of precincts throughout the city. From 2004
   onwards, each sector City Hall also has under its administration a
   Community Police force (Poliţia Comunitară), dealing with local
   community issues. Bucharest also houses the General Inspectorate of the
   Gendarmerie and the General Inspectorate of the National Police.

Crime

   Bucharest's crime rate is rather low in comparison to other European
   capital cities, with the number of total offences declining by 51%
   between 2000 and 2004. In particular, levels of violent crime remain
   very low, with 24 murders and 1069 other violent offences taking place
   in 2004. Although there have been a number of recent police crackdowns
   on organised crime gangs, such as the Cămătaru clan, organised crime
   generally has a reduced impact on public life. Petty crime, however, is
   more common, particularly in the form of pickpocketing, which occurs
   mainly on the city's public transport network. Additionally, confidence
   tricks such as the Maradona scam are sometimes common, especially in
   regards to tourists, even though the frequency of these tricks has
   declined in recent years. Levels of crime are higher in the southern
   districts of the city, particularly in Ferentari, a
   socially-disadvantaged area mainly inhabited by people of Roma
   ethnicity.

   Although the presence of street children was a problem in Bucharest in
   the 1990s, their numbers have declined significantly in recent years,
   currently lying at or below the average of major European capital
   cities. The same is true for beggars and homeless people, many of them
   from the disadvantaged Roma minority. However, there are still an
   estimated 1,000 street children in the city, many of whom engage in
   petty crime and begging. There has also been speculation that the
   street children are recruited by professional underground networks for
   criminal purposes. From 2000 onwards, Bucharest has seen an increase in
   illegal road races which occur mainly at night in the city's outskirts
   or on industrial sites.

   A significant problem in the city remains institutional corruption,
   which is seen as the most important justice-and-law related problem in
   the city. While corruption in Romania has declined in recent years due
   to various government efforts, Bucharest's level of institutional
   corruption remains somewhat higher than the Romanian average.

History

      The remains of Curtea Veche, the royal court in Bucharest during the
                                                               Middle Ages
                                                                   Enlarge
      The remains of Curtea Veche, the royal court in Bucharest during the
                                                               Middle Ages

                                                         Bucharest in 1837
                                                                   Enlarge
                                                         Bucharest in 1837

       St George's Place in Bucharest at the beginning of the 20th century
                                                                   Enlarge
       St George's Place in Bucharest at the beginning of the 20th century

   Bucharest's history alternated periods of development and decline from
   the early settlements of the Antiquity and until its consolidation as
   capital of Romania late in the 19th century. According to the most
   popular of legends in circulation, the city was founded by a shepherd
   named Bucur.

   First mentioned as "the Citadel of Bucureşti" in 1459, it became a
   residence of the Wallachian prince Vlad III the Impaler. The Old
   Princely Court ( Curtea Veche) was built by Mircea Ciobanul, and during
   following rules, Bucharest was established as the summer residence of
   the court, competing with Târgovişte for the status of capital after an
   increase in the importance of southern Muntenia brought about by the
   demands of the suzerain power, the Ottoman Empire.

   Burned down by the Ottomans and briefly discarded by princes at the
   start of the 17th century, Bucharest was restored and continued to grow
   in size and prosperity. Its centre was around the street "Uliţa Mare",
   which starting 1589 was known as Lipscani. Before the 1700s, it became
   the most important trade centre of Wallachia and became a permanent
   location for the Wallachian court after 1698 (starting with the reign
   of Constantin Brâncoveanu).

   Partly destroyed by natural disasters and rebuilt several times during
   the following 200 years, hit by Caragea's plague in 1813- 1814, the
   city was wrested from Ottoman control and occupied at several intervals
   by the Habsburg Monarchy ( 1716, 1737, 1789) and Imperial Russia (three
   times between 1768 and 1806). It was placed under Russian
   administration between 1828 and the Crimean War, with an interlude
   during the Bucharest-centered 1848 Wallachian revolution, and an
   Austrian garrison took possession after the Russian departure
   (remaining in the city until March 1857). Additionally, on March 23,
   1847, a fire consumed about 2,000 buildings of Bucharest, destroying a
   third of the city. The social divide between rich and poor was
   described at the time by Ferdinand Lassalle as making the city "a
   savage hotchpotch".

   In 1861, when Wallachia and Moldavia were united to form the
   Principality of Romania, Bucharest became the new nation's capital; in
   1881, it became the political centre of the newly-proclaimed Kingdom of
   Romania. During the second half of the 19th century, due to its new
   status, the city's population increased dramatically, and a new period
   of urban development began. The extravagant architecture and
   cosmopolitan high culture of this period won Bucharest the nickname of
   "The Paris of the East" (or "Little Paris", Micul Paris), with Calea
   Victoriei as its Champs-Élysées or Fifth Avenue.

   Between December 6, 1916 and November 1918, it was occupied by German
   forces, the legitimate capital being moved to Iaşi. After World War I,
   Bucharest became the capital of Greater Romania. As the capital of an
   Axis country, Bucharest suffered heavy losses during World War II, due
   to Allied bombings, and, on August 23, 1944, saw the the royal coup
   which brought Romania into the anti-German camp, suffering a short but
   destructive period of Luftwaffe bombings in reprisal. On November 8,
   1945, the king's birthday, the Soviet-backed Petru Groza government
   suppressed pro- monarchist rallies.

   During Nicolae Ceauşescu's leadership (1965-1989), most of the historic
   part of the city was destroyed and replaced with Communist-style
   buildings, particularly high-rise apartment blocks. The best example of
   this is the development called Centrul Civic (the Civic Centre),
   including the Palace of the Parliament, where an entire historic
   quarter was razed to make way for Ceauşescu's grandomanic
   constructions. In 1977, a strong 7.4 on the Richter-scale earthquake
   claimed 1,500 lives and destroyed many old buildings. Nevertheless,
   some historic neighbourhoods did survive to this day.

   The Romanian Revolution of 1989 began with mass anti-Ceauşescu protests
   in Timişoara in December 1989 and continued in Bucharest, leading to
   the overthrow of the Communist regime. Dissatisfied with the
   post-revolutionary leadership of the National Salvation Front,
   students' leagues and opposition groups organized large-scale protests
   continued in 1990 (the Golaniad), which were violently stopped by the
   miners of Valea Jiului (the Mineriad). Several other Mineriads
   followed, the results of which included a government change.

   After the year 2000, due to the advent of Romania's economic boom, the
   city has modernised and is currently undergoing a period of urban
   renewal. Various residential and commercial developments are underway,
   particularly in the northern districts, while Bucharest's historic
   centre is currently undergoing significant restoration.

Treaties signed in Bucharest

   Treaty of May 28, 1812, at the end of the Russo-Turkish War
   Treaty of March 3, 1886, at the end of the Serbo-Bulgarian War
   Treaty of August 10, 1913, at the end of the Second Balkan War
   Treaty of August 4, 1916, the treaty of alliance between Romania and
   the Entente
   Treaty of May 6, 1918, the treaty between Romania and the Central
   Powers

Demographics

   CAPTION: Historical population of Bucharest

   Year              Population
   1789 30,030 property-owners; 6,000 houses
   1831 60,587 property-owners; 10,000 houses
   1859 122,000
   1900 282,000
   1918 383,000
   1930 639,000
   1956 1,237,000
   1966 1,452,000
   2000 2,300,000
   2003 2,082,000

   The city's population, according to the 2002 census, is 2,082,000
   inhabitants, or about 9% of the population of Romania. Additionally,
   there are about 50,000 people who commute to the city every day, mainly
   from the surrounding Ilfov county.

   Bucharest's population experienced two phases of rapid growth, the
   first in the late 19th century, when the city grew in importance and
   size, and the second during the Communist period, when a massive
   urbanisation campaign was launched and many people migrated from rural
   areas to the capital. At this time, due to Ceauşescu's ban on abortion
   and contraception, natural increase was also significant. Since the
   fall of Communism, however, the city's population continues to gently
   fall, due both to emigration and to a declining birth rate.

   Approximately 97% of the population of Bucharest are ethnic Romanians,
   with the second largest ethnic group being the Roma, which make up 1.4%
   of the population. Other significant ethnic groups are Hungarians
   (0.3%), Jews (0.1%), Turks (0,1%), Germans (0,1%) and Chinese (0.1%).
   Some other inhabitants of Bucharest are of Greek, Armenian, Lipovan and
   Italian descent. The Greeks and the Armenians used to play significant
   roles in the life of the city at the end of the 19th century and
   beginning of the 20th century. One the predominantly Greek
   neighbourhoods Vitan - where a Jewish population also lived; the latter
   was more present in Văcăreşti and areas around Unirii Square.

   In terms of religion, 96.1% of the population are Romanian Orthodox,
   1.2% are Roman Catholic, 0.5% are Muslim and 0.4% are Eastern
   Rite-Catholic. Despite this, only 24% of the population, of any
   religion, attend a place of worship once a week or more. The life
   expectancy of residents of Bucharest in 2003-2005 was 74.14 years,
   around 2 years higher than the Romanian average. Female life expectancy
   was 77.41 years, in comparison to 70.57 years for males.

Economy

   The Sofitel World Trade Center in Bucharest
   Enlarge
   The Sofitel World Trade Centre in Bucharest

   Bucharest is the most economically-developed and industrialised city in
   Romania, producing around 21% of the country's GDP and about
   one-quarter of its industrial production, while only accounting for 9%
   of the country's population. Almost one third of national taxes is paid
   by Bucharest's citizens and companies. Based on local purchasing power,
   Bucharest has a per-capita GDP of nearly 60% that of the European Union
   average, and more than twice the Romanian average. Based on the fact
   that Bucharest produces around 21% of Romanian GDP for a population of
   around 2 million, the GDP ( PPP) per capita of the city would be
   US$20,057. The city's strong economic growth has revitalised
   infrastructure and led to the development of many shopping malls and
   modern residential towers and high-rise office buildings. In September
   2005, Bucharest had an unemployment rate of 2.6%, significantly lower
   than the national unemployment rate of 5.7%.

   Bucharest's economy is mainly centred on industry and services, with
   services particularly growing in importance in the last ten years. The
   city serves as the headquarters of 186,000 firms, including nearly all
   large Romanian companies. An important source for growth since 2000 has
   been the city's property and construction boom, which has resulted in a
   significant growth in the construction sector. Bucharest is also
   Romania's largest centre for information technology and communications
   and is home to several software companies, including Softwin, which
   operates internationally. Bucharest contains Romania's largest stock
   exchange, the Bucharest Stock Exchange, which was merged in December
   2005 with the Bucharest-based electronic stock exchange, Rasdaq.

   The city has a number of international supermarket chains such as
   Carrefour, Cora and METRO. At the moment, the city is undergoing a
   retail boom, with a large number of supermarkets, and hypermarkets,
   constructed every year. For more information, see supermarkets in
   Romania. The biggest modern shopping centres in Bucharest are Bucharest
   Mall, Plaza Romania, City Mall, Jolie Ville Galleria and Unirea
   Shopping Centre. However, there are also a large number of traditional
   markets; the one at Obor covers about a dozen city blocks, and numerous
   large stores that are not officially part of the market effectively add
   up to a market district almost twice that size.

Transport

   Bucharest Metro - Pipera Station
   Enlarge
   Bucharest Metro - Pipera Station
   Bucharest bus
   Enlarge
   Bucharest bus
   Nicolae Bălcescu boulevard at night
   Enlarge
   Nicolae Bălcescu boulevard at night

   Bucharest's extensive public transport system is the largest in Romania
   and the third largest in Europe. It is made up of the Bucharest Metro,
   as well as a surface transport system run by RATB (Regia Autonoma de
   Transport Bucuresti), which consists of buses, trams, trolleybuses and
   light rail. In addition, there is a private taxi and minibus system.
   The metro and the surface transport system — currently run by two
   separate state-owned corporations — will be merged in early 2006 to
   form the Bucharest Metropolitan Transport Board.

   The city is served by two airports: Henri Coandă International Airport
   (formerly Otopeni) and Aurel Vlaicu International Airport (formerly
   Băneasa). Henri Coandă is the largest airport in Romania and the main
   hub for the national operator TAROM. It is also connected to several
   international airports by a wide range of international airlines. The
   smaller Aurel Vlaicu Airport is used for charter flights and low-cost
   carriers.

   Bucharest is the hub of Romania's national railway network, run by
   Căile Ferate Române. The main railway station is Gara de Nord, or North
   Station, which provides connections to all major cities in Romania as
   well as international destinations such as Budapest, Sofia, Vienna and
   Prague. The city also has five other railway stations run by CFR, which
   are in the process of being integrated in a commuter railway serving
   Bucharest and the surrounding Ilfov county.

   The city's municipal road network is centred around a series of
   high-capacity boulevards, which generally radiate out from the city
   centre to the outskirts. The main axes, which run north-south,
   east-west and northwest-southeast, as well as one internal and one
   external ring road, support the bulk of the traffic. The city's roads
   are usually very crowded during rush hours, due to an increase in car
   ownership in recent years. Every day, there are more than one million
   vehicles travelling within the city. This has resulted in wear and
   potholes appearing on many Bucharest roads, particularly secondary
   roads, this being identified as one of Bucharest's main infrastructural
   problems. In recent years, there has been a comprehensive effort on
   behalf of the City Hall to boost road infrastructure and according to
   the general development plan, nearly 2000 roads are expected to be
   repaired by 2008.

   Bucharest is also a major intersection of Romania's national road
   network. It is the origin of most of the country's national roads and
   expressways, which link the city to all of Romania's major cities as
   well as to neighbouring countries such as Hungary, Bulgaria and
   Ukraine. Romania's two expressways currently in operation, the A1 and
   the A2, both start from Bucharest. The planned A3 and A4 freeways will
   also radiate from the Voluntari region in the city's northern
   outskirts.

   Although it is situated on the banks of a river, Bucharest has never
   functioned as a port city, with other Romanian cities such as Constanţa
   and Brăila acting as the country's main ports. However, the
   Danube-Bucharest Canal, which is 73 km long, is currently in
   construction and is around 60% completed. When finished, the canal will
   link Bucharest to the Danube River and, via the Danube-Black Sea Canal,
   to the Black Sea. This corridor is expected to be a significant
   component of the city's transport infrastructure and increase sea
   traffic by a large margin.

Culture

   Bucharest has a diverse and growing cultural scene, with cultural life
   exhibited in a number of various fields, including the visual arts,
   performing arts and nightlife. Unlike other parts of Romania, such as
   the Black Sea coast or Transylvania, Bucharest's cultural scene is much
   more eclectic, without a defined style, and instead incorporates
   various elements of Romanian and international culture.

Landmarks

   The Palace of the Parliament
   Enlarge
   The Palace of the Parliament

   Bucharest has a number of landmarks that are identified with it
   throughout the world. Perhaps the most prominent of these is the Palace
   of the Parliament, which was built in the 1980s during the reign of
   Communist dictator Nicolae Ceauşescu. Currently the largest building in
   Europe and the third-largest in the world, the Palace houses the
   Romanian Parliament (the Chamber of Deputies and Senate), as well as
   the National Museum of Contemporary Art. It is also often used as a
   convention centre.
   The Memorial of Rebirth
   Enlarge
   The Memorial of Rebirth

   Another well-known landmark of Bucharest is the Arcul de Triumf
   (Triumphal Arch), which was built in 1935 and was modelled after the
   Arc de Triomphe in Paris. A newer landmark of the city is the Memorial
   of Rebirth, a stylised marble pillar unveiled in 2005 to commemorate
   the victims of the Romanian Revolution of 1989, which overthrew
   Communism. The abstract monument sparked a great deal of controversy
   when it was unveiled, being dubbed with names such as "the toothpick
   and the olive," ("măslina-n scobitoare"), as many believed that it
   didn't symbolise the revolution well enough.

   Aside from these landmarks, Bucharest also has a number of cultural
   venues, mentioned below, that are often considered icons of the city,
   such as the Romanian Athaeneum.

Visual arts

                                     The National Museum of Art of Romania
                                                                   Enlarge
                                     The National Museum of Art of Romania

                                   The National Museum of Contemporary Art
                                                                   Enlarge
                                   The National Museum of Contemporary Art

                                                    The Romanian Athenaeum
                                                                   Enlarge
                                                    The Romanian Athenaeum

   In terms of visual arts, the city contains a number of museums
   featuring both classical and contemporary Romanian art, as well as
   selected international works. The National Museum of Art of Romania is
   perhaps the best-known of Bucharest museums. It is located in the
   former royal palace and features extensive collections of medieval and
   modern Romanian art, including works by renowned sculptor Constantin
   Brâncuşi, as well as a prominent international collection assembled by
   the former Romanian royal family.

   Other, smaller museums, contain more specialised collections of works.
   The Zambaccian Museum, which is situated in the former home of
   Armenian-Romanian art collector Krikor H. Zambaccian contains works by
   many well-known Romanian artists as well as international artists such
   as Paul Cézanne, Eugène Delacroix, Henri Matisse, Camille Pissarro and
   Pablo Picasso.

   The Gheorghe Tattarescu Museum contains portraits of Romanian
   revolutionaries in exile such as Gheorghe Magheru, Ştefan Golescu,
   Nicolae Bălcescu and allegorical compositions with revolutionary
   (Romania's rebirth, 1849) and patriotic (The Principalities'
   Unification, 1857) themes.
   George Ştefănescu : Gheorghe Tattarescu Museum
   Enlarge
   George Ştefănescu : Gheorghe Tattarescu Museum

   The Theodor Pallady Museum is situated in one of the oldest surviving
   merchant houses in Bucharest and includes many works by Romanian
   painter Theodor Pallady as well as a number of European and Oriental
   furniture pieces.

   The Museum of Art Collections contains the collections of a number of
   well-known Romanian art aficionados, including Krikor Zambaccian and
   Theodor Pallady.

   Despite the extensive classical art galleries and museums in the city,
   there is also a contemporary arts scene that has become increasingly
   prominent in recent times. The National Museum of Contemporary Art
   (MNAC), situated in a wing of the Palace of the Parliament, was opened
   in 2004 and contains a widespread collection of Romanian and
   international contemporary art, in a number of expressive forms. The
   MNAC also manages the Kalinderu MediaLab, which caters specifically to
   multimedia and experimental art. There is also a range of smaller,
   private art galleries throughout the city centre.

Performing arts

   Performing arts are one of the strongest cultural elements of
   Bucharest, and the city has a number of world-renowned facilities and
   institutions. The most prominent is the neoclassical Romanian
   Athenaeum, which was founded in 1852, hosts classical music concerts
   and is home to the " George Enescu" Philharmonic. Bucharest is also
   home to the Romanian National Opera, as well as the I.L. Caragiale
   National Theatre. Another well-known theatre in Bucharest is the State
   Jewish Theatre, which has gained increasing prominence in recent years
   due partly to the fact that it features plays starring world-renowned
   Romanian-Jewish actress Maia Morgenstern. There is also a large number
   of smaller theatres throughout the city that cater to specific genres,
   such as the Comedy Theatre, the Nottara Theatre, the Odeon Theatre, and
   the Constantin Tănase Revue Theatre.

Music and nightlife

   Space Club, Bucharest
   Enlarge
   Space Club, Bucharest

   Bucharest is home to Romania's largest recording labels, and is often
   the residence of Romanian, and more recently Moldovan, musicians. The
   city's music scene is quite eclectic. Many Romanian rock bands of the
   1970s and 1980s, such as Iris and Holograf, continue to be popular,
   particularly with the middle-aged, while since the 1990s there has been
   growth in the boy band and hip hop genres. The eclectic pop-rock band
   Taxi have been gaining international respect, as has Spitalul de
   Urgenţă's raucous updating of traditional Romanian music. While many
   discos play manele, a Turkish-influenced type of music that is
   particularly popular in Bucharest's working class districts, the city
   has an increasing jazz and blues scene, and, to an extent, eurodance/
   trance and heavy metal/ punk. The city's nightlife, particularly its
   club scene grew significantly in the 1990s, and continues to increase.
   The city does not have a central nightlife strip, with many
   entertainment venues dispersed throughout the city centre. One of the
   city's best known clubs is the Lăptăria Enache, located above the
   National Theatre, as well as Fire Club and Club A.

Traditional culture

   Bucharest's culture has, especially in the last 15 years, become more
   modern and wordly in comparison to other Romanian cities. Traditional
   Romanian culture, however, continues to have an influence in domains
   such as theatre and music. Additionally, Bucharest has two
   internationally-renowned ethnographic museums, the Museum of the
   Romanian Peasant and the open-air Village Museum. The Village Museum,
   in Herăstrău Park, contains 272 authentic buildings and peasant farms
   from all over Romania. The Museum of the Romanian Peasant was declared
   the European Museum of the Year in 1996, and displays a rich collection
   of textiles (especially costumes), icons, ceramics, and other artifacts
   of Romanian peasant life.

   The Museum of Romanian History is another important museum in
   Bucharest, containing a collection of artefacts detailing Romanian
   history and culture from the prehistoric times, Dacian era, medieval
   times and the modern era.

Cultural events and festivals

   A brightly-painted cow at the 2005 Bucharest CowParade
   Enlarge
   A brightly-painted cow at the 2005 Bucharest CowParade

   There are a number of cultural festivals in Bucharest throughout the
   year, in various domains, even though most festivals take place in the
   summer months of June, July and August. The National Opera organises
   the International Opera Festival every year in May and June, which
   includes ensembles and orchestras from all over the world. The Romanian
   Athaeneum Society hosts the George Enescu Classical Music Festival at
   various locations throughout the city in September every year.
   Additionally, the Museum of the Romanian Peasant and the Village Museum
   organise a number of events throughout the year showcasing Romanian
   folk arts and crafts. |} In recent years, due to the growing prominence
   of the Chinese community in Bucharest, several Chinese cultural events
   have taken place. The first officially-organised Chinese festival was
   the Chinese New Year's Eve Festival of February 2005 which took place
   in Nichita Stănescu Park and was organised by the Bucharest City Hall.
   In 2005, Bucharest was the first city in Southeastern Europe to host
   the international CowParade, which resulted in dozens of decorated cow
   sculptures being placed at various points across the city. Since 2005
   Bucharest has its own contemporary art biennale, the Bucharest
   Biennale. The current (2006) issue (curated by Zsolt Pétranyi) will go
   on until the end of June, the next edition will be in 2008.

   The 2000s also saw an increasing visibility of Bucharest gay culture,
   with the opening of the Queen's Club, the first LGBT club in the city,
   in 2001, and the launch of the annual Bucharest GayFest in 2004. The
   city's first gay pride parade was held as part of the 2005 GayFest.

Architecture

   Strada Şelari (Saddlemakers' Street) in Bucharest's historic Lipscani
   precinct
   Enlarge
   Strada Şelari (Saddlemakers' Street) in Bucharest's historic Lipscani
   precinct

   Bucharest's architecture is highly eclectic due to the many influences
   on the city throughout its history. The city centre is a mixture of
   medieval, classical and art deco buildings, utilitarian Communist-era
   architecture, as well as modern structures such as skyscrapers and
   office buildings that were mainly constructed after 2000.

Historical architecture

   Of the city's medieval architecture, most of what survived into modern
   times was destroyed by the Communists and replaced by high-rise
   apartment blocks. Still, some historical precincts remain, the most
   notable of which is the Lipscani area. This precinct contains buildings
   such as Manuc's Inn and the ruins of the Curtea Veche (the Old Court of
   the King), and during the Middle Ages was the heart of Bucharest's
   commercial world. From the 1970s onwards, the area went through urban
   decline, and many historical buildings fell into disrepair. In 2005,
   the Lipscani area was entirely pedestrianised and is currently
   undergoing restoration.
   The Creţulescu Palace
   Enlarge
   The Creţulescu Palace
   City-centre buildings constructed during the interwar period
   Enlarge
   City-centre buildings constructed during the interwar period

   The city centre has also retained architecture from the late 19th
   century and early 20th century, particularly the interwar period, which
   is often seen as the "golden age" of Bucharest architecture. During
   this time, the city grew significantly in size and sought to emulate
   other large European capitals such as Paris. Two notable buildings from
   this time are the Creţulescu Palace, currently housing cultural
   institutions including UNESCO's European Centre for Higher Education,
   and the Cotroceni Palace, the current residence of the Romanian
   President. Many large-scale constructions such as Gara de Nord, the
   main railway station, and the National Bank of Romania's headquarters,
   date from these times. In the 2000s, a wide variety of historic
   buildings in the city centre underwent restoration. In some residential
   areas of the city, particularly the high-income northern suburbs, there
   are many turn-of-the-century villas, most of which were restored after
   2000.

Communist architecture

   Post World War II apartment buildings (blocuri)
   Enlarge
   Post World War II apartment buildings (blocuri)

   A major part of Bucharest's architecture is made up of buildings
   constructed during the Communist era replacing the historical
   arhitecture with "more efficient" high density apartment blocks. In
   Nicolae Ceauşescu's project of systematization many new buildings were
   built in previously-historical areas, which were razed and then built
   upon from scratch. One of the best examples of this type of
   architecture is Centrul Civic, a development that replaced a major part
   of Bucharest's historic city centre with giant utilitarian buildings,
   mainly with marble or travertine façades, inspired by North Korean
   architecture. Communist-era architecture can also be found in
   Bucharest's residential districts, mainly in blocuri, which are
   high-density apartment blocks that house the majority of the city's
   population.
   The area of Centrul Civic
   Enlarge
   The area of Centrul Civic

   Since the fall of Communism in 1989, several Communist-era buildings
   have been refurbished, modernised and used for other purposes. Perhaps
   the best example of this is the conversion of several agro-alimentary
   complexes into shopping malls and commercial centres. These giant
   circular halls, which were most often known as hunger circuses due to
   the food shortages experienced in the 1980s, were constructed during
   the Ceauşescu era to act as produce markets and refectories, although
   most were left unfinished at the time of the Revolution. Modern
   shopping malls like Bucharest Mall, Plaza Romania and City Mall emerged
   on pre-existent structures of former hunger circuses. Another example
   is the modernisation and conversion of a large utilitarian construction
   in Centrul Civic into a Marriott Hotel. This process was accelerated
   after 2000, when the city underwent a property boom, and many
   Communist-era buildings in the city centre became prime real estate due
   to their location. For example, a tram depot built during the Communist
   times was converted into a new shopping mall, the Anador Commercial
   Centre, which opened in 2005. In recent years, many Communist-era
   apartment blocks have also been refurbished to improve the city's urban
   appearance.

Modern architecture

   The headquarters of the Romanian Architects' Association, built on the
   ruins of the Direcţia V Securitate
   Enlarge
   The headquarters of the Romanian Architects' Association, built on the
   ruins of the Direcţia V Securitate
   Bank tower
   Enlarge
   Bank tower

   The newest contribution to Bucharest's architecture took place after
   the fall of Communism, and particularly after 2000, when the city went
   through a period of urban renewal – and architectural revitalisation –
   on the back of Romania's economic boom. Buildings from this time are
   mostly made out of glass and steel, and often have more than fifteen
   storeys. Examples include shopping malls (particularly the Bucharest
   Mall, a conversion and extension of a "hunger circus"), office
   buildings, bank headquarters, the Bucharest World Trade Centre and the
   Chamber of Commerce, which lies on the banks of the Dâmboviţa. As of
   2005, there is a significant number of office buildings in
   construction, particularly in the northern and eastern parts of the
   city. Additionally, there has been a trend in recent years to add
   modern wings and façades to historic buildings, the most prominent
   example of which is the Bucharest Architects' Association Building,
   which is a modern glass-and-steel construction built inside a historic
   stone façade. Aside from buildings used for business and institutions,
   various new residential developments are currently underway, many of
   which consist of modern high-rise buildings with a glass exterior,
   surrounded by American-style residential communities. These
   developments are increasingly prominent in the northern suburbs of the
   city, which are less densely-populated and are home to middle- and
   upper-class Bucharesters due to the process of gentrification.

                         Various Places in Bucharest

   Panoramic view of The Nicolae Bălcescu Boulevard in Bucharest.

   Lipscani district rooftops

   A Panoramic view of the Palace of the Parliament and around it.

   Fountains of Piaţa Unirii with a view towards the Palace of the
   Parliament

   Arcul de Triumf The romanian Triumph Arc established in Bucharest.

   University

   Pasajul Macca-Vilacrosse

   The Unirii Square and a view towards the Palace of the Parliament

   The Unirii Square Fountain

   Odeon Theatre near The University square

   1930s era apartment building in Str. George Vraca

   Lipscani district (old city) Street.

   Office building near Charles de Gaulle square.

   Magheru Boulevard.

   Bucharest at night.

   Magheru Boulevard.

   Shop galleries building.

   Chamber of Commerce by night

   Calea Victoriei area.

   Constitution Square, from the main balcony of the Palace of the
   Parliament.

   Aerial view of Bucharest.

   Aerial view of Bucharest.

Sports

   Football (soccer) is the most widely-followed sport in Bucharest, with
   the city having various club teams that are known throughout Europe.
   Five football teams of Bucharest participate in Liga 1 (League 1), old
   named Divizia A, the top division in the Romanian football league:
   Club Founded Stadium Notes
   Sportul Studenţesc 1916 Regie Stadium Oldest team in Bucharest (Now
   playing in 2nd League (2006-2007 Championship)
   FC Rapid 1923 Giuleşti Stadium Quarter-Finalist in 2005-2006 season of
   Uefa Cup (the best performance in club's history)
   FC Naţional 1944 Cotroceni Stadium
   FC Steaua 1947 Ghencea Stadium Winner of the 1986 European Champion
   Clubs Cup and European Super Cup
   FC Dinamo 1948 Dinamo Stadium
   The National Stadium, Bucharest
   Enlarge
   The National Stadium, Bucharest

   The Lia Manoliu Stadium is the largest stadium in Romania. Also there
   are sport centers, like Dinamo Sports Park and the National Sports
   Centre.

   There are also a number of sport clubs for ice hockey, rugby union,
   basketball, handball, water polo and volleyball. The majority of
   Romanian track and field athletes, boxers, and a great number of
   gymnasts are affiliated with clubs in Bucharest. The Athletics and many
   Gymnastics National Championships are held in Bucharest, one main
   reason being the city's extensive sporting infrastructure.

   Every autumn, Bucharest hosts BCR Open Romania international tennis
   tournament, which is included in the ATP Tour. Also, the Romanian Davis
   Cup Team usually plays its matches in Bucharest, either outdoors at the
   BNR Arena or indoor at the Sala Polivalentă.

   For the 2007 season, Bucharest will host a round of the FIA GT
   Championship at the new Bucharest Ring, on May 20.

Portrayal in film and fiction

     * The American novel The Historian by Elizabeth Kostova focuses on
       Romanian history and the story of Dracula, following one of the
       main characters who travels to Bucharest and Romania during the
       1930s.
     * The American-produced Romanian-language documentary Children
       Underground (2000) portrays the lives of homeless children in
       Bucharest.
     * The Romanian-language film Filantropica ("Philanthropy", 2002)
       gives a satiric portrayal of the city and of many strata of its
       life.
     * The English-language film The Wild Dogs (2002) gives a more
       uniformly bleak portrait of the city.
     * The English-dubbed film Entre chiens et loups (2002) features
       various parts of the city, suburbs & nite-spots as a backdrop to a
       French action movie.
     * Wesley Snipes starred in 7 Seconds (2005), an action flick filmed
       entirely on location in Bucharest. The film features the city's
       varied architecture.
     * Historic Communist Bucharest was depicted in Jack Chick's first
       comic book, "Operation Bucharest", first published in 1974. It is
       loosely based on a Baptist Ministry called "Couriers For Christ"
       based there.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bucharest"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
