   #copyright

Budapest

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: European Geography

                          Budapest

   Official flag of Budapest

                            Official seal of Budapest
   Flag                     Seal
               Nickname: "Paris of the East",
   "Pearl of the Danube"
   or "Queen of the Danube"
   Location of Budapest in Hungary
   Location of Budapest in Hungary
       Country      Hungary
        County      Pest
        Mayor       Gábor Demszky ( SZDSZ)
         Area
        - City      525,16 km²
        - Land      n/a km²
        - Water     n/a km²
      Population
     - City (2006)  1,695,000
       - Density    3570/km²
      Time zone     CET ( UTC+1)
    - Summer ( DST) CEST ( UTC+2)
                    Website: budapest.hu
   Budapest seen from the Gellért Hill
   Enlarge
   Budapest seen from the Gellért Hill

   Budapest ( pronounced [ˈbʊdɑpɛʃt]) is the capital city of Hungary and
   the country's principal political, cultural, commercial, industrial and
   transportation centre.

   Budapest has approximately 1.7 million inhabitants, down from a mid-
   1980s peak of 2.1 million. Budapest became a single city occupying both
   banks of the river Danube with the amalgamation on 17 November 1873 of
   right-bank (west) Buda (Ofen in German) and Óbuda (Old Buda or
   Alt-Ofen) together with Pest on the left (east) bank. It is the seventh
   largest city in the European Union.

History

   Budapest's recorded history begins with the Roman town of Aquincum,
   founded around AD 89 on the site of an earlier Celtic settlement near
   what was to become Óbuda, and from 106 until the end of the 4th century
   the capital of the province of lower Pannonia. Aquincum was the base
   camp of Legio II Adiutrix. The area of Campona (today's Nagytétény)
   belongs to Buda as well. Today's Pest became the site of Contra
   Aquincum (or Trans Aquincum), a smaller sentry point. The word Pest (or
   Peshta) is thought to originate from the Bolgar language, (thought to
   be a Turkic language, not related to modern Bulgarian, which is a
   Slavic language) because at the time of the reign of the Bulgarian Khan
   Krum (approximately 796- 814), the town was under Bulgar dominion. The
   area then became a homeland for the Avars and some Slavic peoples.
   Mátyás Templom, called Matthias Church in English
   Enlarge
   Mátyás Templom, called Matthias Church in English

   The area was occupied around the year 900 by the Magyars of Central
   Asia, the cultural and linguistic ancestors of today's ethnic
   Hungarians, who a century later officially founded the Kingdom of
   Hungary. Already a place of some significance, Pest recovered rapidly
   from its destruction by Mongol invaders in 1241, but it was Buda, the
   seat of a royal castle since 1247, which in 1361 became the capital of
   Hungary.

   The Ottoman Empire's conquest of most of Hungary in the 16th century
   interrupted the cities' growth: Buda and Pest fell to the invaders in
   1541. While Buda remained the seat of a Turkish pasha, and
   administrative centre of a whole vilayet, Pest was largely derelict by
   the time of their recapture in 1686 by Austria's Habsburg rulers, who
   since 1526 had been Kings of Hungary despite their loss of most of the
   country.

   It was Pest, a bustling commercial town, which enjoyed the faster
   growth rate in the 18th and 19th century and contributed the
   overwhelming majority of the cities' combined growth in the 19th. By
   1800 its population was larger than that of Buda and Óbuda combined.
   The population of Pest grew twenty-fold in the following century to
   600,000, while that of Buda and Óbuda quintupled. The fusion of the
   three cities under a single administration, first enacted by the
   Hungarian revolutionary government in 1849 but revoked on the
   subsequent restoration of Habsburg authority, was finally effected by
   the autonomous Hungarian royal government established under the
   Austro-Hungarian Ausgleich ("Compromise") of 1867; see Austria-Hungary.
   The total population of the unified capital grew nearly sevenfold in
   1840– 1900 to 730,000.
   The Royal Castle
   Enlarge
   The Royal Castle

   During the 20th century, most population growth occurred in the
   suburbs, with Újpest more than doubling between 1890– 1910 and Kispest
   more than quintupling in 1900– 1920, as much of the country's industry
   came to be concentrated in the city. The country's human losses during
   World War I and the subsequent loss of more than two thirds of the
   former kingdom's territory (1920) dealt only a temporary blow, leaving
   Budapest as the capital of a smaller but now sovereign state. By 1930
   the city proper contained a million inhabitants, with a further 400,000
   in the suburbs.

   Towards the end of World War II in 1944 Budapest was partly destroyed
   by British and American air raids. The following siege lasted from
   December 24 1944 to February 13 1945, and major damage was caused by
   the attacking Soviet and defending German and Hungarian troops. All
   bridges were disrupted by the Germans. More than 38,000 civilians lost
   their lives during the fighting. Between 20% and 40% of Greater
   Budapest's 250,000 Jewish inhabitants died through Nazi and Arrow Cross
   genocide during 1944 and early 1945. , Despite this, Budapest today has
   the highest number of Jewish citizens per capita of any European city.

   On January 1, 1950, the area of Budapest was significantly expanded:
   new districts were formed from the neighbouring cities and towns (see
   Greater Budapest). From the severe damage during the Soviet siege in
   1944, the city recovered in the 1950s and 1960s, becoming to some
   extent a showcase for the more pragmatic policies pursued by the
   country's communist government ( 1947– 1989) from the 1960s. Since the
   1980s, the capital has shared with the country as a whole in increased
   emigration (mostly to the agglomeration) coupled with natural
   population decrease.

Demographic history

   Population Graph

   Population:
     * 1800: 54,200
     * 1830: 102,700
     * 1850: 178,000
     * 1880: 370,800
     * 1900: 733,400
     * 1910: 882,000
     * 1925: 957,800
     * 1990: 2,016,100
     * 2003: 1,719,343

Politics

   Budapest is the centre of all political affairs, with most countries'
   embassies located in the city. – It has recently been the location of
   protests and violent riots, see 2006 protests in Hungary.

Districts

   The District Map of Budapest
   Enlarge
   The District Map of Budapest

   Originally Budapest had 10 districts after coming into existence upon
   the unification of the three cities in 1873. On 1 January 1950 Budapest
   was united with several neighboring towns and the number of its
   districts was raised to 22. At that time there were changes both in the
   order of districts and in their sizes. Now there are 23 districts, 6 in
   Buda, 16 in Pest and 1 on Csepel island between them. Each district can
   be associated with one or more city parts named after former towns
   within Budapest.

Islands

   Seven islands can be found on the Danube: Hajógyári sziget (literal
   translation: Shipyard Island), Margitsziget (Margaret Island), and
   Csepel sziget (this island is a separate district of Budapest, the
   XXI., while the other islands are parts of other districts, the III.
   and XIII. respectively), Palotai-sziget (in fact, it's a peninsula
   today), Népsziget (connected to the above, but mostly surrounded by
   water), Háros-sziget and Molnár-sziget.

   Notable islands:
   Margaret Island (Margitsziget)
   Enlarge
   Margaret Island (Margitsziget)
     * Margitsziget is a 2.5 km long island (and 0.965 km² in area) The
       island mostly consists of a park and is a popular recreational area
       for tourists and locals alike. The island lies between bridges
       Margaret Bridge (south) and Árpád Bridge (north). Dance clubs,
       Swimming pools, an Aqua park, athletic and fitness centers, bicycle
       and running tracks can be found around the Island. During the day
       the island is occupied by people doing sports, or just resting. In
       the summer (generally on the weekends) mostly young people go to
       the island at night to party in its terraces, or to just 'chill'
       with a bottle of alcohol on a bench or on a grass (this form of
       entertainment is sometimes referred to as bench-partying)
     * The Csepel-sziget (pronounced CHE-pel see-get) or Csepel Island is
       the largest island of the River Danube in Hungary. It is 48 km
       long; its width is 6-8 km and its area comprises 257 km², whereas
       only the northern tip is inside the city limits.
     * Hajógyári-sziget (or Óbudai-sziget) is a man built island, located
       in the third district. This island hosts many activities such as:
       wake-boarding, jet-skiing during the day, and dance clubs during
       the night. This is the island where the famous Sziget Festival
       takes place, hosting hundreds of performances per year and now
       around 400,000 visitors in its last edition. Many building projects
       are taking place to make this island into one of the biggest
       entertainment centers of Europe, the plan is to build Apartment
       buildings, hotels, casinos and a marina.
     * Luppa-sziget is the smallest island of Budapest, located in the
       north region.

Landmarks and monuments

   Budapst in the night

          (The below sights are grouped by location.)

   St. Stephen's Basilica, Pest
   Enlarge
   St. Stephen's Basilica, Pest
   Museum of Fine Arts
   Enlarge
   Museum of Fine Arts
   Andrássy Avenue
   Enlarge
   Andrássy Avenue
     * Andrássy Avenue with its several sights including the State Opera
       House, the Pest Broadway and the House of Terror
     * Buda Castle with the Royal Palace, the Funicular, Hungarian
       National Gallery and National Széchényi Library, Matthias Church,
       Holy Trinity Column (a plague column) and Fisherman's Bastion
     * City Park with Széchenyi Medicinal Bath, Vajdahunyad Castle, the
       Timewheel, the Zoo, the Municipal Grand Circus and the Amusement
       Park
     * Danube Promenade (Duna-korzó) with Vigadó Concert Hall
     * Ferenciek tere with Paris Courtyard and Erzsébet Bridge with Inner
       City Parish Church nearby
     * Franz Liszt Academy of Music
     * Gellért Baths, Gellért Hill with Gellért Statue, Cave Church and
       Citadel with Liberty Statue
     * Geological Museum
     * Great Market Hall and Liberty Bridge
     * Heroes' Square with the Millenary Monument, the Palace of Art and
       the Museum of Fine Arts
     * Margaret Island with the Centennial Memorial, a Japanese garden, a
       Musical Fountain, several recreation facilities and Franciscan,
       Dominican and Premonstratensian ruins from the Middle Ages
     * Museum of Applied Arts
     * National Museum
     * New York Café
     * Dohány Street Synagogue with the Holocaust Memorial ( weeping
       willow statue)
     * Óbuda
     * Palace of Arts and National Theatre
     * Parliament Building with King Stephen's crown and sceptre, Kossuth
       Memorial, Ethnographical Museum, Attila József statue, Imre Nagy
       statue
     * Saint Stephen's Basilica
     * Statue Park
     * Széchenyi Chain Bridge, Academy of Sciences and Gresham Palace
     * Tomb of Gül Baba
     * Váci Street and Vörösmarty Square
     * Western Railway Station

Tourism

   Budapest Market Hall

   A cow at the 2006 Cow Parade

   Heroes' Square

   The Parliament

   St. Stephen Basilica

   House of Terror

   Széchenyi Chain Bridge

Shopping

   Váci Street (The main shopping street) in Christmas decoration
   Enlarge
   Váci Street (The main shopping street) in Christmas decoration

   Budapest has the most shopping centers in Europe, including WestEnd
   City Centre, the largest shopping centre in Central and Eastern Europe,
   and the biggest Tesco and Auchan hypermarkets in the world. The Great
   Market Hall is a large indoor market and a major tourist attraction.

   All luxurious brands can be found, on the high streets, such as
   Andrássy Avenue and Váci utca.

Transport

Airport

   Budapest Ferihegy International Airport, which has 3 different
   passenger terminals: Ferihegy 1, which tends to serve the many discount
   airlines now flying to and from Budapest, Ferihegy 2/A and Ferihegy
   2/B. Terminal 2/C is planned to be built. The airport is located to the
   east of the centre in the XVIII. district in Pestszentlőrinc. Malév
   (Hungarian Airlines) began to change its aircraft in 2003, and by 2005
   owned the most modern fleet in Europe.

Roads

   Budapest is the most important Hungarian road terminus; all the major
   highways end there. Between 1990-1994, the city Street names were
   reverted from the names given under Soviet occupation back to their
   late-19th century names. Budapest is also a major railway terminus.
   Budapest Keleti (Eastern) Railway Station
   Enlarge
   Budapest Keleti (Eastern) Railway Station
   Line 4-6's new tram on a test run (line 1)
   Enlarge
   Line 4-6's new tram on a test run (line 1)
   Budapest Funicular
   Enlarge
   Budapest Funicular

Commuting with public transport

   Budapest public transport is mainly provided by BKV, the company
   operates Buses, Trolley Buses, Trams, Suburban Railway lines, the
   Metro, Boats and many other special vehicles. Budapest's tramline is
   the busiest traditional city tram line in the world, with 50-metre long
   trains running at 60 to 90 second intervals at peak time and usually
   packed with people. Night traffic service is outstandingly good.

Special vehicles

   Beside metros, suburban rails, buses, trams and boats, there are a
   couple of less usual vehicles in Budapest:
     * trolleybus (trolibusz) on several lines in Pest
     * funicular (sikló) between the Chain Bridge and Buda Castle
     * cyclecar (bringóhintó) for rent in Margaret Island
     * chairlift (libegő)
     * cog-wheel railway (fogaskerekű vasút)
     * children's railway (gyermekvasút)

   The latter three vehicles run among Buda hills.
   Trolley-bus
   Enlarge
   Trolley-bus

Railway

   Main articles: MÁV, HÉV Hungarian main-line railways are operated by
   MÁV. There are three main railway termini in Budapest, Keleti
   (eastern), Nyugati (western), and Déli (southern), operating both
   domestic and international rail services. Budapest was one of the main
   stops of the Orient Express until 2001, when the service was cut back
   to Paris-Vienna.

   There is also a suburban rail service in and around Budapest, operated
   under the name HÉV.

Waterways

   The river Danube flows through Budapest on its way to the Black Sea.
   The river is easily navigable and so Budapest has historically been a
   major commercial port (at Csepel).

International schools

   Many embassies and transnational companies are located in Budapest.
   They bring many expatriate foreigners and their families to town,
   creating demand for private and international schools. These schools
   are usually quite expensive and are attended by the expatriates as well
   as some richer Hungarians.

   List of international schools:
     * American International School of Budapest - Homepage
     * International School of Budapest - Homepage
     * International Christian School of Budapest - Homepage
     * Greater Grace International School - Homepage
     * British International School, Budapest - Homepage
     * Budapest University of Technology and Economy International
       Secondary School - Homepage
     * Britannica International School - Homepage
     * SEK International School Budapest - Homepage
     * McDaniel College Budapest - Homepage
     * Lauder Javne Jewish Community School and Kindergarten - Homepage
     * Budapest French School (Lycée Gustave Eiffel) - Homepage
     * Austrian-Hungarian European School - Homepage
     * Thomas Mann Gymnasium / Deutsche Schule Budapest - Homepage
     * Japanese School of Budapest - Homepage

Notable people from Budapest

     * Franz Xaver von Zach 1754 born in Pest, astronomer
     * Ignaz Semmelweis (Semmelweis Ignác Fülöp) born 1818 in Buda,
       physician
     * Árpád Doppler born in 1857 in Budapest, composer
     * Theodor Herzl born in 1860 in Budapest, journalist and founder of
       modern political Zionism
     * Theodore von Karman born in 1881 in Budapest, pioneer of modern
       aerodynamics and fluid dynamics
     * George de Hevesy (Hevesy György) born in 1885 in Budapest, Nobel
       Prize winner in chemistry (1943)
     * Georg Lukács (Lukács György) born in 1885 in Budapest, philosopher
     * Michael Curtiz (Kaminer Manó Kertész) born in 1886 in Budapest,
       film director, among other things directed "Casablanca"
     * Fritz Reiner born in 1888 in Budapest, conductor
     * Albert von Szent-Györgyi Nagyrapolt born in 1893 in Budapest, Nobel
       Prize winner biologist, first isolated and described the vitamin C
     * Karl Mannheim (Mannheim Károly) in 1893 in Budapest, philosopher
     * George Szell (Széll György) born in 1897 in Budapest, conductor
     * Leó Szilárd born in 1898 in Budapest, developed the nuclear bomb
     * Béla Bartók lived from 1899 to 1940 in Budapest, composer
     * László József Bíró born in 1899 in Budapest, developed the biro
     * Edward Teller (Teller Ede) born in 1908 in Budapest, "father of the
       hydrogen bomb" nuclear physicist
     * Sir Georg Solti (Stern György) born in 1912 in Budapest, conductor
     * Amrita Sher-Gil born in 1913 in Budapest, painter
     * László Papp born in 1926 in Budapest, boxer
     * Ferenc Puskás born in 1927 in Budapest, football player
     * Tom Lantos (Lantos Tamás Péter) born in 1928 in Budapest, US
       Congressman
     * Imre Kertész born in 1929 in Budapest, author, Nobel Prize 2002
     * István Kertész born in 1929 in Budapest, conductor
     * George Soros (Soros György) born in 1930 in Budapest
     * Andy Grove (Gróf András István) born in 1936 in Budapest, founder
       of Intel Corporation
     * Ernő Rubik born in 1944 in Budapest, developed Rubik's Cube
     * Péter Esterházy born in 1950 in Budapest, author
     * János Sebestyén born in 1931 in Budapest, organist and
       harpsichordist
     * Zoltán Kocsis born in 1952 in Budapest, pianist
     * Zoltán Kodály lived and died 1967 in Budapest, composer
     * Pál Erdős born in 1913 in Budapest, mathematician
     * Robert Capa born 1913, grew up in Budapest, reporter, photographer
     * Eugene Wigner "the silent genius" born and raised in Budapest, was
       a Hungarian physicist and mathematician who received the Nobel
       Prize in Physics in 1963
     * John von Neumann Hungarian mathematician and polymath who made
       contributions to quantum physics, functional analysis, set theory,
       economics, computer science, topology, numerical analysis,
       hydrodynamics (of explosions), statistics and many other
       mathematical fields as one of world history's outstanding
       mathematicians.

Sister cities

     * Germany Berlin, Germany (1992)
     * United States Fort Worth, United States (1990)
     * Germany Frankfurt, Germany (1990)
     * Slovakia Košice, Slovakia
     * Portugal Lisbon, Portugal (1992)
     * United States New York City, United States (1991)

     * Bosnia and Herzegovina Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina (1995)
     * Israel Tel Aviv, Israel (1989)
     * Austria Vienna, Austria (1990)
     * Lithuania Vilnius, Lithuania
     * Croatia Zagreb, Croatia (1994)
     * Republic of Ireland Dublin, Ireland (2006)
     * Turkey Istanbul, Turkey

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Budapest"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
