   #copyright

Bulgaria

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; European
Countries

   SOS Children works in Bulgaria. For more information see SOS Children
   in Bulgaria
   Република България
   Republika Balgaria
   Republic of Bulgaria

   Flag of Bulgaria Coat of arms of Bulgaria
   Flag             Coat of arms
   Motto: Bulgarian: Съединението прави силата
   (English: "Unity Makes Strength")
   Anthem: Mila Rodino
   ("Dear Motherland")
   Location of Bulgaria
   Capital   Sofia
   42°41′N 23°19′E
   Largest city Sofia
   Official languages Bulgarian
   Government Parliamentary democracy
    - President Georgi Parvanov
    - Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev
   Independence From the Ottoman Empire
    - Founded 681
    - Christianized 865
    - Gained autonomy March 3, 1878
    - Declared October 5, 1908
   (September 22 O.S.)
   Accession to EU January 1, 2007
   Area
    - Total 110,912 km² ( 104th)
   42,823 sq mi
    - Water (%) 0.3%
   Population
    - 2005 estimate 7,726,000 ( 93rd)
    - 2001 census 7,932,984
    - Density 70/km² ( 124th)
   181/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total $71.235 billion ( 66th)
    - Per capita $9,600 ( 66th)
   HDI  (2004) 0.816 (high) ( 54th)
   Currency Lev ( BGN)
   Time zone EET ( UTC+2)
    - Summer ( DST) EEST ( UTC+3)
   Internet TLD .bg
   Calling code +359

   Bulgaria ( Bulgarian: България, IPA: [bɤlˈgarijə]), officially the
   Republic of Bulgaria ( Bulgarian: Република България, IPA: [rɛˈpubliˌkə
   bɤlˈgarijə]), is a country in Southeastern Europe, and the oldest
   contemporary country in Europe. It borders the Black Sea to the east,
   Greece and Turkey to the south, Serbia and the Republic of Macedonia to
   the west, and Romania to the north, mostly along the Danube.

   Bulgaria is an active member of NATO and is joining the European Union
   on January 1, 2007. The country has been a member of the United Nations
   since 1955, and is a founding member of the OSCE. As a Consultative
   Party to the Antarctic Treaty, Bulgaria takes part in the governing of
   the territories situated south of 60° south latitude.

History

   The Panagyuriste Thracian gold treasure
   Enlarge
   The Panagyuriste Thracian gold treasure

   The Thracians were an ancient people who inhabited what is now
   Bulgaria. They were divided in numerous tribes until king Teres united
   most of them in a single state around 500 BC. This kingdom was called
   the Odrysian state and reached its peak under the kings Sitalkes and
   Cotys I (383-359 BC). In 341 BC it was destroyed by the Macedonian
   state but rose from its ashes at the end of the 4th century BC under
   Seuthes III. In 188 BC the Romans invaded Thrace and the wars with them
   continued to AD 45, when it became a Roman Province.

   The Thracians did not have writing and now their legacy survives mainly
   in the numerous treasures and tombs they left. It is believed that the
   oldest golden treasure - the one of Varna, which is 6,500 years old, is
   Thracian-made. One of the most talented ancient commanders, Spartacus,
   was a Thracian born in the Rhodope Mountains.

   In the late 7th century a branch of the Bulgars led by Khan Asparuh
   migrated into the northern Balkans, where they merged with the local
   Slavic and Thracian population to form the First Bulgarian Empire in AD
   681. In 717 the Bulgarians helped relieve the Arab siege of
   Constantinople, killing some 40,000-60,000 soldiers. Their khan Tervel
   was called by his contemporaries The Saviour of Europe. In 864 Bulgaria
   accepted the Orthodox Faith and became a major European power in the
   9th and the 10th century, while fighting with the Byzantine Empire for
   the control of the Balkans. The greatest territorial extension was
   reached under Simeon I, the first Tsar, covering much of the Balkans
   and modern-day Romania. Following a decline in the middle of the 10th
   century the Bulgarian state was crushed by an assault by the Rus' in
   969. The Byzantines then began campaigns to conquer Bulgaria. In 971
   they seized the capital Preslav and captured emperor Boris II. The
   resistance continued in the western Bulgarian lands for nearly half a
   century until the state was completely destroyed by the Byzantines led
   by Basil II in 1018.

   In 1185 the Bulgarian Empire was reestabilished under the Asenevtsi
   Dynasty and continued to be an important power in Europe for two more
   centuries, while fighting for dominance in the region with the
   Byzantine Empire, the Crusader states and Hungary, reaching its zenith
   under Ivan Asen II (1218-1241). By the end of the 14th century the
   country had disintegrated into several feudal principalities and was
   eventually conquered by the Ottoman Empire. A Polish-Hungarian crusade
   under the rule of Władysław III of Poland to free the Balkans was
   crushed in 1444 in the battle of Varna.

   The 5-century period of Ottoman rule was characterized by great
   violence and oppression. The Bulgarian population was decimated and
   most of its cultural relics were lost. Large towns and the areas where
   Ottoman power was strong were severely depopulated until the 19th
   century.

   Following the Russo-Turkish War, 1877-78 and the Treaty of San Stefano
   of March 3, 1878, an autonomous Bulgarian principality was proclaimed.
   The treaty was immediately rejected by the Great Powers for fear that a
   large Slavic country on the Balkans would serve Russian interests. This
   led to the Treaty of Berlin (1878) which provided for an autonomous
   Bulgarian principality comprising Moesia and the region of Sofia. The
   first Bulgarian prince was Alexander Battenberg. Most of Thrace was
   included in the autonomous region of Eastern Rumelia, whereas the rest
   of Thrace along with the whole of Macedonia was returned under the
   sovereignty of the Ottomans. After uniting with Eastern Rumelia in 1885
   (following the Serbo-Bulgarian War), the principality was proclaimed a
   fully independent kingdom in 1908. This happened during the reign of
   Ferdinand I of Bulgaria.
   Tarnovo, the capital of the Second Bulgarian Empire (1185-1393)
   Enlarge
   Tarnovo, the capital of the Second Bulgarian Empire (1185-1393)

   He became the Bulgarian prince after Alexander Battenberg abdicated in
   1886 following a coup d'etat staged by pro-Russian army officers.
   (Although the counter coup d'etat coordinated by Stefan Stambolov was
   successful, Alexander Battenberg could not remain Bulgarian prince
   without the approval of the Russian emperor Alexander III.) The
   struggle for liberation of the Bulgarians in the Adrianople Vilayet and
   Macedonia continued throughout the end of the 19th and the beginning of
   the 20th century culminating with the Ilinden-Preobrazhenie Uprising
   organised by the IMARO in 1903.

   In 1912 and 1913 Bulgaria became involved in the Balkan Wars, entering
   into conflict with Greece and Serbia against the Ottoman Empire and
   then against its former Balkan allies in desperate effort to achieve
   its national unity. After being defeated in the Second Balkan War,
   Bulgaria lost most of the territory conquered in the first war, as well
   as Southern Dobruja. During World War I, Bulgaria found itself fighting
   on the losing side after its alliance with the Central Powers. The
   defeat led to new territorial losses (the Western Outlands to Serbia,
   Western Thrace to Greece and the re-conquered Southern Dobruja to
   Romania. The Balkan Wars and World War I led to the influx of over
   250,000 Bulgarian refugees from Macedonia, Eastern and Western Thrace
   and Southern Dobruja.
   Euxinograd, once a summer palace of the Bulgarian tsars
   Enlarge
   Euxinograd, once a summer palace of the Bulgarian tsars

   These numbers increased in the 1930s following Serbian state-sponsored
   aggression against its native Bulgarian population. After regaining
   control over Southern Dobruja in 1940, Bulgaria allied with the Axis
   Powers in World War II, although no Bulgarian soldiers participated in
   the war against the USSR. During this time the country occupied parts
   of Greece and Yugoslavia inhabited mostly by Bulgarians. Bulgaria was
   the one of two countries (another one being Finland) that saved its
   entire Jewish population (around 50,000) from the Nazi camps by
   refusing to comply with a 31 August 1943 resolution. However, Jews in
   newly acquired territories from Greece and Yugoslavia were sent to
   death camps by the Bulgarian authorities on German request. In
   September the Soviet army entered into Bulgaria which later enabled the
   Bulgarian Communists to seize power and establish a Communist
   dictatorship. Bulgaria had to fight against Germany (initially with a
   450 000 strong army in 1944, reduced to 130 000 in 1945). More than
   30,000 Bulgarian soldiers and officers were killed in the war.

   Bulgaria fell within the Soviet sphere of influence after World War II,
   became a People's Republic in 1946 and one of the USSR's staunchest
   allies. In the late 1970s it began normalizing its relations with
   Greece and in the 1990s with Turkey. The People's Republic ended in
   1989 as many Communist regimes in Eastern Europe, as well as the Soviet
   Union itself, began to collapse (the Bulgarian Communist leader Todor
   Zhivkov was removed from power on 10 November 1989). Bulgaria again
   held multiparty elections and privatized its economy, but economic
   difficulties and a tide of corruption led over 800,000 Bulgarians, most
   of them qualified professionals, to emigrate.

   Bulgaria joined NATO on 29 March 2004 and is set to join the European
   Union on 1 January 2007 after signing the Treaty of Accession on 25
   April 2005.

Politics

   Central Sofia with the National Assembly of Bulgaria edifice in the
   middle
   Enlarge
   Central Sofia with the National Assembly of Bulgaria edifice in the
   middle

   The president of Bulgaria ( Georgi Parvanov since 22 January 2002 was
   re-elected for a second mandate on 29 October 2006 and will enter on
   his duties in January 2007 for the next five years) is directly elected
   for a 5-year term with the right to one re-election. The president
   serves as the head of state and commander in chief of the armed forces.
   The president is the head of the Consultative Council for National
   Security and while unable to initiate legislation, the President can
   return a bill for further debate, though parliament can overturn the
   president's veto with a simple majority vote.

   The Council of Ministers is chaired by the PM ( Sergey Stanishev since
   18 August 2005), and is the principal body of the Executive Branch and
   presently consists of 20 ministers. The Prime Minister is nominated by
   the largest parliamentary group and is given a mandate by the President
   to form a cabinet.

   The current governmental coalition is made of the Bulgarian Socialist
   Party (BSP), National Movement Simeon II ( NMS) and the Movement for
   Rights and Freedoms (representing mainly the Turkish minority).

   The Bulgarian unicameral parliament, the National Assembly or Narodno
   Sabranie, consists of 240 deputies who are elected for 4-year-terms by
   popular vote. The votes are for party or coalition lists of candidates
   for each of the twenty-eight administrative divisions. A party or
   coalition must garner a minimum of 4% of the vote in order to enter
   parliament. Parliament is responsible for enactment of laws, approval
   of the budget, scheduling of presidential elections, selection and
   dismissal of the prime minister and other ministers, declaration of
   war, deployment of troops outside of Bulgaria, and ratification of
   international treaties and agreements.

   The last elections took place on June 2005. The next elections are
   planned for summer 2009.

   The Bulgarian judicial system consists of regional, district and appeal
   courts, as well as a Supreme Court of Cassation. In addition, there is
   a Supreme Administrative Court and a system of military courts. The
   Presidents of the Supreme Court of Cassation, Supreme Administrative
   Court and the Prosecutor General are elected by a qualified majority of
   two-thirds from all the members of the Supreme Judicial Council and are
   appointed by the President of the Republic. The Supreme Judicial
   Council is in charge of the self-administration and organisation of the
   Judiciary.

   The Constitutional Court is in charge of reviewing the
   constitutionality of laws and statutes brought before it, as well as
   the compliance of these laws with international treaties that the
   Government has signed. Parliament elects the 12 members of the
   Constitutional Court by a two-thirds majority, the members serve a
   nine-year term.

   The territory of the Republic of Bulgaria is divided into provinces and
   municipalities. In all Bulgaria has 28 provinces, each headed by a
   provincial governor appointed by the government. In addition, there are
   263 municipalities.

Administrative divisions

   •
   •
   •
   •
   •
   •
   •
   •
   •
   •
   •
   •
   •
   •
   •
   •
   •
   •
   SOFIA
   •
   •
   •
   •
   •
   •
   •
   •

   Blagoevgrad
   Burgas
   Dobrich
   Gabrovo
   Haskovo
   Kardzhali
   Kyustendil
   Lovech
   Montana
   Pazardzhik
   Pernik
   Pleven
   Plovdiv
   Razgrad
   Ruse
   Shumen
   Silistra
   Sliven
   Smolyan
   Sofia
   Stara Zagora
   Targovishte
   Varna
   Veliko Tarnovo
   Vidin
   Vratsa
   Yambol
   Black Sea
   Danube
   F.Y.R.O.M.
   Greece
   Romania
   Serbia
   Turkey

   Since 1999 Bulgaria consists of 28 provinces (oblasti, singular -
   oblast), after having been subdivided into 9 provinces since 1987. All
   are named after the provincial capital, with the national capital
   itself forming a separate province:
     * Blagoevgrad
     * Burgas
     * Dobrich
     * Gabrovo
     * Haskovo
     * Kardzhali
     * Kyustendil
     * Lovech
     * Montana
     * Pazardzhik
     * Pernik
     * Pleven
     * Plovdiv
     * Razgrad

                    * Ruse
                    * Shumen
                    * Silistra
                    * Sliven
                    * Smolyan
                    * Sofia
                    * Sofia Province
                    * Stara Zagora
                    * Targovishte
                    * Varna
                    * Veliko Tarnovo
                    * Vidin
                    * Vratsa
                    * Yambol

Geography

   Map of Bulgaria
   Enlarge
   Map of Bulgaria
   The Seven Rila Lakes in Bulgaria
   Enlarge
   The Seven Rila Lakes in Bulgaria
   The Bulgarian Black Sea Coast at Sinemorets
   Enlarge
   The Bulgarian Black Sea Coast at Sinemorets

   Bulgaria comprises portions of the classical regions of Thrace, Moesia,
   and Macedonia. The southwest of the country is mountainous with two
   alpine ranges - Rila and Pirin and further east are the lower but more
   extensive Rhodope Mountains. Rila mountain includes the highest peak of
   the Balkan Peninsula, peak Musala at 2925 meters (9,596  ft); the long
   range of the Balkan mountains runs west-east through the middle of the
   country, north of the famous Rose Valley. Hilly country and plains are
   found in the southeast, along the Black Sea coast in the east, and
   along Bulgaria's main river, the Danube in the north. Other major
   rivers include the Struma and the Maritsa river in the south.

   The Bulgarian climate is temperate, with cold, damp winters and hot,
   dry summers, and Mediterranean along the Black Sea coast

   The Balkan peninsula derives its name from the Balkan or Stara Planina
   mountain range which runs through the centre of Bulgaria into eastern
   Serbia.

   The largest cities in the country are Sofia (1,246,791), Plovdiv
   (376,918), Varna (345,522), Burgas (259,985), Rousse (177,538), Stara
   Zagora (163,193), Pleven (121,700), Dobrich (115,861), Sliven
   (100,300).

   Bulgaria has its own scientific base on Livingston Island in the South
   Shetland Islands, Antarctica.
     * List of cities in Bulgaria
     * Rivers of Bulgaria
     * Reservoirs and dams in Bulgaria

Economy

   Bulgaria's economy contracted dramatically after 1989 with the loss of
   the market of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON)
   member states, to which the Bulgarian economy had been closely tied.
   The standard of living fell by about 40%, but it regained pre-1990
   levels in June 2004. In addition, UN sanctions against Yugoslavia and
   Iraq took a heavy toll on the Bulgarian economy. The first signs of
   recovery emerged in 1994 when the GDP grew and inflation fell. During
   1996, however, the economy collapsed due to lack of international
   economic support and an unstable banking system. Since 1997 the country
   has been on the path to recovery, with GDP growing at a 4 – 5% rate,
   increasing FDI, macroeconomic stability and EU membership set for 2007.
   Mall of Sofia
   Enlarge
   Mall of Sofia
   Tourism has always been a big industry in the country, and still
   booming: one of the 130 hotels in Slanchev Bryag, one of the most
   popular resorts in Eastern Europe
   Enlarge
   Tourism has always been a big industry in the country, and still
   booming: one of the 130 hotels in Slanchev Bryag, one of the most
   popular resorts in Eastern Europe

   The former government, elected in 2001, pledged to maintain the
   fundamental economic policy objectives adopted by its predecessor in
   1997, i.e., retaining the Currency Board, practicing sound financial
   policies, accelerating privatisation, and pursuing structural reforms.
   Economic forecasts for 2005 and 2006 predict continued growth in the
   Bulgarian economy. The annual year-on-year GDP growth for 2005 and 2006
   is expected to total 5.3% and 6.0%, respectively. Industrial output for
   2005 is forecast to rise by 11.9% year-on-year, and for 2006 — by 15.2%
   year-on-year. Unemployment for 2005 is projected at 11.5% and for 2006
   — at under 10%. As of 2006 the GDP structure is: agriculture- 8,0%;
   industry-26,1%; services- 65,9%.

   Agricultural output has decreased since 1989 but production is growing
   in the recent years. Farming is more important than stock-breeding. The
   prevalence of mechanisation is higher than most other Eastern European
   countries but there is lack of modern equipment. There are more than
   150,000 tractors, 10,000 combines, alongside aeroplanes and other
   equipment. Production of the most important crops is: wheat-4,120,000
   t; sunflower- 1,080,000 t; maize- 2,120,000 t; grapes- 500,000 t;
   tobacco- 79,000 t; tomatoes- 530,000 t; barley- 1,180,000 t; potatoes-
   650,000 t; peppers- 213,000 t; cucumbers- 110,000 t; cherries- 75,000 ;
   watermelons- 420,000 t; cabbage- 340,000 t; apples- 150,000 t;
   plums-150,000 t; strawberries- 52,000 t.

   Industry is of great importance for the economy. Although Bulgaria is
   not very rich in reserves of coal, oil, and gas, the country is a major
   producer of electricity and the most important exporter in the whole
   region due to the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant with a total capacity of
   3,760 MW. A second plant, the Belene Nuclear Power Plant with a
   capacity of 2,000 MW is under construction. There is a $1,400,000,000
   project for construction of an additional 670 MW for the 500 MW Maritza
   Iztok 1 TPP (see Energy in Bulgaria).

   The production of steel and pig iron is concentrated in Kremikovtsi and
   Pernik. There is also a third metallurgical base in Debelt. In
   production of steel and steel products per capita the country is first
   in the Balkans.

   Ferrous metallurgy is very important. The largest refineries for lead
   and zinc are in Plovdiv (the biggest refinery between Italy and the
   Ural mountains), Kurdzhali and Novi Iskar; for copper in Pirdop and
   Eliseina; for aluminium in Shumen. In production of many metals per
   capita, Bulgaria is first in South Eastern Europe and among the first
   in Europe and the world.

   About 14% of the total industrial production is related to machine
   building and 24% of the people are employed in this field. Its
   importance decreased since 1989 but is growing again now. Electronics
   and electrical equipment production is very well developed. The largest
   centres are Sofia, Plovdiv and the area around, Botevgrad, Stara
   Zagora, Varna and many others. These plants produce household
   appliances, computers, CDs, telephones, medical and scientific
   equipment. Many of the factories producing transportation equipment do
   not work with full capacity. There are plants producing trains (
   Burgas, Dryanovo), trams ( Sofia), trolleys ( Dupnitsa), buses (
   Botevgrad), trucks ( Shumen), motocars, automotive assembly plant in
   Lovech. The main centre of agricultural machinery is Ruse. Shipbuilding
   is concentrated in Varna, Burgas and Ruse. Arms production is mainly
   developed in central Bulgaria ( Kazanlak, Sopot, Karlovo).

Science, technology and telecommunications

   Bulgaria offers excellent conditions for high-tech and
   telecommunication industries and services with its strategic location,
   highly-qualified workforce, macroeconomic stability, growing domestic
   market and good education. This is why some multinational companies
   choose Bulgaria to build their regional offices and headquarters even
   before the joining to the EU. The most notable of these is
   Hewlett-Packard, which built its Global Service Centre for Europe, the
   Near East and Africa in the capital.

   Telecommunications is perhaps the fastest growing industry in the
   country. There are currently three mobile operators:Globul, Mtel and
   Vivatel which provide almost 100% coverage. They have hundreds of
   service centres throughout the country which are constantly growing and
   improving. More than 5,500,000 Bulgarians own mobile cellular phones.
   Every town and many villages have fast Internet connection. There are
   around 100,000 Internet hosts.

   The country has good traditions and perfect opportunities in science.
   The inventor of the earliest known electronic computer John Atanasoff
   is of Bulgarian descent. Bulgaria used to be a major supplier of
   scientific and research instruments for the Soviet space programmes, it
   was one of the first states to develop serial computer production, it
   has great experience in pharmaceutical research and development. The
   Bulgarian Academy of Sciences is the leading institution with most of
   the researchers working for its numerous branches.

   There are two major astronomic observatories: the Rozhen Observatory,
   which is the biggest in South Eastern Europe and the Belogradchik
   Observatory with three telescopes.

Transport

   Railroad transport in Bulgaria
   Enlarge
   Railroad transport in Bulgaria

   Bulgaria occupies a unique and strategically important geographic
   location. Since ancient times, the country has been a major crossroad
   between Europe, Asia and Africa. Five of the ten Transeuropean
   corridors run through its territory.

   The total length of the roads is 102,016 km of which 93,855 km are
   paved. There are 416 km of motorways. There are several motorways which
   are planned, under construction and partially built: Trakiya motorway,
   Hemus motorway, Cherno More motorway, Struma motorway, Maritza motorway
   and Lyulin motorway. There other motorways which are planned but their
   final track is yet to be decided. They include a link between the
   capital Sofia and Vidin, a link between the Struma and Trakiya
   motorways south of the Rila mountain, a link between Rousse and Veliko
   Tarnovo, and the Sofia ringroad. Many roads have been recently
   reconstructed.

   The length of the railways is 6,500 km. of which more than 60% are
   electrified. There is a €360,000,000 project for the modernization and
   electrification of the Plovdiv- Kapitan Andreevo railway.

   Air transportation is relatively well developed. There are four
   international airports at Sofia, Burgas, Varna and Plovdiv. Massive
   investment is planned for the first three. There are important domestic
   airports in Vidin, Pleven, Gorna Oryahovitsa, Rousse, Silistra,
   Targovishte, Stara Zagora, Kardzhali, Haskovo and Sliven. After the
   fall of communism in 1989 most of them are not used as the importance
   of domestic flights declined. There are many military airports and
   agricultural airfields in the country. 128 of the 213 airports in
   Bulgaria are paved.

   The ports of Varna and Burgas are by far the most important and have
   the largest turnover. Other than Burgas, Sozopol, Nesebar and Pomorie
   are big fishing ports. The largest Danube ports are Rousse and Lom
   which serves the capital.

   There is well organised public transport in the cities and in many
   smaller towns. There are buses, trolleys (in about 20 cities) and trams
   (in Sofia). The Sofia Metro in the capital is going to have 3 lines
   with total length of about 48km and 52 stations. Only a section of one
   of these is currently completed.

Demographics

   The Rila Monastery is one of Bulgaria's most important cultural and
   historical monuments
   Enlarge
   The Rila Monastery is one of Bulgaria's most important cultural and
   historical monuments

   According to the 2001 census, Bulgaria's population is mainly ethnic
   Bulgarian (83.9%), with two sizable minorities, Turks (9.4%) and Roma
   (4.7%). Of the remaining 2.0%, 0.9% are distributed among some forty
   smaller minorities, the most numerous of which are the Russians,
   Armenians, Vlachs ( Romanians in the North and Aromanians in the
   South), Jews, Crimean Tatars and Karakachans. The people who have not
   declared their ethnicity are 1.1% of the total population.

   Bulgarian is the mother-tongue of 84.8% of the population; it is a
   member of the Slavic languages. Bulgarian is the only official
   language, but other languages such as Turkish and Romany, are spoken
   corresponding closely to ethnic breakdown.

   Most Bulgarians (82.6%) are, at least nominally, members of the
   Bulgarian Orthodox Church, the national Eastern Orthodox church. Other
   religious denominations include Islam (12.2%), various Protestant
   denominations (0.7%), Roman Catholicism (0.5%), with other
   denominations, atheists and undeclared numbering ca. 4.1%.

   Bulgaria has had the slowest population growth of any country in the
   world since 1950, with the exception of St. Kitts & Nevis (due to their
   high emigration rate). In fact, population growth has been negative
   since the early 1990s, due to the economic collapse and high
   emmigration rate. Now Bulgaria suffers a heavy demographic crisis. In
   1988 the population of Bulgaria was 8,859,000 people (after a census),
   and a 2001-census shows a 7,950,000 population.

Culture

   The Roman theatre in Plovdiv
   Enlarge
   The Roman theatre in Plovdiv
   Stoyan Bachvarov Dramatic Theatre, Varna
   Enlarge
   Stoyan Bachvarov Dramatic Theatre, Varna

   A country often described to lie at the crossroads linking the East and
   West, Bulgaria was the centre of Slavic Europe during much of the
   Middle Ages, exerting considerable literary and cultural influence over
   the Eastern Orthodox Slavic world by means of the Preslav and Ohrid
   Literary Schools. Bulgaria is also the birthplace of the Cyrillic
   alphabet, the second most widely used alphabet in the world, which was
   developed in these two schools in the 10th century.

   Bulgaria is well-known for its rich folklore, distinctive traditional
   music, rituals and tales, but the country's contribution to humanity
   also continued in the 19th and 20th century, when individuals such as
   John Atanasoff - born in USA with Bulgarian origin, regarded as the
   father of the digital computer, a number of noted opera singers (
   Nicolai Ghiaurov, Boris Christoff, Raina Kabaivanska, Ghena Dimitrova)
   and successful artists ( Christo Javacheff, Pascin, Vladimir Dimitrov)
   popularized the culture of Bulgaria abroad.

   A number of ancient civilizations, most notably the Thracians, Greeks,
   Romans and Bulgars have left their mark on the culture, history and
   heritage of Bulgaria. The country has nine UNESCO World Heritage Sites.
   Of these, two are Thracian tombs (one in Sveshtari and one in Kazanlak,
   three are monuments of medieval Bulgarian culture (the Boyana Church,
   the Rila Monastery and the Rock-hewn Churches of Ivanovo), while the
   Pirin National Park and the Srebarna Nature Reserve represent the
   country's natural beauty, and the ancient city of Nesebar is a unique
   combination of European cultural interaction, as well as, historically,
   one of the most important centres of naval trade in the Black Sea. In
   addition, the Varna Necropolis, a 3200-3000 BC burial site, contains
   what are believed to be the oldest examples of worked gold in the
   world.
     * List of famous Bulgarians
     * Bulgarian customs
     * Music of Bulgaria
     * Bulgarian artists
     * Bulgarian dances
     * Bulgarian cuisine

Tourism

   In winter, Borovets, Bansko and Pamporovo are ski resorts. There are
   summer resorts on the Black Sea at Sozopol, Nessebur, Golden Sands,
   Sunny Beach, Sveti Vlas, Albena, St. St. Constantine & Helena and many
   others. Spa resorts such as Bankya, Hisarya, Sandanski, Velingrad,
   Varshets and many others are popular all over the year. Bulgaria is
   becoming an attractive destination because of the quality of the
   resorts and prices below those found in Western Europe.

   Bulgaria has enjoyed a substantial growth in income from international
   tourism over the past decade. Beach resorts are popular with tourists
   from Germany, Russia, Scandinavia and the United Kingdom. The ski
   resorts are a favorite destination for English tourists.

Sports

   The Vasil Levski National Stadium
   Enlarge
   The Vasil Levski National Stadium

   Football is by far the most popular sport in the country. Many
   Bulgarian fans follow closely the Bulgarian Football League, as well as
   the leagues of other European countries, such as those of Spain,
   England, Italy and Germany. The greatest success of the Bulgarian
   National Team is the fourth place at the 1994 FIFA World Cup in the
   USA. The most famous Bulgarian footballer is Hristo Stoichkov, who was
   widely regarded as the world's best football player at the peak of his
   career between 1992 and 1994, while also playing for FC Barcelona. CSKA
   Sofia and Levski Sofia are the two most successful Bulgarian football
   clubs.

   Bulgaria boasts great achievements in other sport areas, too. Maria
   Gigova has four world titles in gymnastics, which is still unmatched by
   anyone in the world. Some other famous gymnasts include Simona
   Peycheva, Neshka Robeva and Jordan Jovtchev. Bulgarians are also
   dominant in Weightlifting with around 1,000 gold medals in different
   competitions; Stefan Botev, Nickolai Peshalov, Demir Demirev and Yoto
   Yotov are among the most distinguished weightlifters. Wrestling,
   volleyball, and chess are also popular.

Religion

   The Alexander Nevsky Cathedral in Sofia is one of the biggest Orthodox
   cathedrals in Europe
   Enlarge
   The Alexander Nevsky Cathedral in Sofia is one of the biggest Orthodox
   cathedrals in Europe
   Church of Christ Pantocrator, Nesebar
   Enlarge
   Church of Christ Pantocrator, Nesebar

   Most citizens of Bulgaria are associated — at least nominally — to the
   Bulgarian Orthodox Church. It was founded in 870 AD under the
   Patriarchate of Constantinople from which it obtained its first
   primate, its clergy and theological texts. It has been autocephalous
   since 927. The Bulgarian Patriarchate was established in Sofia after
   the creation of the Bulgarian Exarchate, in 1870. The Bulgarian
   Orthodox Church is the independent national church of Bulgaria like the
   other national branches of Eastern Orthodoxy and is considered an
   inseparable element of Bulgarian national consciousness. The church
   became subordinate within the Greek Orthodox Church, twice during the
   periods of Byzantine (1018 – 1185) and Ottoman (1396 – 1878) domination
   but has been revived every time as a symbol of Bulgarian statehood
   without breaking away from the Orthodox dogma. In 2001, the Bulgarian
   Orthodox Church had 6,552,000 members in Bulgaria (82.6% of the
   population). However, many people raised during the 45 years of
   communist rule are not religious, even though they may formally be
   members of the church.

   Despite the dominant position of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church in
   Bulgarian cultural life, a number of Bulgarian citizens belong to other
   religious denominations, most notably Islam, Roman Catholicism and
   Protestantism. Islam came to Bulgaria at the end of the 14th century
   after the conquest of the country by the Ottomans. It gradually gained
   ground throughout the 15th and 16th centuries by the introduction of
   Turkish colonists and the conversion of native Bulgarians. At the time
   of Liberation (1878) no less than 40% of the population was Muslim, but
   emigration was a key factor in reducing this percentage. In 2001, there
   were 967,000 Muslims in Bulgaria, accounting for 12.2% of the total
   population.

   In the 16th and the 17th century missionaries from Rome converted
   Bulgarian Paulicians in the districts of Plovdiv and Svishtov to Roman
   Catholicism. Today, their descendants form the bulk of Bulgarian
   Catholics whose number stands at 44,000 in 2001. Protestantism was
   introduced in Bulgaria by missionaries from the United States in 1857.
   Missionary work continued throughout the second half of the 19th and
   the first half of the 20th century. In 2001, there were some 42,000
   Protestants in Bulgaria.

   According to the most recent Eurostat "Eurobarometer" poll, in 2005 ,
   only 40% of Bulgarian citizens responded that "they believe there is a
   God", whereas 40% answered that "they believe there is some sort of
   spirit or life force", 13% that "they do not believe there is a God,
   spirit, nor life force", and 6% did not answer.

National parks

   Bulgaria has more than ten major national parks and many reservation
   areas. The best known and most popular of these are listed below.
     * Central Balkan National Park
     * Pirin National Park
     * Rhodope National Park
     * Rila National Park
     * Stara Planina (Balkan Mountains)
     * Strandja National Park
     * Vitosha National Park

Gallery

   The Belogradchik Rocks

   Bulgarian National Revival (18th-19th century) architecture in
   Plovdiv's old town part

   The Dormition of the Theotokos Cathedral in Varna

   Shipka Pass, Stara Planina in winter

   A Black Sea beach near Dyuni

   The capital city of Sofia

   Typical architecture and natural surroundings of Melnik

   The inner yard of the Bachkovo Monastery

   Baroque architecture in Rousse

   Tsarevets, Veliko Tarnovo, the main stronghold of the medieval Second
   Bulgarian Empire

   The Roman amphitheatre in Stara Zagora

   The Danube between Belene and Belene Island

   High Resolution Images from Bulgaria

Neighbouring countries

   Flag of Romania  Romania
   Flag of Serbia  Serbia
   Republic of Macedonia  Republic of Macedonia North Black Sea
   Image:Template CanadianCityGeoLocation East.png   Flag of Russia
   Russia
   Black Sea  Image:Template CanadianCityGeoLocation East.png   Flag of
   Georgia (country)  Georgia
   Black Sea  Image:Template CanadianCityGeoLocation East.png   Flag of
   Turkey  Turkey
   West    Flag of Bulgaria  Bulgaria     East
   South
   Flag of Greece  Greece Flag of Turkey  Turkey
   Countries of Europe

   Albania · Andorra · Armenia^1 · Austria · Azerbaijan^2 · Belarus ·
   Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus^1 ·
   Czech Republic · Denmark · Estonia · Finland · France · Georgia^2 ·
   Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy · Kazakhstan^2 ·
   Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Republic of Macedonia
   · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands · Norway · Poland
   · Portugal · Romania · Russia^2 · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia ·
   Slovenia · Spain · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey^2 · Ukraine · United
   Kingdom · Vatican City

   (1) Entirely in Asia but having socio-political connections with
   Europe. (2) Has significant territory in Asia.
   Countries on the Black Sea

   Flag of Bulgaria  Bulgaria • Flag of Georgia (country)  Georgia • Flag
   of Romania  Romania • Flag of Russia  Russia • Flag of Turkey  Turkey •
   Flag of Ukraine  Ukraine
   European Union members and candidates

   Austria • Belgium • Cyprus • Czech Republic • Denmark • Estonia •
   Finland • France • Germany • Greece • Hungary • Ireland • Italy •
   Latvia • Lithuania • Luxembourg • Malta • Netherlands • Poland •
   Portugal • Slovakia • Slovenia • Spain • Sweden • United Kingdom

   Countries acceding on January 1, 2007: Bulgaria • Romania

   Candidate countries: Croatia • Turkey • Republic of Macedonia (referred
   to as the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia by the European Union)
   North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO)
   Flag of NATO

   Belgium • Bulgaria • Canada • Czech Republic • Denmark • Estonia •
   France • Germany • Greece • Hungary • Iceland • Italy • Latvia •
   Lithuania • Luxembourg • Netherlands • Norway • Poland • Portugal •
   Romania • Slovakia • Slovenia • Spain • Turkey • United Kingdom •
   United States

   Candidate countries: Albania • Croatia • Republic of Macedonia (as
   FYROM)
   Francophonie
   Members: Belgium • Benin • Bulgaria • Burkina Faso • Burundi • Cambodia
   • Cameroon • Canada • New Brunswick • Quebec • Ontario • Cape Verde •
   Central African Republic • Chad • Comoros • Côte d'Ivoire • Cyprus •
   Democratic Republic of the Congo • Djibouti • Dominica • Egypt •
   Equatorial Guinea • France • French Guiana • Gabon • Ghana • Guadeloupe
   • Guinea • Guinea-Bissau • Haiti • Laos • Lebanon • Madagascar • Mali •
   Martinique • Mauritania • Mauritius • Morocco • Niger • Republic of the
   Congo • Romania • Rwanda • Saint Lucia • São Tomé and Príncipe •
   Senegal • Seychelles • Saint-Pierre and Miquelon • Switzerland • Togo •
   Tunisia • Ukraine • Vanuatu • Vietnam

   Observers: Armenia • Austria • Croatia • Czech Republic • Georgia •
   Hungary • Lithuania • Mozambique • Poland • Serbia • Slovakia •
   Slovenia • Ukraine
   Black Sea Economic Cooperation

   Albania • Armenia • Azerbaijan • Bulgaria • Georgia • Greece • Moldova
   • Romania • Russia • Serbia • Turkey • Ukraine
   Slavic-speaking nations

   West Slavic: Flag of Czech Republic  Czech Republic • Flag of Poland
   Poland • Flag of Slovakia  Slovakia

   South Slavic: Flag of Bosnia and Herzegovina  Bosnia and Herzegovina •
   Flag of Bulgaria  Bulgaria • Flag of Croatia  Croatia • Flag of
   Republic of Macedonia  Republic of Macedonia • Flag of Montenegro
   Montenegro • Flag of Serbia  Serbia • Flag of Slovenia  Slovenia

   East Slavic: Flag of Belarus  Belarus • Flag of Russia  Russia • Flag
   of Ukraine  Ukraine


    EU Flag Antarctic Nations
    Argentina • Australia • Belgium • Brazil • Bulgaria • Chile • China •
 Ecuador • Finland • France • Germany • India • Italy • Japan •
       Netherlands • New Zealand • Norway • Peru • Poland •
 Russian Federation • South Africa • South Korea • Spain • Sweden •
          Ukraine • United Kingdom • United States • Uruguay

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bulgaria"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
