   #copyright

Button

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Engineering

   A small flat button
   Enlarge
   A small flat button
   Metal, plastic, and leather shank buttons.
   Enlarge
   Metal, plastic, and leather shank buttons.

   In clothing and fashion design, a button is small disc- or knob-shaped,
   typically round, object usually attached to an article of clothing in
   order to secure an opening, or for ornamentation. Functional buttons
   work by slipping the button through a fabric or thread loop, or by
   sliding the button through a slit called a buttonhole.

   Buttons may be manufactured from an extremely broad variety of
   materials, including natural materials such as antler, bone, horn,
   ivory, shell, vegetable ivory, and wood; or synthetics such as
   celluloid, glass, metal, and plastic.

   Hard plastic is by far the most common material for newly manufactured
   buttons; the other materials tend to occur only in premium apparel.

History

   Buttons and button-like objects used as ornaments rather than fasteners
   have been discovered in the ancient Indus Valley during its Kot Diji
   phase (circa 2800- 2600 BC) and Bronze Age sites in China (circa 2000-
   1500 BC), and are attested in Ancient Rome. Functional buttons for
   clothing became widespread with the rise of snug-fitting clothing in
   13th- and 14th-century Europe.

Types of buttons

     * Shank buttons have a small ring or a bar with a hole called the
       shank protruding from the back of the button, through which thread
       is sewn to attach the button.
     * Covered buttons are fabric-covered forms with a separate back piece
       that secures the fabric over the knob.
     * Flat or sew-through buttons have two or four holes punched through
       the button through which the thread is sewn to attach the button.
       Flat buttons may be attached by sewing machine rather than by hand,
       and may be used with heavy fabrics by working a thread shank to
       extend the height of the button above the fabric.
     * Worked or cloth buttons are created by embroidering or crocheting
       tight stitches (usually with linen thread) over a knob or ring
       called a form.
     * Mandarin buttons are knobs made of intricately knotted strings.
       Mandarin buttons are a key element in Mandarin dress (Qi Pao in
       Chinese), where they are closed with loops. Pairs of mandarin
       buttons worn as cuff links are called silk knots.

Button sizes

   Buttons are commonly measured in lignes (also called lines and
   abbreviated L), with 40 lignes equal to 1 inch. For example, some
   standard sizes of buttons are 18L (11.43 mm, standard button of mens'
   shirts) and 32L (20.32 mm, typical button on suit jackets).

Types of buttonholes

   Machine-stitched keyhole buttonhole with bar
   Enlarge
   Machine-stitched keyhole buttonhole with bar

   Functional buttons (as opposed to decorative buttons) are normally
   paired with a buttonhole. Alternately, a decorative loop of cloth or
   rope may replace the buttonhole. Buttonholes may be either made by hand
   sewing or automated by a sewing machine. Types of buttonholes are:
     * A plain buttonhole, by far the most common type. In plain
       buttonholes, the raw (cut) edges of the fabric are finished with
       thread in very closely spaced stitches (if made by hand, often the
       button stitch). When stitched by hand, a slit is made in the fabric
       first and the result is called a worked buttonhole.

   Sewing machines offer various levels of automation to creating plain
   buttonholes.
     * A machine-made buttonhole is usually sewn with two parallel rows of
       machine sewing in a narrow zig-zag stitch, with the ends finished
       in a broader zig-zag stitch. (One of the first automatic buttonhole
       machines was invented by Henry Alonzo House in 1862.)

   When made by machine, the slit between the sides of the buttonhole is
   opened after the stiching is completed.
     * A bound buttonhole, which has its raw edges encased by pieces of
       fabric or trim instead of stitches.

     * A keyhole buttonhole is a special case of a thread-finished
       buttonhole that is normally machine-made due to the difficulty of
       achieving it by hand working. It is characterized by a round hole
       at the end of the slit to accommodate the button's shank without
       distorting the fabric.

   Keyhole buttonholes are most often found on tailored coats and jackets.

   Buttonholes often have a bar at either end. This is a row of
   perpendicular hand or machine stitching to reinforce the ends of a
   buttonhole.

Additional images

   Buttoned doublet, later 16th century.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Button"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
