   #copyright

Cai Lun

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Engineers and inventors

   Cai Lun ( Traditional Chinese: 蔡倫; Simplified Chinese: 蔡伦; Hanyu
   Pinyin: Cài Lún; Wade-Giles: Ts'ai Lun) (ca. AD 50— 121), courtesy name
   Jingzhong (敬仲), was a Chinese eunuch, who is conventionally regarded as
   the inventor of paper and the papermaking process, in forms
   recognizable in modern times as paper (as opposed to Egyptian papyrus).

   He was born in Guiyang during the Eastern Han Dynasty, and became a
   paperwork secretary (中常侍) of Emperor He. For papermaking, he tried
   materials like bark, hemp, silk, and even fishing net, but his exact
   formula has been lost to history. The emperor was pleased with the
   invention and granted Cai an aristocratic title and great wealth.
   Later, he became involved in intrigue, as a supporter of Empress Dou.
   He was involved in the death of her romantic rival, Consort Song.
   Afterwards, he became an associate of Empress Deng Sui. In 121, after
   Consort Song's grandson Emperor An assumed power after Empress Deng's
   death, Cai was ordered to report to prison. Before he was to report, he
   committed suicide by drinking poison after taking a bath and dressing
   in fine robes.

   While paper is widely used worldwide today, the creator of this
   extremely important invention is little-known outside East Asia. After
   Cai invented paper in 105, it immediately became widely used in China.
   In 751, some Chinese paper makers were captured by Arabs after Tang
   troops were annihilated in the Battle of Talas River. The techniques of
   papermaking then spread to the West.

   Cai's contribution is considered one of the most important inventions
   in history, since it enabled China to develop its civilization much
   faster than with earlier writing materials (primarily bamboo), and it
   did the same with Europe when it was introduced in the 12th century or
   the 13th century.

   Cai was ranked #7 on Michael H. Hart's list of the most influential
   figures in history.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cai_Lun"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
