   #copyright

Calgary

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: North American Geography

   City of Calgary

   Downtown Calgary at night.

   ( Coat of Arms of Calgary)

   ( Flag of Calgary)
   City of Calgary

   Location of Calgary within census division number 6 in Alberta, Canada

   Area 789.90 km²
   Metro area 5,083.00 km²
   Population 991,759 (April 2006)
   Pop'n rank 3rd
   Metro pop'n 1,060,300 (2005 est.)
   Metro rank 5th
   Pop'n density 1252.3
   Location 51°02′N 114°03′W
   Altitude 1048  metres
   Incorporation 1894
   Province Alberta
   Census Division 6
   Members of Parliament Diane Ablonczy, Rob Anders, Art Hanger, Stephen
   Harper, Jason Kenney, Deepak Obhrai, Jim Prentice, Lee Richardson
   Members of the Legislative Assembly Cindy Ady, Moe Amery, Neil Brown,
   Wayne Cao, Harvey Cenaiko, Harry B. Chase, Alana DeLong, Heather
   Forsyth, Yvonne Fritz, Denis Herard, Arthur Johnston, Ralph Klein, Ron
   Liepert, Richard Magnus, Gary Mar, Greg Melchin, Hung Pham, David
   Rodney, Shiraz Shariff, Ron Stevens, David Swann, Dave Taylor, Len
   Webber
   Mayor Dave Bronconnier

   ( Past mayors)
   City Manager Owen A. Tobert
   Governing Body Calgary City Council
   Time zone Mountain (UTC-7)
   Postal code T1Y to T3R
   Area Code 403
   Official website: City of Calgary

   Calgary is the largest city in the province of Alberta, Canada. It is
   in the south of the province, in a region of foothills and high plains,
   approximately 80 km east of the front ranges of the Canadian Rockies.
   Calgary is the third largest civic municipality, by population, in
   Canada. As of April 2006, Calgary's population was 991,759. The
   estimated metropolitan population ( CMA) was 1,060,300 in 2005 (see
   Calgary Region), making Greater Calgary the fifth largest Census
   Metropolitan Area in the country. It is located within the relatively
   densely populated " Calgary-Edmonton Corridor". It is the largest
   Canadian metropolitan area between Toronto and Vancouver.

   A resident of Calgary is known as a Calgarian.

   Calgary is well-known as a destination for winter sports and ecotourism
   with a number of major mountain resorts near the city and metropolitan
   area. Calgary's economy is mostly centred on the petroleum industry
   (see Canadian Oil Patch), however agriculture, tourism, and the
   high-tech industries also contribute to the city's fast economic
   growth. Calgary also holds many major annual festivals, including the
   Calgary Stampede, the Folk Music Festival, the Lilac Festival, One
   World Festival ( GlobalFest), and the second largest Caribbean festival
   in the country (Carifest). In 1988, Calgary became the first Canadian
   city to host The Olympic Winter Games.

History

First settlement

   Calgary as it appeared circa 1885
   Enlarge
   Calgary as it appeared circa 1885

   Before the Calgary area was settled by Europeans, it was the domain of
   the Blackfoot people whose presence has been traced back at least
   11,000 years. In 1787 cartographer David Thompson spent the winter with
   a band of Peigan encamped along the Bow River. He was the first
   recorded European to visit the area and John Glenn was the first
   documented European settler in the Calgary Area, in 1873.

   The site became a post of the North West Mounted Police (now the RCMP).
   Originally named Fort Brisebois, after NWMP officer Éphrem-A Brisebois,
   it was renamed Fort Calgary in 1876 because of questionable conduct on
   the part of that officer. The NWMP detachment was assigned to protect
   the western plains from US whiskey traders. Fort Calgary was named by
   Colonel James Macleod after Calgary (Cala-ghearraidh, Beach of the
   pasture) on the Isle of Mull, Scotland. When the Canadian Pacific
   Railway reached the area and a rail station was constructed, Calgary
   began to grow into an important commercial and agricultural centre. The
   Canadian Pacific Railway headquarters are located in Calgary today.
   Calgary was officially incorporated as a town in 1884 and elected its
   first mayor, George Murdoch. In 1894, Calgary became the first city in
   what was then the Northwest Territories.

The oil boom

   Calgary in 1969
   Enlarge
   Calgary in 1969

   Oil was first discovered in Alberta in 1902, but it didn't become a
   significant industry in the province until 1947 when huge reserves of
   it were discovered. Calgary quickly found itself at the centre of the
   ensuing oil boom. The city's economy grew when oil prices increased
   with the Arab Oil Embargo of 1973. The population increased by 254,000
   in the seventeen years between 1971 (403,000) and 1988 (657,000) and
   another 335,000 in the next eighteen years following (to 992,000 in
   2006). During these boom years, skyscrapers were constructed at a pace
   seen by few cities anywhere. The relatively low-rise downtown quickly
   became dense with tall buildings: a trend that continues to this day.

   Calgary's economy was so closely tied to the oil industry that the
   city's boom peaked with the average annual price of oil in 1981. The
   subsequent drop in oil prices and the introduction of National Energy
   Program, were cited by industry as reasons for a collapse in the oil
   industry, and consequently the overall Calgary economy. The NEP was
   cancelled in the mid-1980s by the Brian Mulroney federal government.
   Continued low oil prices, however, prevented a full recovery until the
   1990s.

Recent history

   Downtown Calgary in 2003 as seen from the top of McHugh Bluff.
   Enlarge
   Downtown Calgary in 2003 as seen from the top of McHugh Bluff.

   With the energy sector employing a huge number of Calgarians, the
   fallout from the economic slump of the early 1980s was understandably
   significant. The unemployment rate soared. By the end of the decade,
   however, the economy was in recovery. Calgary quickly realized that it
   could not afford to put so much emphasis on oil and gas, and the city
   has since become much more diverse, both economically and culturally.
   The period during this recession marked Calgary's transition from a
   mid-sized and relatively nondescript prairie city into a major
   cosmopolitan and diverse centre. This transition culminated in February
   of 1988, when the city hosted the XV Olympic Winter Games. The success
   of these games essentially put the city on the world stage.

   The economy in Calgary and Alberta is now booming, and the region of
   nearly 1.1 million people is still among the fastest growing in the
   country. While the oil and gas industry comprise most of the economy,
   the city has invested a great deal into other areas. Tourism is perhaps
   one of the fastest growing industries in the city. Over 4.5 million
   people now visit the city on an annual basis for its many festivals and
   attractions, as well as the Calgary Stampede. The nearby mountain
   resort towns of Banff, Lake Louise, and Canmore are also becoming
   increasingly popular with tourists, and are bringing people into
   Calgary as a result. Other modern industries include light
   manufacturing, high-tech, film, transportation, and services. The city
   has also ranked high in quality of life surveys .

Geography and climate

   Calgary is located within the foothills of the Rocky Mountains and is
   relatively hilly as a result. Calgary's elevation is approximately 1048
   metres (3440 feet) above sea level downtown, and 1083 metres (3556
   feet) at the airport. The city proper covers a land area of 721 km² (as
   of 2001) and as such exceeds the land areas of both Toronto and New
   York City.

   There are two major rivers that run through the city. The Bow River is
   the largest and flows from the west to the south. The Elbow River flows
   northwards from the south until it converges with the Bow River near
   downtown. Since the climate of the region is generally dry, dense
   vegetation occurs naturally only in the river valleys and within Fish
   Creek Provincial Park, the largest urban park in Canada.

   The city is quite large in physical area, consisting of an inner city
   surrounded by various communities of decreasing density. Unlike most
   cities with a sizable metropolitan area, most of Calgary's suburbs are
   incorporated into the city proper, with the notable exceptions of the
   city of Airdrie to the north, Cochrane to the northwest, Strathmore to
   the east, and the sprawling Springbank district to the west. Though it
   is not technically within Calgary's metropolitan area, the town of
   Okotoks is only a short distance to the south and is considered a
   suburb as well. The Calgary Economic Region includes slightly more area
   than the CMA and has a population of 1,146,900.

   The city of Calgary proper is immediately surrounded by two municipal
   districts, Rocky View No. 44 to the north, west and east; and Foothills
   No. 31 to the south.

   Because of the growth of the city, its southwest borders are now
   immediately adjacent to the Tsuu T'ina Nation Indian reserve. Recent
   residential developments in the deep southwest of the city have created
   a need for a major roadway heading into the interior of the city, but
   because of complications in negotiations with the Tsuu T'ina about the
   construction, the much-needed construction has not yet begun.

   Cochrane              Rocky View No. 44
                         Airdrie
   Tsuu T'ina Nation 145 North                    Rocky View No. 44
                                                  Chestermere
                         West    Calgary     East
                         South
                         Foothills No. 31
                         Okotoks

Calgary's neighbourhoods

   Stephen Avenue
   Enlarge
   Stephen Avenue

   The downtown region of the city consists of five neighbourhoods: Eau
   Claire (including the Festival District), the Downtown West End, the
   Downtown Commercial Core, Chinatown, and the Downtown East Village
   (also part of the Rivers District). The commercial core is itself
   divided into a number of districts including the Stephen Avenue Retail
   Core, the Entertainment District, the Arts District and the Government
   District. Distinct from downtown and south of 9th Avenue is Calgary's
   densest neighbourhood, the Beltline. The area includes a number of
   communities such as Midtown, Victoria Crossing and a portion of the
   Rivers District. The Beltline is the focus of major planning and
   rejuvenation initiatives on the part of the municipal government to
   increase the density and liveliness of Calgary's centre.

   Adjacent to, or directly radiating from the downtown are the first of
   the inner-city communities. These include Crescent Heights, Sunnyside,
   Hounsfield Heights/Briar Hill, Hillhurst (including Kensington BRZ),
   Bridgeland, Renfrew, Mount Royal, Mission and Inglewood. The inner city
   is, in turn, surrounded by relatively dense and established
   neighbourhoods such as Rosedale, North Haven, and Mount Pleasant to the
   north; Bowness, Parkdale and Westgate to the west; Park Hill, South
   Calgary (including Marda Loop), Bankview, Altadore and Killarney to the
   south; and Forest Lawn/International Avenue to the east. Lying beyond
   these, and usually separated from one another by highways, are the
   suburban communities, often characterized as "Commuter Communities".
   The greatest amount of suburban expansion is happening in the city's
   deep south with major growth on the northwestern edge as well. In all,
   there are over 180 distinct neighbourhoods within the city limits.

Climate

   Calgary has a highland continental climate with long, but highly
   variable, winters and short, warm summers (USDA Plant Hardiness Zone
   3b). The climate is greatly influenced by the city's elevation and
   close proximity to the Rocky Mountains. Although Calgary's winters can
   be uncomfortably cold; warm, dry Chinook winds routinely blow into the
   city from the Pacific Ocean during the winter months, giving Calgarians
   a break from the cold. These winds have been known to raise the winter
   temperature by up to 15°C (27°F) in just a few hours, and may last
   several days. The chinooks are such a common feature of Calgary's
   winters that only one month (January 1950) has failed to witness a thaw
   over more than 100 years of weather observations. More than one half of
   all winter days see the daily maximum rise above 0°C (32°F). Some
   mid-winter days even approach 20°C (68°F) on occasion.

   Calgary is a city of extremes, and temperatures have ranged anywhere
   from a record low of −45°C (-49°F) in 1893 to a record high of 36°C
   (97°F) in 1919. Although not common, Calgary experiences summer daytime
   temperatures of above 30°C (86°F) on an average of about four days per
   year. Temperatures fall below −30°C (-22°F) on about five days per
   year, though extreme cold spells usually do not last very long.
   According to Environment Canada, the average temperature in Calgary
   ranges from a January daily average of −9°C (16°F) to a July daily
   average of 16°C (61°F).

   As a consequence of Calgary's high elevation, summer evenings can be
   very cool, the average summer minimum temperature is 8°C (46°F), and
   frosts can occur in any month of the year. Calgary has experienced
   snowfall even in July and August. With an average relative humidity of
   55% in the winter and 45% in the summer, Calgary has a semi-arid
   climate typical of other cities in the Western Great Plains and
   Canadian Prairies. Unlike cities further east, like Toronto, Montreal,
   or even Winnipeg, humidity is almost never a factor during the Calgary
   summer.

   The city is also one of the sunniest in Canada, with 2,405 hours of
   annual sunshine, on average. Calgary receives an average of 413 mm
   (16.2 in) of precipitation annually, with 301 mm (11.8 in) of that
   occurring in the form of rain, and the remainder as snow. Most of the
   precipitation occurs from May to August, with June averaging the most
   monthly rainfall. In June of 2005, Calgary received 248 mm (9.8 in) of
   precipitation, making it the wettest month in the city's recorded
   history. Droughts are not uncommon and may occur at any time of the
   year.

   Calgary averages more than 20 days a year with thunderstorms, with
   almost all of them occurring in the summer months. Calgary lies on the
   edge of Alberta's hailstorm alley and is prone to occasional damaging
   hailstorms. A hailstorm that struck Calgary in September 1991 was one
   of the most destructive natural disasters in Canadian history.

   Seasons
     * Winter: November to mid-March.
     * Spring: mid-March to May
     * Summer: June to August
     * Autumn: September to November

Culture

City life

   Olympic Plaza in the Arts District
   Enlarge
   Olympic Plaza in the Arts District

   Calgary's urban scene has changed considerably since the city has
   grown. It is also starting to become recognized as one of Canada's most
   diverse cities. Today, Calgary is a modern cosmopolitan city that still
   retains much of its traditional culture of hotel saloons, western bars,
   night clubs, and hockey. Following its revival in the 1990s, Calgary
   has also become a centre for country music in Canada. As such, it is
   referred to by some as the "Nashville of the North." Calgary is also
   home to a thriving all-ages music scene of many genres, including pop,
   rock, hip-hop, and country.

   As a relatively ethnically diverse city, Calgary also has a number of
   major multicultural areas and assets. It has one of the largest
   Chinatowns in Canada as well as a “Little Italy” in the Bridgeland
   neighbourhood. Forest Lawn is among the most diverse areas in the city
   and as such, the area around 17th Avenue SE within the neighbourhood is
   also known as International Avenue. The district is home to a wide
   variety of ethnic restaurants and stores.

   As the population has grown, and particularly, as the urban density in
   central Calgary has increased, so too has the vitality of this area.
   While the city continues to embrace suburbanism, people are beginning
   to find a wide variety alternatives in the inner city. This has led to
   significant increases in the popularity of central districts such as
   17th Avenue, Kensington, Inglewood, Forest Lawn, Marda Loop and the
   Mission District. The nightlife and the availability of cultural venues
   in these areas has gradually begun to evolve as a result.

Performing arts

   Calgary is the site of the Southern Alberta Jubilee Auditorium, a 4
   million cubic foot (113,000 m³) performing arts, culture and community
   facility. The auditorium is one of two "twin" facilities in the
   province, the other located in Edmonton, each being locally known as
   the "Jube." The 2,700-seat auditorium was opened in 1957 and has been
   host to hundreds of Broadway musical, theatrical, stage and local
   productions. Annually, over 850,000 visitors frequent the performance
   space. The Calgary Jube is the resident home of the Alberta Ballet, the
   Calgary opera, the Kiwanis Music Festival, and the annual civic
   Remembrance Day Ceremonies. Both auditoriums operate 365 days a year,
   and are run by community-based non-profit societies. Both have recently
   (September 05) received a $91 million renovation as part of the
   Province's Centennial year.

   Calgary has a thriving festival scene with festivals being held all
   year round. Some established festivals that attract talent from all
   over the World are FunnyFest Calgary Comedy Festival and the Folk Music
   Festival.

   Calgary is also home to a number of contemporary and established
   theatre companies; among them are One Yellow Rabbit, which shares the
   EPCOR Centre for the Performing Arts with the Calgary Philharmonic
   Orchestra, as well as Theatre Calgary, and Alberta Theatre Projects.
   There are also many smaller theatre and performing arts companies in
   the city, such as Vertigo Mystery Theatre. Calgary was also the
   birthplace of the improvisational theatre games known as Theatresports.
   The Calgary International Film Festival is also held in the city
   annually, as well as the International Festival of Animated Objects.

Museums and galleries

   The city is home to several museums. The best-known of these, the
   Glenbow Museum is the largest in western Canada and includes an art
   gallery. Other major museums include the largest Chinese Cultural
   Centre in North America, the Canadian Olympic Hall of Fame (at Canada
   Olympic Park), The Military Museums, the Cantos Music Museum and the
   Aero Space Museum. There are also a number of art galleries in the city
   and many of them are concentrated along the Stephen Avenue and 17th
   Avenue corridors. The largest of these is the Art Gallery of Calgary
   (AGC).

Cultural events and festivals

   Calgary is home to a number of major annual festivals and events. These
   include the growing Calgary International Film Festival, the Calgary
   Folk Music Festival, The Greek Festival, Carifest, the Lilac Festival,
   GlobalFest, the Calgary Fringe Festival, Summerstock, Expo Latino, and
   many other cultural and ethnic festivals. Calgary's most well-known
   event is the Calgary Stampede, which occurs every July. It features an
   internationally recognized rodeo competition, a midway, stage shows,
   agricultural competitions, chuck-wagon races, First Nations
   exhibitions, and pancake breakfasts around the city, among other
   attractions. It is among the largest and best-known festivals in
   Canada. The event has a 93 year history. In 2005, attendance at the
   10-day rodeo and exhibition totalled 1,242,928.

Sports and recreation

   XV Olympic Winter Games

   In large part due to its proximity to the Rocky Mountains, Calgary has
   traditionally been a popular destination for winter sports. Since
   hosting the 1988 Winter Olympics, the city has also been home to a
   number of major winter sporting facilities such as Canada Olympic Park
   ( luge, cross-country skiing, ski jumping, downhill skiing,
   snowboarding, and some summer sports) and the Olympic Oval ( speed
   skating and hockey). These facilities serve as the primary training
   venues for a number of competitive athletes. In the summer, the Bow
   River is very popular among fly-fishermen. Golfing is also an extremely
   popular activity for Calgarians and the region has a large number of
   courses.

   The city also has a large number of urban parks including Fish Creek
   Provincial Park, Nose Hill Park, Bowness Park, Edworthy Park, the
   Inglewood Bird Sanctuary, Confederation Park, and Prince's Island Park.
   Nose Hill Park is the largest municipal park in Canada. Connecting
   these parks and most of the city's neighbourhoods is one of the most
   extensive multi-use (walking, bike, rollerblading, etc) path systems in
   North America.

Professional sports teams

   Club League Venue Established Championships
   Calgary Flames National Hockey League Pengrowth Saddledome 1980* 1
   Calgary Stampeders Canadian Football League McMahon Stadium 1945 5
   Calgary Roughnecks National Lacrosse League Pengrowth Saddledome 2001 1
   Calgary Vipers Northern League (Baseball) Foothills Stadium 2005 0

   (*) Established as the Atlanta Flames in 1972.

Amateur and junior clubs

   Club League Venue Established Championships
   Calgary Hitmen Western Hockey League Pengrowth Saddledome 1995 1
   Calgary Canucks Alberta Junior Hockey League Max Bell Centre 1971 9
   Calgary Royals Alberta Junior Hockey League Father David Bauer Olympic
   Arena 1990 1
   Calgary Oval X-Treme National Women's Hockey League Olympic Oval 1995 4
   Calgary Speed Skating Association Speed Skating Canada Olympic Oval
   1990 >10

Attractions

   Calgary's skyline at night (from the north of downtown)
   Enlarge
   Calgary's skyline at night (from the north of downtown)

   Calgary's downtown features an eclectic mix of restaurants and bars,
   cultural venues, shopping (most notably, TD Square, Calgary Eaton
   Centre, Stephen Avenue and Eau Claire Market), and public squares such
   as Olympic Plaza. Downtown tourist attractions include the Calgary Zoo,
   the TELUS World of Science, the TELUS Convention Centre, the Chinatown
   district, the Glenbow Museum, the Calgary Tower, the Art Gallery of
   Calgary (AGC) and the EPCOR Centre for the Performing Arts. At 2.5
   acres (10,000 m²), the Devonian Gardens is one of the largest urban
   indoor gardens in the world, and it is located on the 4th floor of TD
   Square (above the shopping). The downtown region is also home to
   Prince's Island Park, an urban park located just north of the Eau
   Claire district. Directly to the south of downtown is Midtown and the
   Beltline. This area is quickly becoming one of the city's densest and
   most active mixed use areas. At the district's core is the popular "
   17th Avenue", which is known for its many bars and nightclubs,
   restaurants, and shopping venues. During the Calgary Flames' playoff
   run in 2004, 17th Avenue was frequented by over 50,000 fans and
   supporters per game night. The concentration of notorious red
   jersey-wearing fans led to the street's playoff moniker, the " Red
   Mile." Downtown Calgary is easily accessed using the city's C-Train
   rapid transit system.

   Attractions on the west side of the city include the Heritage Park
   Historical Village theme park, depicting life in pre-1914 Alberta and
   featuring working historic vehicles such as a steam train, paddlewheel
   boat and electric streetcar. The village itself is comprised of a
   mixture of replica buildings and historic structures relocated from
   southern Alberta. Other major city attractions include Canada Olympic
   Park (and the Canadian Olympic Hall of Fame), Calaway Park amusement
   park, and Race City Motorsport Park. In addition to the many shopping
   areas in the city centre, there are a number of large suburban shopping
   complexes in Calgary. Among the largest are Chinook Centre and
   Southcentre Mall in the south, WestHills and Signal Hill in the
   southwest, South Trail Crossing and Deerfoot Meadows in the southeast,
   Market Mall in the northwest, and Sunridge Mall in the northeast.

Skyline

   Calgary's downtown can easily be recognized by its numerous
   skyscrapers. Some of these structures, such as the Calgary Tower and
   the Pengrowth Saddledome are unique enough to be symbols of Calgary. As
   a major business centre with a metropolitan population of just over a
   million people, this is not surprising. Office buildings tend to
   concentrate within the commercial core while residential towers occur
   most frequently within the Downtown West End and the Beltline, south of
   downtown. These buildings are iconographic of the city's booms and
   busts, and it is easy to recognize the various phases of development
   that have shaped the image of downtown. The first skyscraper building
   boom occurred during the late 1950s and continued through to the 1970s.
   After 1980, during a major recession, many highrise construction
   projects were immediately halted. It was not until the late 1980s and
   through to the early 1990s that major construction began again.

   In total, there are 10 office towers that are at least 150.0 m (usually
   around 40 floors) or higher. The tallest of these (the Petro-Canada
   Centre), is the tallest office tower in Canada outside of Toronto.
   Several more large office towers are currently being planned for
   downtown: The Bow, Jameson Place, Penny Lane Towers (East and West),
   Centennial Place (two towers), City Centre (two towers), and the highly
   anticipated (although only rumored) Imperial Oil and First Canadian
   Centre II towers. A large number of major residential projects (mostly
   condominiums) are also under construction or have been proposed for
   Calgary's inner city.

   To connect many of the downtown office buildings, the city also boasts
   the world's most extensive skyway network (elevated indoor pedestrian
   bridges), officially called the +15. The name derives from the fact
   that the bridges are usually 15 feet above grade.

Demographics

   Ethnic Origin Population Percent
   Canadian      237,740    25.64%
   English       214,500    23.13%
   Scottish      164,665    17.76%
   German        164,420    17.73%
   Irish         140,030    15.10%
   Ukrainian     125,720    13.56%
   French        113,005    12.19%

   According the 2001 Statistics Canada federal census, there were 878,866
   people living within the City of Calgary proper. Of this population,
   49.9 per cent were male and 50.1 per cent were female. Children under
   five accounted for approximately 6.0 per cent of the resident
   population of Calgary. This compares with 6.2 per cent in Alberta, and
   almost 5.6 per cent for Canada overall.

   In 2001, 9.0 per cent of the resident population in Calgary were of
   retirement age (65 and over for males and females) compared with 13.2
   per cent in Canada, therefore, the average age is 34.9 years of age
   comparing to 37.6 years of age for all of Canada.

   In the five years between 1996 and 2001, Calgary's population grew by
   15.8 percent. This is contrasted with an increase of 10.3 percent for
   the province of Alberta. The population density of Calgary averaged
   1,252.3 persons per square kilometre, compared with an average of 4.6,
   for the province.

   A city-administered census estimate, conducted annually to assist in
   negotiating financial agreements with the provincial and federal
   governments, showed a population of just over 991,000 in 2006. The
   population of the Calgary Census Metropolitan Area was just over 1.06
   million, and the Calgary Economic Region posted a population of just
   under 1.15 million in 2005.

   Given a rate of growth averaging 98 people per day between April 2005
   and April 2006, the city determined statistically that the first child
   born on July 25, 2006 would be Calgary's one millionth resident. This
   date was arrived at only by means of assumption and statistical
   approximation and only took into account children born to Calgarian
   parents.

   Calgary is the main city of Census Division No. 6 and the Calgary
   Regional Partnership.

Visible minority groups

   A majority of Calgarians declare to be of European ancestry. This group
   comprises 79% of the population (688,465 people). Another 2.3% (19,765
   people) of the population is Aboriginal. In addition, the city is home
   to a relatively large number of people belonging to visible minority
   groups. These groups include Chinese: 51,540 or 5.9%, South Asian:
   36,370 or 4.2%, Filipino: 16,245 or 1.9%, Black Canadian: 13,370 or
   1.5%, Latin American: 8,525 or 1.0%, and many others. Based on single
   responses. Statistics are from the 2001 Statistics Canada census.

Government and politics

   Calgary's new and Old City Hall (built in 1911)
   Enlarge
   Calgary's new and Old City Hall (built in 1911)

   Calgary is traditionally viewed as a conservative city, dominated by
   traditional small-c social conservatives and fiscal conservatives. As
   the city is a corporate power-centre, a high percentage of the
   workforce is employed in white-collar jobs. During the 1990s the city's
   mainstream political culture was dominated by the right-wing Reform
   Party of Canada federally, and the Alberta Progressive Conservatives
   provincially. The Reform Party was founded in Calgary.

   However, as Calgary's population has increased, so has the diversity of
   its politics. One growing alternative movement was recently active
   during the 2000 World Petroleum Congress demonstrations and the J26 G8
   2002 protests. Protesters were a mix of locals and outsiders. In early
   2003 in response to the 2003 invasion of Iraq, according to organizers,
   5,000 to 10,000 people from southern Alberta, and elsewhere, converged
   outside the U.S. Consulate General's office. The city has chapters of
   various activist organizations, as well as an Anti-Capitalist
   Convergence. Left-wing provincial and federal Liberals tend to distance
   themselves from the activist movement which also claims support from
   the left. The Green Party of Canada has also made inroads in Calgary,
   exemplified by results of the 2004 federal election where they achieved
   7.5% of the vote across the city and 11.3% in the Calgary North Centre
   riding. A provincial alternative, represented by the right-wing Alberta
   Alliance, became active during the 26th Alberta general election and
   campaigned for fiscally and socially conservative reforms, and managed
   a growing percentage of support thereafter.

Provincial politics

   Prior to the November 22, 2004 General Election, all 21 provincial MLAs
   representing Calgary were Progressive Conservatives. The province's
   premier and leader of the Progressive Conservative Party of Alberta,
   Ralph Klein, has held his Calgary Elbow seat since 1989. The Alberta
   Liberals won three seats in the provincial legislature during that
   election. Two of the 23 provincial seats were new as a result of
   redistricting.

Federal politics

   Currently, all eight of Calgary's federal MPs are members of the
   Conservative Party of Canada (CPC). The CPC's predecessors have
   traditionally held the majority of the city's federal seats. The
   federal electoral district of Calgary-Southwest is currently held by
   Prime Minister and CPC leader Stephen Harper. Coincidentally, the same
   seat was also held by Preston Manning, the leader of the Reform Party
   of Canada, a predecessor of CPC. Joe Clark, former Prime Minister and
   former leader of the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada (also a
   predecessor of the CPC), held the riding of Calgary Centre. Of Canada's
   22 serving Prime Ministers, two have served terms representing a
   Calgary riding while Prime Minister. The first was the Right Honorable
   Richard Bennett from Calgary West who held that position from 1930 to
   1935.

Contemporary issues

   As a city that has experienced rapid growth in recent years, Calgary is
   having its share of growing pains. Among the most significant is that
   of urban sprawl. With no geographical barriers to its growth besides
   the Tsuu T'ina First Nation to the southwest and an affluent population
   that can afford large homes and properties, the city now has only a
   slightly smaller urban footprint than that of New York City and its
   boroughs, despite having less than one-eighth the population of New
   York City proper. This has led to difficulties in providing necessary
   transportation to Calgary’s population, both in the form of roadways
   and public transit. The result has also been a downtown which has
   traditionally lacked life on the evenings and weekends. It has also led
   to a somewhat misguided interpretation of the city as being a “driver’s
   city”. With the redevelopment of the Beltline and the Downtown East
   Village at the forefront, efforts are underway to vastly increase the
   density of the inner city, but the sprawl continues nevertheless. In
   2003, the combined population of the downtown neighbourhoods ( the
   Downtown Commercial Core, the Downtown East Village, the Downtown West
   End, Eau Claire, and Chinatown) was just over 12,600. In addition, the
   Beltline to the south of downtown had a population of 17,200.
   Condominiums in the Downtown West End
   Enlarge
   Condominiums in the Downtown West End

   Calgary has also struggled to find its own unique identity. On the one
   hand, it has relentlessly tried to maintain its western heritage. This
   has led to the popular nickname, "Cowtown". At the same time, the city
   has branded itself as being a modern economic and business centre. In
   recent years, Calgary has also become one of Canada's most cosmopolitan
   cities and has been quickly evolving into a major cultural centre.
   These very different images have often resulted in ambiguity and
   confusion with regard to the direction of Calgary's continued
   development.

   Many socioeconomic issues have found their way into the city’s urban
   fabric in recent history. As the population grows, so does the rate of
   poverty and homelessness in the city. Certain neighbourhoods along with
   portions of downtown have commonly been singled out as being home to
   much higher proportions of disadvantaged residents. Many neighbourhoods
   in the city’s east have been particularly (and perhaps unfairly)
   stereotyped this way.

   Although Calgary and Alberta have traditionally been affordable places
   to live, substantial growth (much of it due to the prosperous energy
   sector) has led to increasing demand on real-estate. As a result, house
   prices in Calgary have increased significantly in recent years and are
   now quite high relative to other Canadian cities.

   As of 2006, there is an extreme shortage of workers in Calgary, both
   skilled and unskilled. It is common to see signing bonuses for workers
   in the service industry. Downtown hotels have had to shut down floors
   because there is not enough staff to clean all the rooms. Calgary's
   housing boom, combined with large road construction projects and
   competition from oil fields with high wages to the north, has created a
   strain on the labor force.

Crime

   Even though Calgary has a relatively low crime rate when compared to
   other cities in North America, gangs and drug-related crime are
   becoming much larger issues than they have been in the past. Gang
   “warfare” is becoming more common all the time and contributes to a
   number of homicides in the city annually. Drug busts (particularly of
   marijuana grow operations) are also becoming very common, especially in
   the suburbs where anonymity is possible.

Economy

   Calgary's economy is still dominated by the oil and gas industry,
   despite recent diversification. The larger companies BP, EnCana,
   Imperial Oil, Petro-Canada, Shell Canada, Suncor Energy, and
   TransCanada.

   In 1996, Canadian Pacific Railway moved its head office to Calgary, and
   is now among the city's top employers. In 2005, Imperial Oil moved its
   headquarters from Toronto to Calgary in order to be closer to its oil
   operations. This involved the relocation of approximately 400 families.

   Other large employers include ATCO, Fluor Canada, the Forzani Group,
   Nortel, Shaw Cable, TELUS, and WestJet.

   There is approximately 50 million square feet of office space in the
   city, with approximately 32 million of these within the downtown
   commercial core).

   In October 2006, EnCana announced the construction of the Bow, a
   59-floor skyscraper in the downtown core of the city. This new
   corporate headquarters for the company will become, when completed, the
   tallest building in Canada outside of Toronto.

Education

Post-secondary

   University of Calgary Campus
   Enlarge
   University of Calgary Campus

   Calgary is the site of five major public post-secondary institutions.
   The University of Calgary is Calgary's primary large degree-granting
   facility. Currently, 28,807 students are enrolled there. Mount Royal
   College is the city's second largest institution (13,000 students), and
   it grants degrees in a number of fields. Bow Valley College's main
   campus is located downtown and provides training in business,
   technology, and the liberal arts for about 10,000 students (the college
   has three campuses in Calgary and numerous in the region). The Southern
   Alberta Institute of Technology (SAIT) provides polytechnic education.
   The Alberta College of Art and Design (ACAD) is located in Calgary. In
   addition, the University of Lethbridge has a satellite campus in the
   city.

   There are also several private liberal arts institutions including
   Alliance University College, Nazarene University College and St. Mary's
   University College. There are a number of other smaller private
   colleges in the city. Calgary is also home to DeVry Career College's
   only Canadian campus. Calgary was also the home of the Milton Wiliams
   School for Education Through the Arts, a national centre of excellence
   in arts immersion education for children between the fifth and ninth
   grades; however, in early 2005, the aging school was demolished.
   However, the school is still active on the grounds of the Willow Park
   Elementary School.

School system and K-12

   In the year 2005 roughly 97,000 students attended K-12 in about 215
   schools in the English language public school system run by the Calgary
   Board of Education. Another 43,000 attend about 93 schools in the
   separate English language Calgary Catholic School District board. The
   much smaller francophone community has their own French language school
   boards (public and Catholic), which are both based in Calgary, but
   serve a larger regional district. There are also several public charter
   schools in the city. Calgary has a number of unique schools, including
   the country's first high school exclusively designed for
   Olympic-calibre athletes, the National Sport School. Calgary is also
   home to many private schools including Strathcona Tweedsmuir, Rundle
   College, Clear Water Academy, Webber Academy, and Masters Academy.

   Calgary is also home to Western Canada's largest high school, "Lord
   Beaverbrook High School", with 2241 students enrolled in the 2005-2006
   school year.

Infrastructure

Transportation

   Calgary's C-Train system.
   Enlarge
   Calgary's C-Train system.

   Calgary is considered a transportation hub for much of central and
   western Canada. Calgary International Airport (YYC), in the city's
   northeast, is the fourth largest in Canada by passenger movements and
   is also a major cargo hub. Non-stop destinations include cities
   throughout Canada, the United States, Europe, Central America, and Asia
   (cargo services only). Calgary's presence on the Trans-Canada Highway
   and the Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR) mainline also make it an
   important hub for freight. Calgary no longer has regular interurban
   passenger rail service but CPR still operates a passenger railway
   station for rail tour companies at Palliser Square.

   Calgary maintains a major streets network and a freeway system. Much of
   the system is on a grid where roads are numbered with avenues running
   east-west and streets running north-south. Roads in predominantly
   residential areas as well as freeways and expressways do not generally
   conform to the grid and are usually not numbered as a result. In
   addition, Calgary Transit provides public transportation services
   throughout the city with buses and light rail. Calgary's rail system,
   known as the CTrain was one of the first such systems in North America
   and consists of three lines (two routes) on 42.1 km of track (mostly at
   grade with a dedicated right-of-way). The bus system has over 160
   routes.

   As an alternative to the over 260 km of dedicated bikeways on streets,
   the city has a large interconnected network of paved multi-use
   (bicycle, walking, rollerblading, etc) paths spanning over 635 km.

Medical centres and hospitals

   Calgary currently has three major hospitals; the Foothills Medical
   Centre, the Rockyview General Hospital and the Peter Lougheed Centre,
   all overseen by the Calgary Health Region. A medical evacuation
   helicopter operates under the auspices of the Shock Trauma Air Rescue
   Society. Calgary also has the Tom Baker Cancer Centre, Alberta
   Children's Hospital, and Grace Women's Health Centre providing a
   variety of care, in addition to hundreds of smaller medical and dental
   clinics. The University of Calgary Medical Centre also operates in
   partnership with the Calgary Health Region.

Military

   Mewata Armoury is just one location maintaining an active part-time
   training garrison.
   Enlarge
   Mewata Armoury is just one location maintaining an active part-time
   training garrison.

   The presence of the Canadian military has been part of Calgary's
   economy and culture since the early years of the 20th century,
   beginning with the assignment of a squadron of Strathcona's Horse.
   After many failed attempts to create the city's own unit, the 103rd
   Regiment (Calgary Rifles) was finally authorized on 1 Apr 1910.
   Canadian Forces Base (CFB) Calgary was established as Currie Barracks
   and Harvie Barracks following the Second World War. The base remained
   the most significant Department of National Defence (DND) institution
   in the city until it was decommissioned in 1998. Despite this closure,
   Calgary is still home to a number of Canadian Forces Reserve units,
   garrisoned throughout the city, along with a small cadre of Regular
   Force support.

Famous Calgarians

   Other names

        * Cowtown
        * The Stampede City
        * The Heart of The New West

   Sister cities


     * Phoenix, Arizona (United States) - 1997
     * Daejeon (South Korea) - 1996
     * Naucalpan (Mexico) - 1994

     * Daqing (People's Republic of China) - 1985
     * Jaipur (India) - 1973
     * Quebec City (Canada) - 1956

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calgary"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
