   #copyright

Cambodia

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Asian Countries;
Countries

   SOS Children works in Cambodia. For more information see SOS Children
   in Cambodia
                         Image:Cambodia5.png
   Preăh Réachéanachâkr Kâmpŭchea
   Royaume du Cambodge
   Kingdom of Cambodia

   Flag of Cambodia Coat of arms of Cambodia
   Flag             Coat of arms
   Motto:
   ( Khmer: "Nation, Religion, King")
   Anthem: Nokoreach
   Location of Cambodia
   Capital
   (and largest city)    Phnom Penh
                         11°33′N 104°55′E
    Official languages   Khmer
   Government            Democratic constitutional monarchy
    - King               Norodom Sihamoni
    - Prime Minister     Hun Sen
       Independence      from France
    - Declared           1949
    - Recognized         1953
                                Area
    - Total              181,035 km² ( 89th)
                         69,898 sq mi
    - Water (%)          2.5
                             Population
    - July 2005 estimate 14,071,000 ( 63rd)
    - 1998 census        11,437,656
    - Density            78/km² ( 111th)
                         201/sq mi
        GDP ( PPP)       2005 estimate
    - Total              $34.67 billion ( 89th)
    - Per capita         $2,399 ( 133rd)
        HDI  (2004)      0.571 (medium) ( 130th)
         Currency        ៛ Riel^1

                         currency_code = KHR ( {{{currency_code}}})
         Time zone       ( UTC+7)
    - Summer ( DST)      ( UTC+7)
       Internet TLD      .kh
       Calling code      +855
   ^1 Local currency, although US Dollars are widely used.

   This is a featured article. Click here for more information.

   The Kingdom of Cambodia ( Khmer: Image:Cambodia5.png transliterated:
   Preăh Réachéanachâkr Kâmpŭchea) is a country in Southeast Asia with a
   population of more than 13 million. Cambodia is the successor state of
   the once powerful Khmer Empire, which ruled most of the Indochinese
   Peninsula between the 11th and 14th centuries.

   A citizen of Cambodia is usually identified as "Cambodian" or "Khmer",
   which strictly refers to ethnic Khmers. Most Cambodians are Theravada
   Buddhists of Khmer extraction, but the country also has a substantial
   number of predominantly Muslim Cham, as well as small hill tribes.

   The country shares a border with Thailand to its west and northwest,
   with Laos to its northeast, and with Vietnam to its east and southeast.
   In the south it faces the Gulf of Thailand. The geography of Cambodia
   is dominated by the Mekong river (colloquial Khmer: Tonle Thom or "the
   great river") and the Tonlé Sap ("the fresh water river"), an important
   source of fish. Its low geography means much of the country sits near
   to below sea level, and its main source of water from the Mekong
   reverses its water flow in the wet season into the neighbouring Tonle
   Sap River.

Naming

   Cambodia is the traditional English transliteration, taken from the
   French Cambodge, while Kampuchea is the direct transliteration, more
   faithful to the Khmer pronunciation. The Khmer Kampuchea is derived
   from the ancient Khmer kingdom of Kambuja (Kambujadesa). Kambuja or
   Kamboja is the ancient Sanskrit name of the Kambojas, an early tribe of
   north India, named after their founder Kambu Svayambhuva, believed to
   be a variant of Cambyses. See Etymology of Kamboja.

   In the Khmer Mul script the official name of the country is ( regular
   script ), Preahreachanachâk Kampuchea, meaning "Kingdom of Cambodia".
   Etymologically, its components are: Preah- ("sacred"); -reach- ("king,
   royal, realm", from Sanskrit); -ana- (from Pāli āṇā, "authority,
   command, power", itself from Sanskrit ājñā, same meaning) -châk (from
   Sanskrit cakra, meaning "wheel", a symbol of power and rule).

   The name used on formal occasions, such as political speeches and news
   programs, is (regular script ), Prâteh Kampuchea, literally "the
   Country of Cambodia". Prâteh is a formal word meaning "country".

   The colloquial name most used by Khmer people, is , Srok Khmae,
   literally "the Khmer Land". Khmer is spelled with a final "r" in the
   Khmer alphabet, but this "r" is not pronounced in standard Khmer; word
   final "r" disappeared from most dialects of Khmer pronunciation in the
   19th century. Srok is a Mon-Khmer word roughly equal in meaning to
   prâteh, but less formal.

   Since independence, the official name of Cambodia has changed several
   times, following the troubled history of the country. The following
   names have been used in English and French since 1954.
   1993 stamp showing the name État du Cambodge
   Enlarge
   1993 stamp showing the name État du Cambodge
     * Kingdom of Cambodia/Royaume du Cambodge under the rule of the
       monarchy from 1953 through 1970;
     * Khmer Republic/République Khmère (a calque of French Republic)
       under the Lon Nol led government from 1970 to 1975;
     * Democratic Kampuchea/Kampuchea démocratique under the rule of the
       communist Khmer Rouge from 1975 to 1979;
     * People's Republic of Kampuchea/République populaire du Kampuchea (a
       calque of People's Republic of China) under the rule of the
       Vietnamese-sponsored government from 1979 to 1989;
     * State of Cambodia/État du Cambodge (a neutral name, while deciding
       whether to return to monarchy) under the rule of the United Nations
       transitional authority from 1989 to 1993;
     * Kingdom of Cambodia/Royaume du Cambodge reused after the
       restoration of the monarchy in 1994.

History

   A Khmer army going to war against the Cham, from a relief on the Bayon
   Enlarge
   A Khmer army going to war against the Cham, from a relief on the Bayon

   The first advanced civilizations in present day Cambodia appeared in
   the 1st millennium AD. During the 3rd, 4th, and 5th centuries, the
   Indianised states of Funan and Chenla coalesced in what is now
   present-day Cambodia and southwestern Vietnam. These states, which are
   assumed by most scholars to have been Khmer, had close relations with
   China and India. Their collapse was followed by the rise of the Khmer
   Empire, a civilization which flourished in the area from the 9th
   century to the 13th century.

   Though declining after this period, the Khmer Empire remained powerful
   in the region until the 15th century. The empire's centre of power was
   Angkor, where a series of capitals was constructed during the empire's
   zenith. Angkor Wat, the main religious temple at the site, is a
   symbolic reminder of Cambodia's past as a major regional power.

   After a long series of wars with neighbouring kingdoms, Angkor was
   sacked by the Thai and abandoned in 1432. The court moved the capital
   to Lovek where the kingdom sought to regain its glory through maritime
   trade. The attempt was short-lived, however, as continued wars with the
   Thai and Vietnamese resulted in the loss of more territory and the
   conquering of Lovek in 1594. During the next three centuries, The Khmer
   kingdom alternated as a vassal state of the Thai and Vietnamese kings,
   with short-lived periods of relative independence between.
            This article is part of
   the History of Cambodia series
   Early history of Cambodia
   Migration of Kambojas
   Funan (AD1 - AD630)
   Chenla (AD630 - AD802)
   Khmer Empire (AD802 - AD1432)
   Rule over Isan
   Dark ages of Cambodia (1432 - 1887)
   The loss of the Mekong Delta
   Colonial Cambodia (1887-1953)
   Post-Independence Cambodia
   Cambodian Civil War (1967-1975)
   Coup of 1970
   Khmer Rouge Regime (1975-1979)
   Mayagüez incident
   People's Republic of Kampuchea (1979-1989)
   Modern Cambodia (1989-present)
   2003 Phnom Penh riots

   In 1863 King Norodom, who had been installed by Thailand, sought the
   protection of France. In 1867, the Thai king signed a treaty with
   France, renouncing suzerainty over Cambodia in exchange for the control
   of Battambang and Siem Reap provinces which officially became part of
   Thailand. The provinces were ceded back to Cambodia by a border treaty
   between France and Thailand in 1906.

   Cambodia continued as a protectorate of France from 1863 to 1953,
   administered as part of the French colony of Indochina. After war-time
   occupation by the Japanese empire from 1941 to 1945, Cambodia gained
   independence from France on November 9, 1953. It became a
   constitutional monarchy under King Norodom Sihanouk.

   In 1955, Sihanouk abdicated in favour of his father in order to be
   elected Prime Minister. Upon his father's death in 1960, Sihanouk again
   became head of state, taking the title of Prince. As the Vietnam War
   progressed, Sihanouk adopted an official policy of neutrality until
   ousted in 1970 by a military coup led by Prime Minister General Lon Nol
   and Prince Sisowath Sirik Matak, while on a trip abroad. From Beijing,
   Sihanouk realigned himself with the communist Khmer Rouge rebels who
   had been slowly gaining territory in the remote mountain regions and
   urged his followers to help in overthowing the pro-United States
   government of Lon Nol, hastening the onset of civil war.
   French colonial buildings in Phnom Penh
   Enlarge
   French colonial buildings in Phnom Penh

   Operation Menu, a series of secret B-52 bombing raids by the United
   States on suspected Viet Cong bases and supply routes inside Cambodia,
   was acknowledged after Lon Nol assumed power; U.S. forces briefly
   invaded Cambodia in a further effort to disrupt the Viet Cong. The
   bombing continued and, as the Cambodian communists began gaining
   ground, eventually included strikes on suspected Khmer Rouge sites
   until halted in 1973. Estimates of the number of Cambodians killed
   during the bombing campaigns vary widely. The Khmer Rouge reached Phnom
   Penh and took power in 1975, changing the official name of the country
   to Democratic Kampuchea, led by Pol Pot.

   Estimates vary as to how many people were killed by the Khmer Rouge
   regime. Depending on whether or not one includes deaths from starvation
   and subsequent deaths in refugee camps, estimates range anywhere from
   1.7 million to 3 million Cambodians. Many were in some way deemed to be
   " enemies of the state", whether they were linked to the previous
   regime, civil servants, people of education or of religion, critics of
   the Khmer Rouge or Marxism, or simply offered resistance to the brutal
   treatment of the cadres. Hundreds of thousands more fled across the
   border into neighbouring Thailand.

   In November 1978, Vietnam invaded Cambodia to stop Khmer Rouge
   incursions across the border and the genocide of Vietnamese in
   Cambodia. Violent occupation and warfare between the Vietnamese and
   Khmer Rouge holdouts continued throughout the 1980s. Peace efforts
   began in Paris in 1989, culminating two years later in October 1991 in
   a comprehensive peace settlement. The United Nations was given a
   mandate to enforce a ceasefire, and deal with refugees and disarmament.

   After the brutality of the 1970s and the 1980s, and the destruction of
   the cultural, economic, social and political life of Cambodia, it is
   only in recent years that reconstruction efforts have begun and some
   political stability has finally returned to Cambodia. The democracy
   established following conflict was shaken in 1997 by factional
   fighting, but has otherwise remained in place.

Politics

   The current King of Cambodia, HM Norodom Sihamoni
   Enlarge
   The current King of Cambodia, HM Norodom Sihamoni

   The politics of Cambodia formally take place, according to the nation's
   constitution of 1993, in the framework of a parliamentary,
   representative democratic monarchy. The Prime Minister of Cambodia is
   the head of government, and of a pluriform multi-party system, while
   the king is the head of state. The Prime Minister is appointed by the
   King, on the advice and with the approval of the National Assembly; the
   Prime Minister and his or her ministerial appointees exercise executive
   power in government. Legislative power is vested in both the executive
   and the two chambers of parliament, the National Assembly of Cambodia
   and the Senate.

   On October 14, 2004, King Norodom Sihamoni was selected by a special
   nine-member throne council, part of a selection process that was
   quickly put in place after the surprise abdication of King Norodom
   Sihanouk a week before. Sihamoni's selection was endorsed by Prime
   Minister Hun Sen and National Assembly Speaker Prince Norodom Ranariddh
   (the new king's brother), both members of the throne council. He was
   crowned in Phnom Penh on October 29. The monarchy is symbolic and does
   not exercise political power. Norodom Sihamoni was trained in Cambodian
   classical dance and is unmarried.

   The BBC reports that corruption is rampant in the Cambodian political
   arena with international aid from the U.S. and other countries being
   illegally transferred into private accounts. Corruption has also added
   to the wide income disparity within the population.

Administrative divisions

   Map of Cambodia
   Enlarge
   Map of Cambodia

   Cambodia is divided into 20 provinces (khett, singular and plural) and
   four municipalities (krong, singular and plural). There are further
   subdivisions into districts (srok), communions (khum), great districts
   (khett), and islands (koh).
    1. Municipalities (Krong):
          + Phnom Penh
          + Sihanoukville (Kampong Som)
          + Pailin
          + Kep
    2. Provinces (Khett):
          + Banteay Meanchey
          + Battambang
          + Kampong Cham
          + Kampong Chhnang
          + Kampong Speu
          + Kampong Thom
          + Kampot
          + Kandal
          + Koh Kong
          + Kratié
          + Mondulkiri
          + Oddar Meancheay
          + Pursat
          + Preah Vihear
          + Prey Veng
          + Ratanakiri
          + Siem Reap
          + Stung Treng
          + Svay Rieng
          + Takéo
    3. Islands (Koh):
          + Koh Kong
          + Koh Polaway
          + Koh Rong
          + Koh Rong Samlon
          + Koh Sess
          + Koh Tang
          + Koh Thass
          + Koh Tral (administered by Vietnam as Phu Quoc)
          + Koh Traolach
          + Koh Treas

   Phnom Penh is the largest population centre, with 1 million of
   Cambodia's 13 million people. Mondulkiri, hill country in the northeast
   bordering Vietnam, is the largest province by area but ranks lowest in
   population density.

Foreign relations

   Cambodia is a member of the United Nations and its specialized agencies
   such as the World Bank and International Monetary Fund. It is an Asian
   Development Bank (ADB) member, a member of ASEAN, and joined the WTO on
   13 October 2004. In 2005 Cambodia attended the inaugural East Asia
   Summit.

   Following a return to political normality, Cambodia has established
   diplomatic relations with numerous countries; the government reports
   twenty embassies in the country including many of its Asian neighbours
   and those of important players during the Paris peace negotiations,
   including the US, Australia, Canada, China, the European Union (EU),
   Japan, and Russia.

   While the violent ruptures of the 1970s and 80s have passed, several
   border disputes between Cambodia and its neighbours persist. There are
   disagreements over some offshore islands and sections of the boundary
   with Vietnam, and undefined maritime boundaries and border areas with
   Thailand.

   In January 2003, there were riots in Phnom Penh prompted by rumored
   comments about Angkor Wat by a Thai actress wrongly attributed by
   Reaksmei Angkor, a Cambodian newspaper, and later quoted by Prime
   Minister Hun Sen. The Thai government sent military aircraft to
   evacuate Thai nationals and closed its border with Cambodia while Thais
   demonstrated outside the Cambodian embassy in Bangkok. The border was
   re-opened on March 21, after the Cambodian government paid $6 million
   USD in compensation for the destruction of the Thai embassy and agreed
   to compensate individual Thai businesses for their losses.

Geography

   Climate of Phnom Penh
   Enlarge
   Climate of Phnom Penh

   Cambodia has an area of about 181,040 square kilometres
   (69,900 sq. mi), sharing an 800 kilometre (500 mi) border with Thailand
   in the north and west, a 541 kilometre (336 mi) border with Laos in the
   northeast, and a 1,228 kilometre (763 mi) border with Vietnam in the
   east and southeast. It has 443 kilometres (275 mi) of coastline along
   the Gulf of Thailand.

   The most distinctive geographical feature is the lacustrine plain,
   formed by the inundations of the Tonle Sap (Great Lake), measuring
   about 2,590 square kilometres (1,000 sq. mi) during the dry season and
   expanding to about 24,605 square kilometres (9,500 sq. mi) during the
   rainy season. This densely populated plain, which is devoted to wet
   rice cultivation, is the heartland of Cambodia. Most (about 75%) of the
   country lies at elevations of less than 100 metres (330 ft) above sea
   level, the exceptions being the Cardamom Mountains (highest elevation
   1,813 m / 5,948 ft) and their southeast extension the Dâmrei Mountains
   ("Elephant Mountains") (elevation range 500–1,000 m or 1,640–3,280 ft),
   as well the steep escarpment of the Dângrêk Mountains (average
   elevation 500 m / 1,640 ft) along the border with Thailand's Isan
   region. The highest elevation of Cambodia is Phnom Aoral, near Pursat
   in the centre of the country, at 1,813 metres (5,948 feet).

   Temperatures range from 10°–38°C (50°–100°F) and Cambodia experiences
   tropical monsoons. Southwest monsoons blow inland bringing
   moisture-laden winds from the Gulf of Thailand and Indian Ocean from
   May to October, and the country experiences the heaviest precipitation
   from September to October. The northeast monsoon ushers in the dry
   season, which lasts from November to March, with the driest period from
   January to February.

Economy

   Despite recent progress, the Cambodian economy continues to suffer from
   the effects of decades of civil war, internal strife and rampant
   corruption. The per capita income is rapidly increasing, but is low
   compared with other countries in the region. Most rural households
   depend on agriculture and its related sub-sectors. Rice, fish, timber,
   garments and rubber are Cambodia's major exports, and the US,
   Singapore, Japan, Thailand, China, Indonesia and Malaysia are its major
   export partners.

   War and brutal totalitarianism in the 1970s created famine in Cambodia.
   Desperate farm families consumed their rice seeds and many traditional
   varieties became difficult to find. In the 1980s the International Rice
   Research Institute (IRRI) reintroduced more than 750 traditional rice
   varieties to Cambodia from its rice seed bank in the Philippines. These
   varieties had been collected in the 1960s. In 1987, the Australian
   government funded IRRI to assist Cambodia to improve its rice
   production. By 2000, Cambodia was once again self-sufficient in rice
   (Puckridge 2004, Fredenburg and Hill 2006).

   The recovery of Cambodia's economy slowed dramatically in 1997–98, due
   to the regional economic crisis, civil violence, and political
   infighting. Foreign investment and tourism also fell off drastically.
   Since then however, growth has been steady. In 1999, the first full
   year of peace in 30 years, progress was made on economic reforms and
   growth resumed at 5.0%. Despite severe flooding, GDP grew at 5.0% in
   2000, 6.3% in 2001, and 5.2% in 2002. Tourism was Cambodia's fastest
   growing industry, with arrivals increasing from 219,000 in 1997 to
   1,055,000 in 2004. During 2003 and 2004 the growth rate remained steady
   at 5.0%, while in 2004 inflation was at 1.7% and exports at $1.6
   billion US dollars. As of 2005, GDP per capita was $2,200, which ranked
   178th (out of 233) countries.

   The population often lacks education and productive skills,
   particularly in the poverty-ridden countryside, which suffers from a
   lack of basic infrastructure. Fear of renewed political instability and
   corruption within the government discourage foreign investment and
   delay foreign aid, although there has been significant assistance from
   bilateral and multilateral donors. Donors pledged $504m to the country
   in 2004, while the Asian Development Bank alone has provided $850m in
   loans, grants, and technical assistance.
   Angkor Wat, the biggest tourist draw of Cambodia
   Enlarge
   Angkor Wat, the biggest tourist draw of Cambodia

   The tourism industry is the country's second-greatest source of hard
   currency after the textile industry. More than 60% of visitor arrivals
   are to Angkor, and most of the remainder to Phnom Penh. Other tourist
   hotspots include Sihanoukville in the southeast which has several
   popular beaches, and the nearby area around Kampot including the Bokor
   Hill Station. The BBC reports that Cambodia is also a major destination
   for sex tourism, and there is particular concern over child sex and
   forced prostitution.

Demographics

   Number of inhabitants between 1961 and 2001 in thousands. Note the
   decrease during the Khmer Rouge years (1975–79). FAO Data,Cambodia
   Enlarge
   Number of inhabitants between 1961 and 2001 in thousands. Note the
   decrease during the Khmer Rouge years (1975–79). FAO Data,Cambodia

   Cambodia is ethnically homogeneous. More than 90% of its population is
   of Khmer origin and speaks the Khmer language, the country's official
   language. The remainder include Chinese, Vietnamese, Cham, Khmer Loeu,
   and Indians.

   The Khmer language is a member of the Mon-Khmer subfamily of the
   Austroasiatic language group. French, once the lingua franca of
   Indochina and still spoken by some, mostly older Cambodians as a second
   language, remains the language of instruction in various schools and
   universities that are often funded by the government of France.
   Cambodian French, a remnant of the country's colonial past, is a
   dialect found in Cambodia and is frequently used in government.
   However, in recent decades, many younger Cambodians and those in the
   business-class, have favoured learning English, which is gradually
   becoming more widely spoken.

   Theravada Buddhism, once suppressed by the Khmer Rouge but now
   experiencing a revival, is the dominant religion, but Islam (5%) and
   Christianity (2%) are also practiced.

   Civil war and its aftermath have had a marked effect on the Cambodian
   population. The median age is a low 20.6 years, with 35.6% younger than
   15. At 0.95 males/female, Cambodia has the most female-biased sex ratio
   in the Greater Mekong Subregion . In the Cambodian population over 65,
   the female to male ratio is 1.6:1. UNICEF has designated Cambodia the
   third most mined country in the world, attributing over 60,000 civilian
   deaths and thousands more maimed or injured since 1970 to the
   unexploded landmines left behind in rural areas. The majority of the
   victims are children herding animals or playing in the fields. Adults
   that survive landmines often require amputation of one or more limbs
   and have to resort to begging for survival.

Culture and sport

   "Cambodia" in Khmer writing
   Enlarge
   "Cambodia" in Khmer writing

   Khmer culture, as developed and spread by the Khmer empire, has
   distinctive styles of dance, architecture and sculpture, which have
   strongly influenced neighbouring Laos and Thailand. Angkor Wat (Angkor
   means "city" and Wat "temple") is the best preserved example of Khmer
   architecture from the Angkorian era and hundreds of other temples have
   been discovered in and around the region. The Tuol Sleng Genocide
   Museum, the infamous prison of the Khmer Rouge, and Choeung Ek, one of
   the main Killing Fields are other important historic sites.

   Bonn Om Teuk (Festival of Boat Racing), the annual boat rowing contest,
   is the most attended Cambodian national festival. Held at the end of
   the rainy season when the Mekong river begins to sink back to its
   normal levels allowing the Tonle Sap River to reverse flow,
   approximately 10% of Cambodia's population attends this event each year
   to play games, give thanks to the moon, watch fireworks, and attend the
   boat race in a carnival-type atmosphere. Popular games include
   cockfighting, soccer, and kicking a sey, which is similar to a hacky
   sack. Notable recent artistic figures include the singers Sinn
   Sisamouth, who introduced new musical styles to the country, and later
   Meng Keo Pichenda.

   Rice, as in other South East Asian countries, is the staple grain,
   while fish from the Mekong and Tonle Sap also form an important part of
   the diet. The Cambodian per capita supply of fish and fish products for
   food and trade in 2000 was 20 kilograms of fish per year or 2  ounces
   per day per person. Some of the fish can be made into prahok (a Khmer
   delicacy) for longer storage. Overall, the cuisine of Cambodia is
   similar to that of its Southeast Asian neighbours. The cuisine is
   relatively unknown to the world compared to that of its neighbors
   Thailand and Vietnam, but has been described not as spicy as Thai
   cuisine and similar to other Southeast Asia cuisines.

   Football (soccer) is one of the more popular sports, although
   professional organized sports are not as prevelant in Cambodia as in
   western countries due to the economic conditions. The Cambodia national
   football team managed fourth in the 1972 Asian Cup but development has
   slowed since the civil war. Western sports such as volleyball,
   bodybuilding, field hockey, rugby, and baseball are gaining popularity
   while traditional boat racing maintains its appeal as a national sport.
   Martial Arts is also practiced in Cambodia, the most popular being
   Pradal Serey, which is similar to Muay Thai and also considered a
   national sport. Other styles such as Karate, Kung Fu and Taekwondo are
   rapidly catching on.

Transport

   Motorbike riders in Phnom Penh
   Enlarge
   Motorbike riders in Phnom Penh

   The civil war severely damaged Cambodia's transport system, despite the
   provision of Soviet technical assistance and equipment. Cambodia has
   two rail lines, totalling about 612 kilometers (380  mi) of single,
   one  meter gauge track. The lines run from the capital to Sihanoukville
   on the southern coast, and from Phnom Penh to Sisophon (although trains
   often run only as far as Battambang). Currently only one passenger
   train per week operates, between Phnom Penh and Battambang.

   The nation's extensive inland waterways were important historically in
   domestic trade. The Mekong and the Tonle Sap River, their numerous
   tributaries, and the Tonle Sap provided avenues of considerable length,
   including 3,700 kilometers (2,300 mi) navigable all year by craft
   drawing 0.6 meters (2 ft) and another 282 kilometers (175 mi) navigable
   to craft drawing 1.8 meters (6 ft). Cambodia has two major ports, Phnom
   Penh and Sihanoukville, and five minor ones. Phnom Penh, located at the
   junction of the Basak, the Mekong, and the Tonle Sap rivers, is the
   only river port capable of receiving 8,000  ton ships during the wet
   season and 5,000  ton ships during the dry season.

   The country has six commercial airports: Pochentong International
   Airport near Phnom Penh is the largest; the others are at Siem Reap,
   Battambang, Mondulkiri, Ratanakiri, and Stung Treng.

   With increasing economic activity has come an increase in automobile
   and motorcycle use; as often in developing countries, an associated
   rise in traffic deaths and injuries is occurring. Cycle rickshaws
   ("cyclos") are an additional option often used by visitors.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cambodia"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
