   #copyright

Cambridge

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

                     Cambridge
    King's College Chapel, seen from The Backs.

   Kings College Chapel, seen from The Backs.
                 City of Cambridge

   Cambridge

                      Shown within Cambridgeshire
                     Geography
   Status:            City (1951)
   Region:            East of England
   Admin. County      Cambridgeshire
   Area
   - Total            Ranked 316th
                      40.70 km²
   Admin. HQ          Cambridge
   ONS code           12UB
   Coordinates        52°12′29″N, 0°07′21″E
                   Demographics
   Population:
   - Total (2005 est.)
   - Density          Ranked 157th
                      124,000
                      3,047 / km²
   Ethnicity
                      89.4% White
                      4.4% Mixed Race/Other
                      3.8% S.Asian
                      1.3% Afro-Carib.
                      2.1% Chinese
                     Politics
   Arms of Cambridge City Council
   Cambridge City Council
   http://www.cambridge.gov.uk/
   Leadership:        Leader & Cabinet
   Executive          Liberal Democrats
   MP                 David Howarth
   MP(2)              Andrew Lansley
   Map of the Cambridgeshire area (1904).
   Enlarge
   Map of the Cambridgeshire area (1904).

   The city of Cambridge is an old English university town and the
   administrative centre of the county of Cambridgeshire. It lies
   approximately 50 miles (80 km) north-northeast of London and is
   surrounded by a number of smaller towns and villages. It is also at the
   heart of the high-technology centre known as Silicon Fen and is one of
   the major constituent parts of the Oxford-Cambridge Arc.

   Cambridge is best known for the University of Cambridge, which includes
   the renowned Cavendish Laboratory, King's College Chapel, and the
   Cambridge University Library. The Cambridge skyline is dominated by the
   last two, along with the chimney of Addenbrooke's Hospital in the far
   south of the city and St John's College Chapel tower in the north. The
   city's name is pronounced /'keɪm.bɹɪdʒ/, as opposed to another
   Cambridge in Gloucestershire, England, which is pronounced
   /'kæm.bɹɪdʒ/.

   According to the 2001 census, the population was 108,863 (including
   22,153 students).

History

   Settlements have existed around the area since before the Roman Empire.
   The earliest clear evidence of occupation, a collection of hunting
   weapons, is from the Late Bronze Age, starting around 1000 BC. There is
   further archaeological evidence through the Iron Age, a Belgic tribe
   having settled on Castle Hill in the 1st century BC.

   The first major development of the area began with the Roman invasion
   of Britain in about AD 40. Castle Hill made Cambridge a useful place
   for a military outpost from which to defend the River Cam. It was also
   the crossing point for the Via Devana which linked Colchester in Essex
   with the garrisons at Lincoln and the north. This Roman settlement may
   have been called Durolipons.

   The settlement remained a regional centre during the 350 years after
   the Roman occupation, until about AD 400. Roman roads and walled
   enclosures can still be seen in the area.

   After the Romans had left, Saxons took over the land on and around
   Castle Hill. Their grave goods have been found in the area. During
   Anglo-Saxon times Cambridge benefited from good trade links across the
   otherwise hard-to-travel fenlands. By the 7th century, however,
   visitors from nearby Ely reported that Cambridge had declined severely.
   Cambridge is mentioned in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle as Grantebrycge.
   This is the earliest known reference to a bridge at Cambridge.

   The arrival of the Vikings in Cambridge was recorded in the Anglo-Saxon
   Chronicle in 875. Viking rule, the Danelaw, had been imposed by 878.
   The Vikings' vigorous trading habits caused Cambridge to grow rapidly.
   During this period the centre of the town shifted from Castle Hill on
   the left bank of the river to the area now known as the Quayside on the
   right bank. After the end of the Viking period the Saxons enjoyed a
   brief return to power, building St Benet's church in 1025. It still
   stands in Bene't Street.
   Great St Mary's Church marks the centre of Cambridge, whilst the Senate
   House on the left is the centre of the University. Gonville and Caius
   College is in the background.
   Enlarge
   Great St Mary's Church marks the centre of Cambridge, whilst the Senate
   House on the left is the centre of the University. Gonville and Caius
   College is in the background.

   In 1068, two years after his conquest of England, William of Normandy
   built a castle on Castle Hill. Like the rest of the new kingdom,
   Cambridge fell under the control of the King and his deputies. The
   distinctive Round Church dates from this period. By Norman times the
   name of the town had mutated to Grentabrige or Cantebrigge
   (Grantbridge), while the river that flowed through it was called the
   Granta.

   Over time the name of the town changed to Cambridge, while the river
   Cam was still known as the Granta - indeed the river is still often
   known as the Granta to this day. The Welsh language name of the town
   remains Caergrawnt (roughly analogous to Grantchester, which is also
   the name of a village near Cambridge). It was only later that the river
   became known as the Cam, by analogy with the name Cambridge. The
   University, formed 1209, uses a Latin adjective cantabrigiensis (often
   contracted to "Cantab") to mean "of Cambridge", but this is obviously a
   back-formation from the English name.
   Trinity Street and the Main Gate of St John's College with the tower of
   the college's chapel looming in the background.
   Enlarge
   Trinity Street and the Main Gate of St John's College with the tower of
   the college's chapel looming in the background.

Beginnings of the University

   In 1209, students escaping from hostile townspeople in Oxford fled to
   Cambridge and formed a University there. The oldest college that still
   exists, Peterhouse, was founded in 1284. One of the most impressive
   buildings in Cambridge, King's College Chapel, was begun in 1446 by
   King Henry VI. The project was completed in 1515 during the reign of
   King Henry VIII.

   Cambridge University Press originated with a printing licence issued in
   1534. Hobson's Conduit, the first project to bring clean drinking water
   to the town centre, was built in 1610 (by the Hobson of Hobson's
   choice). Parts of it survive today. Addenbrooke's Hospital was founded
   in 1766. The railway and station were built in 1845. According to
   legend, the University dictated their location: well away from the
   centre of town, so that the possibility of quick access to London would
   not distract students from their work. However, there is no basis for
   this in fact.

   Cambridge University played a unique role in the invention of modern
   football as the game's first set of rules were drawn up by members of
   the university in 1848. The Cambridge Rules were first played in
   Parker's Piece and had a "defining influence on the 1863 Football
   Association rules."

   Despite having a University, Cambridge was not granted its city charter
   until 1951. Cambridge does not have a cathedral, which was
   traditionally a pre-requisite for city status.

Cambridge today

   Drawing on its links with the University, the Cambridge area today is
   sometimes referred to as Silicon Fen, due to the growth of high tech
   businesses and technology incubators that have sprung up in the series
   of science parks and other developments in and around the city. Such
   companies include Acorn Computers and Sinclair. The University was
   joined by the larger part of Anglia Ruskin University, and the
   educational reputation has led to other bodies (such as the Open
   University in East Anglia) basing themselves in the city.

   The University has a large number of museums that are open to the
   public.

Housing estates

   Throughout the 1960s and 70s the size of the city was greatly increased
   by several large council estates planned to hold London's overspill.
   The biggest impact has been on the area north of the river, which is
   now home to the estates of Arbury, East Chesterton and King's Hedges,
   whilst there are many smaller estates to the south of the city.

Government

   The market in the centre of Cambridge, with Great St Mary's Church in
   the background · more [1]
   Enlarge
   The market in the centre of Cambridge, with Great St Mary's Church in
   the background · more

Local government

   Cambridge is a non-metropolitan district, with a city council. The city
   council's headquarters are in the Guildhall, an imposing building in
   the market square.

   Cambridge is also served by Cambridgeshire county council.

   For electoral purposes the city is divided into the following wards:
   Abbey, Arbury, Castle, Cherry Hinton, Coleridge, East Chesterton, Kings
   Hedges, Market, Newnham, Petersfield, Queen Edith's, Romsey,
   Trumpington, West Chesterton.

   The political composition of the city wards of the county council after
   the May 2005 elections was ( ):
     * 10 Liberal Democrat seats
     * 4 Labour seats
     * 0 Conservative seats

   The political composition of the city council after the May 2006
   elections was:
     * 29 Liberal Democrat councillors
     * 13 Labour councillors

   The Liberal Democrats have controlled the city council since 2000.

Westminster

   The parliamentary constituency of Cambridge covers most of the city.
   David Howarth ( Liberal Democrat) was elected MP at the 2005 general
   election, winning the seat from the sitting MP, Labour's Anne Campbell.
   Some areas, however — corresponding largely to the Queen Edith's and
   Trumpington wards — lie in the South Cambridgeshire constituency, whose
   MP is Andrew Lansley ( Conservative), first elected in 1997.

   The University used to have a seat in the House of Commons, Sir Isaac
   Newton being one of the most notable holders. The Cambridge University
   constituency was abolished under 1948 legislation, and ceased at the
   dissolution of Parliament for the 1950 general election, along with the
   other university constituencies.

Affiliations

   Cambridge is twinned with:
     * Germany Heidelberg, Germany since 1957
     * Hungary Szeged, Hungary since 1987.

Transport

   Punting on the Cam river is a popular recreation in Cambridge.
   Enlarge
   Punting on the Cam river is a popular recreation in Cambridge.

Roads

   Because of its rapid growth since the 20th century, Cambridge has a
   congested road network. Several major roads intersect at Cambridge. The
   M11 motorway from east London terminates here. The A14 (formerly A604
   and A45) east-west trunk route skirts the northern edge of the city.
   This is a major freight route connecting the port of Felixstowe on the
   east coast with the Midlands, North Wales, the west coast and Ireland.
   The A14 is considered by many local people to be dangerous, and
   unnecessarily congested. This is particularly true of the section
   between Huntingdon and Cambridge where the east-west traffic is merged
   with the A1 to M11 north-south traffic on just a 2-lane dual
   carriageway. The A10, a former Roman road from north London, passes
   round the city on its way to Ely and King's Lynn. Other roads connect
   the city with Bedford, St Neots, Newmarket and Colchester.

   The city has a ring road about 2 km in diameter, inside which there are
   traffic restrictions intended to improve conditions for pedestrians,
   cyclists and bus users and to reduce congestion. It has a well
   developed park and ride bus service encouraging motorists to park near
   the city's edge.

Rail

   The front of Cambridge Station.
   Enlarge
   The front of Cambridge Station.

   Cambridge railway station was built in 1845 with a platform designed to
   take two full-length trains. Cambridge has direct rail links to King's
   Cross (via Hitchin and the East Coast Main Line) and Liverpool Street
   (via the West Anglia Main Line) stations in London. It is also linked
   to King's Lynn and Ely (via the Fen Line), Norwich (via the Breckland
   Line), Liverpool, Birmingham, Ipswich and as well as London Stansted
   Airport. The important UK rail hub of Peterborough is also within reach
   of Cambridge. The railway service connecting Cambridge and Oxford,
   known as the Varsity Line, was discontinued in 1968.

Air

   Cambridge City Airport is owned by Marshall Aerospace, who are capable
   of adapting and fitting out military transports, airliners and
   corporate jets, and most notably has been involved in fitting out the
   world's largest airliner, the Airbus A380. The runway can accommodate
   an unladen Boeing 747 or MD-11, but there is no regular scheduled
   service and it is mostly used by business and leisure flights. In
   Summer 2004 a charter service to Jersey was operated by Aurigny Air
   Services using Saab 340 turboprop aircraft. A dealer in
   fibreglass-moulded light monoplanes is also based here. Removal of
   Marshalls to a site away from the city, with development of the airport
   site for housing, is a possibility over the next 5-10 years.

Cycling

   As a university town lying on fairly flat ground and with traffic
   congestion, Cambridge has a large number of cyclists. Many residents
   also prefer cycling to driving in the narrow, busy streets, giving the
   city the highest level of cycle use in the UK. According to the 2001
   census, 25% of residents travelled to work by cycle. A few roads within
   the city are adapted for cycling, including separate traffic lights for
   cycle lanes and cycle contraflows on streets which are otherwise
   one-way; the city also benefits from parks which have shared use paths.
   There are, however, no separate cycle paths within the city centre.
   Despite the high levels of cycling, expenditure on cycling
   infrastructure is around the national average of 0.3% of the transport
   budget. There are a few cycle routes in the surrounding countryside and
   the city is now linked to the National Cycle Network. The main
   organisation campaigning to improve conditions for cyclists in
   Cambridge is Cambridge Cycling Campaign.

Sport

   Cambridge's most successful sports team over recent years is its rugby
   union club. After three successive promotions they are playing in
   National Division Two for the 2006/07 season. The club's home ground is
   at West Renault Park on Granchester Road in the south west corner of
   the city.

   The city is home to Cambridge United F.C., who played in the Football
   League at the Abbey Stadium from 1970 to 2005, when they were relegated
   to Conference National. When relegation became inevitable the club was
   placed in administration with substantial debts, but it emerged from
   administration in time for the 2005-2006 season. Non-league Cambridge
   City F.C. play at Milton Road in Chesterton.

   Cambridge is also known for its university sporting events against
   Oxford, especially the rugby union Varsity Match and the Boat Race.
   These are followed by people across the globe, many of whom have no
   connection to the institutions themselves.

   The City Council hosts details of Local Sports Clubs.

   Cambridge has a King George's Field, named as a memorial to King George
   V.

Health

   The MRC Building, one of Cambridge's many research facilities
   Enlarge
   The MRC Building, one of Cambridge's many research facilities

   Cambridge is well served by medical care, with several smaller medical
   centres dotted around the city, along with Addenbrooke's Hospital a
   learning and teaching hospital and one of the largest in the United
   Kingdom, also functioning as a centre for medical research.

Multicultural Cambridge

   For its size, Cambridge has a relatively diverse ethnic population.
   This is mainly due to people from other countries coming to study at
   the University. The area around Mill Road has a large Turkish
   population, and is home to many Asian food stores and the Abu Bakr
   Mosque.

Religion

   Cambridge has an active Christian population which makes use of the
   many churches that dominate the town's landscape. Great St Mary's
   church has the status of being the "University Church", and official
   university sermons take the part of services there. Many of the
   University colleges contain chapels that hold services according to the
   rites and ceremonies of the Church of England, while at least one is
   Roman Catholic. There is also a mosque used by Muslim residents and
   students, and a synagogue belonging to the university Jewish Society.

   The town also has a number of ecclesiastical colleges for training
   clergy for ordination into a number of denominations, with affiliations
   to both the University of Cambridge and Anglia Ruskin Universiy.

Fiction

   In the 1950s, the English children's writer Philippa Pearce created a
   fictionalised version of Cambridge known as "Castleford" (not connected
   to the real town of the same name in West Yorkshire). It appears in
   several of her books, most notably Tom's Midnight Garden and Minnow on
   the Say. The main distinguishing point between "Castleford" and the
   real Cambridge is that this "Castleford" does not have a university,
   apparently because the author wanted the readers to think of the town
   in itself, and she felt that Cambridge was too closely associated with
   its university in the public imagination for this to be possible.

   Tom Sharpe is also a Cambridge-based author who has written fictional
   accounts of teaching at Cambridge Technical College (now Anglia Ruskin
   University) and of Cambridge college life.

   Susanna Gregory wrote a series of novels set in 14th-century Cambridge
   and featuring a teacher of medicine and sleuth named Matthew
   Bartholomew.

   Douglas Adams was at one time a resident of Cambridge, and parts of his
   novel Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency are set in the city. This
   novel was partially reworked from his unbroadcast Doctor Who serial
   Shada, which also included scenes in Cambridge.

   Sylvia Plath wrote a number of short stories with a Cambridge setting
   which are published in the collection Johnny Panic and the Bible of
   Dreams.

   Dame Rose Macaulay had strong connections to the city, and set part of
   her novel They Were Defeated in the city during the reign of Charles I.

   A number of novels in C.P.Snow's Strangers and Brothers series (The
   Masters, The Affair) are set in a Cambridge college (a thinly-veiled
   Christ's).

   Kate Atkinson used the town as the setting for her book Case Histories.

   Michelle Spring wrote a series of novels about a Cambridge-based
   private detective, Laura Principal, beginning with Every Breath You
   Take (1994).

   Cambridge fiction is extracted and discussed in Graham Chainey, "A
   Literary History of Cambridge" (Cambridge, 1985, 1995; ISBN 090711525X)
   and Martin Garrett, "Cambridge: a Cultural and Literary History"
   (Oxford, 2004; ISBN 1902669797).

Festivals and events

     * Cambridge Midsummer Fair is one of the oldest fairs in the UK and
       at one point was possibly the largest medieval fair in Europe.
       Today it exists primarily as an annual funfair with the vestige of
       a market attached.
     * Cambridge Folk Festival is one of the largest festivals of folk
       music in the UK
     * Strawberry Fair, is a free, public fair. It is held every first
       Saturday in June on Midsummer Common.
     * Cambridge Beer Festival, which began in 1973. It takes place on
       Jesus Green for one week in May every year and is staffed solely by
       volunteers.
     * The Cambridge Film Festival is held annually in July and is
       considered to be one of the nation's best.

Notable residents

     * Stephen Hawking, physicist.
     * Ronald Searle, cartoonist.
     * Rory McGrath, comedian.
     * Jeffrey Archer, author and former politician.
     * David Gilmour, Roger Waters, and the late Syd Barrett, founding
       (excepting Gilmour) members of the rock band Pink Floyd.

Trivia

     * In 2004, Cambridge was granted Fairtrade City status.
     * In 2004, the famous board game Monopoly enjoyed the publication of
       a Cambridge edition .

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cambridge"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
