   #copyright

Cameroon

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Countries;
Countries

   SOS Children works in Cameroon. For more information see SOS Children
   in Cameroon, Africa
               République du Cameroun
   Republic of Cameroon

   Flag of Cameroon Emblem of Cameroon
   Flag             Emblem
   Motto: Peace - Work - Fatherland
   (French: Paix - Travail - Patrie)
   Anthem: O Cameroon, Cradle of Our Forefathers
   (French: Ô Cameroun, Berceau de nos Ancêtres)
   Location of Cameroon
          Capital        Yaoundé
                         3°52′N 11°31′E
       Largest city      Douala
    Official languages   French, English
   Government            Republic
    - President          Paul Biya
    - Prime Minister     Ephraïm Inoni
       Independence      from France and UK
    - Date               January 1, 1960
                         Area
    - Total              475,442 km² ( 53rd)
                         183,568 sq mi
    - Water (%)          1.3
                      Population
    - July 2005 estimate 16,322,000 ( 58th)
    - 2003 census        15,746,179
    - Density            34/km² ( 167th)
                         88/sq mi
        GDP ( PPP)       2005 estimate
    - Total              $43.196 billion ( 84th)
    - Per capita         $2,421 ( 130th)
        HDI  (2006)      0.506 (medium) ( 144th)
         Currency        CFA franc ( XAF)
         Time zone       WAT ( UTC+1)
    - Summer ( DST)      not observed ( UTC+1)
       Internet TLD      .cm
       Calling code      +237

   Cameroon, officially the Republic of Cameroon, is a unitary republic of
   central Africa. It borders Nigeria, Chad, Central African Republic,
   Republic of Congo, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea and the Gulf of Guinea.
   Cameroon, a German colony at the time of World War I, was split among
   the French and British as war spoils after the defeat of Germany. In
   1960, French Cameroun became independent as the Republic of Cameroun,
   and merged with the southern part of British Cameroons in 1961 to form
   the Federal Republic of Cameroon. It was renamed the United Republic of
   Cameroon in 1972, and the Republic of Cameroon or République du
   Cameroun in 1984 (its official languages are English and French).

   Compared to other African countries, Cameroon enjoys relative political
   and social stability, which has in turn permitted the development of
   agriculture, roads, and railways, as well as an extensive petroleum
   industry. Despite movement toward political reform, however, power
   remains firmly in the hands of an ethnic oligarchy.

History

Pre-colonial period

   Joseph Merrick, a Jamaican Baptist missionary, at an Isubu funeral in
   1845
   Enlarge
   Joseph Merrick, a Jamaican Baptist missionary, at an Isubu funeral in
   1845

   Archaeological finds show that humankind has inhabited Cameroonian
   territory since the Neolithic. The longest continuous inhabitants are
   probably the Pygmy groups such as the Baka. The Sao culture occupied
   the area around Lake Chad c. AD 500. The Kanem-Bornu Empire later came
   to dominate this area. Kingdoms, fondoms, and chiefdoms arose in the
   west, including those of the Bamileke, Bamun, and Tikar.

   Portuguese sailors reached the coast in 1472. They noted an abundance
   of prawns and crayfish in the Wouri River and named it Rio dos
   Camarões, Portuguese for River of Prawns, and the phrase from which
   Cameroon is derived. Over the next few centuries, European interests
   regularised trade with the coastal peoples. Meanwhile, Christian
   missionaries established operations and gradually moved inland.

   In the early 19th century, Modibo Adama led Fulani soldiers on a jihad
   against the non-Muslim peoples ( Kirdi) of the north and those Muslims
   who still practiced aspects of paganism. Adama established the Adamawa
   Emirate, a vassal to the Sokoto Caliphate of Usman dan Fodio. Ethnic
   groups who fled the Fulani warriors displaced others, resulting in a
   major redistribution of population.

Colonial period

   The German Empire claimed the territory as the colony of Kamerun in
   1884. They moved inland, breaking trade monopolies held by coastal
   peoples such as the Duala and steadily expanded their control. The
   Germans established plantations in the forested south, especially in
   the coastal southwest. They made substantial investments in the
   colony's infrastructure, including the building of railways, roads, and
   hospitals. However, the indigenous peoples were reluctant to work on
   these projects, so the government instigated a harsh system of forced
   labour. With the defeat of Germany in World War I, Kamerun became a
   League of Nations mandate territory and was split between French
   Cameroun and British Cameroons in 1919. New Kamerun, territories
   acquired by Germany in 1911, became part of French Equatorial Africa.

   France improved the infrastructure of its territory with capital
   investments, a supply of skilled workers, and continued forced labour.
   French Cameroun eventually surpassed its British counterpart in gross
   national product, education, and health care services. Nevertheless,
   these developments were largely relegated to Douala, Foumban, Yaoundé,
   and Kribi, and the territory between them. The economy was carefully
   tied with that of France; raw materials sent to Europe were then sold
   back to the colony as finished goods.

   Great Britain administered its territory from neighbouring Nigeria.
   Natives complained that this made them a neglected "colony of a
   colony". Nigerian migrant workers flocked to Southern Cameroons,
   removing the need for forced labour but angering indigenous peoples.
   The plantations were returned to German administration until after
   World War II, when they were consolidated into the Cameroon Development
   Corporation. British administrators paid little attention to Northern
   Cameroons.

   The League of Nations mandates were converted into United Nations
   Trusteeships in 1946. The question of independence became a pressing
   issue in French Cameroun, where numerous political parties held
   different ideas on the timetable and goals of independence. The Union
   des Populations du Cameroun (UPC) was the most radical of these and
   advocated immediate independence and the adoption of a socialist
   economy. France outlawed the party on 13 July 1955, prompting a long
   guerilla war and the assassination of its leader Ruben Um Nyobe. France
   eventually granted increasing degrees of autonomy to the territory's
   governing bodies. In British Cameroons, the question was whether to
   reunify with French Cameroun or join with Nigeria.

Post-independence

   Ahmadou Ahidjo arrives at Washington, D.C., in July 1982
   Enlarge
   Ahmadou Ahidjo arrives at Washington, D.C., in July 1982

   On 1 January 1960, French Cameroon gained independence under President
   Ahmadou Ahidjo. On 1 October 1961, British Southern Cameroons reunified
   with them—Northern British Cameroons opted to join Nigeria instead—as
   the Federal Republic of Cameroon. The continuing war with the UPC
   allowed Ahidjo to concentrate power in the presidency. The resistance
   was finally suppressed in 1971, but the declared state of emergency
   persisted. Ahidjo emphasized the importance of nationalism over
   tribalism, using fears of ethnic violence to further consolidate power.
   Ahidjo's Cameroon National Union (CNU) became the sole political party
   on 1 September 1966. In 1972, the federation was abolished in favour of
   a United Republic of Cameroon headed from Yaoundé.

   Economically, Ahidjo pursued a policy of planned liberalism. Cash crops
   were an early priority, but the discovery of petroleum in the 1970s
   shifted focus to that sector. Oil money was used to create a national
   cash reserve, pay farmers, and finance major development projects.
   Communications, education, transportation, and hydroelectric
   infrastructure were all expanded. Nevertheless, Ahidjo used posts at
   these new industries as rewards for his allies, many of whom had no
   development or business background; many failed.

   Ahidjo stepped down on 4 November 1982, leaving power to his
   constitutional successor, Paul Biya. However, Ahidjo remained in
   control of the CNU, and a power struggle developed between the former
   and current president. When Ahidjo tried to assert the party's right to
   choose the president, Biya and his allies pressured him into resigning.
   Biya at first allowed open elections for party offices and for the
   National Assembly. However, after a failed coup attempt and the
   Cameroonian Palace Guard Revolt on 6 April 1984, he moved more toward
   the leadership style of his predecessor.

   Biya's first major challenge was the economic crisis of the mid-1980s
   to late 1990s, the result of international economic conditions,
   drought, and falling petroleum prices coupled with years of corruption,
   mismanagement, and cronyism. Cameroon turned to foreign aid; cut funds
   for education, government, and healthcare; and privatised industries.
   The growing dissatisfaction of Cameroon's Anglophones has since given
   Biya another challenge. Leaders from the formerly British portion of
   the country have called for greater autonomy, with some advocating
   complete secession as the Republic of Ambazonia.

   After the reintroduction of multi-party politics in December 1990,
   numerous ethnic and regional political groups have formed, such as the
   Social Democratic Front under John Fru Ndi and the National Union for
   Democracy and Progress under Maigari Bello Bouba. Biya and his Cameroon
   People's Democratic Movement have maintained control of the presidency
   and the National Assembly in national elections, but rivals contend
   that these have been unfair. The last elections were held on October
   11, 2004.

Politics

   Cameroon President Paul Biya (right)
   Enlarge
   Cameroon President Paul Biya (right)

   The President of Cameroon is the Head of State and Head of the Armed
   Forces. The President is given a broad range of powers, and is able to
   carry them out without consulting the National Assembly. He appoints
   the Prime Minister, who is Head of Government, and appoints to all
   civil and military posts of the state. He may also dissolve the
   National Assembly and, where circumstances so warrant, declare by
   decree a state of emergency which shall confer upon him special powers.

   Legislative power is exercised by the parliament, which presently is
   made up of only one house, the National Assembly. (The second house of
   parliament, the Senate, as of 2006, has not yet been formed.) The
   National Assembly consists of 180 delegates and meets three times a
   year. The main responsibility of the Assembly is to pass laws, but
   rarely has it changed any laws or blocked the passage of legislation.

   Judicial power is exercised by the Supreme Court, Courts of Appeal and
   Tribunals. Although the Constitutution prescribes that Judicial Power
   be independent of the executive and legislative powers, in practice,
   the judiciary is subordinate to the executive branch's Ministry of
   Justice. The Supreme Court may review the constitutionality of a law
   only at the president's request.
   Administrative divisions of Cameroon.
   Enlarge
   Administrative divisions of Cameroon.

   Cameroon is a member of both the Commonwealth of Nations and La
   Francophonie. There is a nationalist resistance movement in the
   Anglophone region of Ambazonia.

Administrative divisions

   Cameroon is divided into 10 provinces and subdivided into 58 divisions
   (called départements in French). The divisions are further sub-divided
   into sub-divisions and districts.

   The provinces include: Adamawa Province, Centre Province, East
   Province, Far North Province, Littoral Province, North Province,
   Northwest Province, West Province, South Province, and Southwest
   Province.

   Divisions (départements): see Divisions of Cameroon

Geography

   Satellite image of Cameroon, generated from raster graphics data
   supplied by The Map Library
   Enlarge
   Satellite image of Cameroon, generated from raster graphics data
   supplied by The Map Library

   At 183,568 mi² (475,440 km²), Cameroon is the world's 53rd-largest
   country. It is comparable in size to Papua New Guinea, and somewhat
   larger than the U.S. state of California. Cameroon's landmass is
   181,252 mi² (469,440 km²), with 2,317 mi² (6,000 km²) of water.

   The country is located in Central and West Africa, bordering the Bight
   of Biafra, between Equatorial Guinea and Nigeria.

   Cameroon is sometimes described as "Africa in miniature" because it
   exhibits all the major climates and vegetation of the continent:
   mountains, desert, rain forest, savannah grassland, and ocean
   coastland. Cameroon can be divided into five geographic zones. These
   are distinguished by dominant physical, climatic, and vegetative
   features.
   Mount Cameroon craters
   Enlarge
   Mount Cameroon craters

Natural regions

   Cameroon's coastal plain extends 10 to 50 miles (15–80  km) inland from
   the Gulf of Guinea (part of the Atlantic Ocean) to the edge of a
   plateau. In the former western state, however, the mass of Mount
   Cameroon reaches almost to the sea. Exceedingly hot and humid, the
   coastal belt includes some of the wettest places on earth. For example,
   Debundscha, at the base of Mt. Cameroon, has an average annual rainfall
   of 405 inches (10,290  mm). The plain is densely forested.

   The low southern plateau, rising from the coastal plain and dominated
   by tropical rain forest, has an average elevation of 1,500 to 2,000
   feet (450–600  m). It is less humid than the coast.

   In western Cameroon is an irregular chain of mountains, hills, and
   plateaus that extend from Mt. Cameroon almost to Lake Chad at the
   northern tip of the country. This region enjoys a pleasant climate,
   particularly in the Bamenda, Bamiléké, and Mambilla highlands. It also
   contains some of the country's most fertile soils, notably around
   volcanic Mt. Cameroon.

   From the forested southern plateau the land rises northward to the
   grassy, rugged Adamaoua (Adamawa) highlands. Stretching across Cameroon
   from the western mountain area, the Adamaoua forms a barrier between
   the north and south. Its average elevation is 3,400 feet (1,035 m), and
   its climate is reasonably pleasant.

   The northern savanna plain extends from the edge of the Adamaoua to
   Lake Chad. Its characteristic vegetation is scrub and grass. This is a
   region of sparse rainfall and high median temperatures.

Rivers

   The country has four patterns of drainage. In the south, the principal
   rivers—the Wouri, Sanaga, Nyong, and Ntem—flow southwestward or
   westward directly into the Gulf of Guinea. The Dja and Kadeï, however,
   drain southeastward into the Congo River. In northern Cameroon, the
   Benoué River (Benue) runs north and west, eventually into the Niger,
   while the Logone River flows northward into Lake Chad.

   Only part of Lake Chad lies within Cameroon. The rest belongs to Chad,
   Nigeria, and Niger. The lake varies in size according to seasonal
   rainfall.

Border rivers

   Some of the borders of Cameroon follow rivers, including the Aïna River
   and Ntem River.

Economy

   For a quarter-century following independence, Cameroon was one of the
   most prosperous countries in Africa. The drop in commodity prices for
   its principal exports — petroleum, cocoa, coffee, and cotton — in the
   mid-1980s, combined with an overvalued currency, widespread corruption,
   and economic mismanagement, led to a decade-long recession. Real per
   capita GDP fell by more than 60% from 1986 to 1994. The current account
   and fiscal deficits widened, and foreign debt grew. Yet because of its
   oil resources and favorable agricultural conditions, Cameroon still has
   one of the best-endowed primary commodity economies in sub-Saharan
   Africa.
   tea bag produced in Cameroon
   Enlarge
   tea bag produced in Cameroon

   As with many developing countries, rapid urbanisation has created many
   strains on the economy. The single largest economic activity in
   Cameroon is still subsistence agriculture. Many obstacles are slowing
   Cameroon's growth; some of these include onerous levels of bureaucracy,
   crumbling infrastructure, and ingrained corruption. Recently, the
   government has claimed to be making another attempt to crack down on
   corruption and to create a more transparent business environment.

Demographics

   Yaoundé, capital of Cameroon (2003)
   Enlarge
   Yaoundé, capital of Cameroon (2003)
   Photo from the north of Cameroon
   Enlarge
   Photo from the north of Cameroon
   The palace of the sultan of the Bamun people at Foumban, West Province
   Enlarge
   The palace of the sultan of the Bamun people at Foumban, West Province

   Cameroon's demographic profile is comprised of an estimated 250
   distinct ethnic groups, which may be formed into five large
   regional-cultural divisions:
     * western highlanders (Semi-Bantu or grassfielders), including the
       Bamileke, Bamun (or Bamoun), and many smaller Tikar groups in the
       Northwest (est. 38% of total population);
     * coastal tropical forest peoples, including the Bassa, Duala (or
       Douala), and many smaller groups in the Southwest (12%);
     * southern tropical forest peoples, including the Beti-Pahuin, Bulu
       (a subgroup of Beti-Pahuin), Fang (subgroup of Beti-Pahuin), Maka,
       Njem, and Baka pygmies (18%);
     * predominantly Islamic peoples of the northern semi-arid regions
       (the Sahel) and central highlands, including the Fulani (or Peuhl
       in French) (14%); and
     * the " Kirdi", non-Islamic or recently Islamic peoples of the
       northern desert and central highlands (18%).

Culture

   The Kirdi and the Matakam of the western mountains produce distinctive
   types of pottery. The powerful masks of the Bali, which represent
   elephants' heads, are used in ceremonies for the dead, and the
   statuettes of the Bamileke are carved in human and animal figures. The
   Tikar people are famous for beautifully decorated brass pipes, the
   Ngoutou people for two-faced masks, and the Bamum for smiling masks.
             Holidays
      Date        English Name
   January 1   New Year's Day
   February 11 National Youth Day
   May 1       Labor Day
   May 20      National Day
   August 15   Assumption
   December 25 Christmas

   L'Institut Français d'Afrique Noire (French Institute of Black Africa)
   maintains a library in Douala that specializes in the sociology,
   ethnology, and history of Africa. Of the several museums, the Diamare
   and Maroua Museum has anthropological collections relating to the
   Sudanese peoples, and the Cameroon Museum of Douala exhibits objects of
   prehistory and natural history.

   Cultural organizations include the Cameroun Cultural Association, the
   Cameroun Cultural Society, and the Federal Linguistic and Cultural
   Centre.

   There are also numerous women's associations (including the North West
   Women's Association for Rural Development), youth organizations, and
   sporting associations. Unlike women's organizations recently created by
   Western development agencies in places like Central Asia, associations
   of women in West Africa have a long, indigenous history. In
   contemporary Cameroon they are often registered as Community Initiative
   Groups, or CIG's, yet they continue a tradition of women gathering
   together to give emotional and economic support to one another. One
   such CIG is RENATA, also known as the Network Association of Aunties,
   which is working to end the widespread practice of breast ironing. Even
   though these groups are based on women dealing with women's problems
   (like child care, farming/provisioning the family with food, social
   justice etc.) they are not exclusive, and children as well as dedicated
   men are encouraged to join.

   In addition, movable holidays include the Christian holy days of Good
   Friday, Easter Sunday, and Easter Monday, and the Muslim holidays of
   'Id al-Fitr and 'Id al-Adha.

   See also: Music of Cameroon, Cuisine of Cameroon, List of writers from
   Cameroon

Education

   Two separate systems of education were used in Cameroon after
   independence. East Cameroon's system was based on the French model,
   West Cameroon's on the British model. The two systems were merged by
   1976. Christian mission schools have been an important part of the
   educational system.

   Cameroon is known for having one of the best education systems in
   Africa. Primary school is both free and obligatory. Statistics say that
   70% of all children aged between 6-12 years go to school, whilst 79% of
   the Cameroon population as a whole is literate. In the southern areas
   of the country almost all children of primary-school age are enrolled
   in classes. However, in the north, which has always been the most
   isolated part of Cameroon, registration is low. Most students in
   Cameroon do not go beyond the primary grades.

   The country has institutions for teacher training and technical
   education. At the top of the educational structure is the University of
   Yaoundé. There is, however, a growing trend for the wealthiest and
   best-educated students to leave the country in order to study and live
   abroad, creating a brain drain.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cameroon"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
