   #copyright

Camel

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mammals

                  iCamels
   Bactrian Camel, Camelus bactrianus
   Bactrian Camel, Camelus bactrianus
   Dromedary, Camelus dromedarius
   Dromedary, Camelus dromedarius
         Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Mammalia
   Order:   Artiodactyla
   Family:  Camelidae
   Genus:   Camelus
            Linnaeus, 1758

                                   Species

   Camelus bactrianus
   Camelus dromedarius

   Camels are even-toed ungulates in the genus Camelus. The Dromedary or
   Arabian Camel has a single hump, and the Bactrian Camel has two humps.
   They are native to the dry and desert areas of Northern Africa and
   Asia, respectively. The average life expectancy of a camel is 30 to 50
   years. The term camel is also used more broadly to describe any of the
   six camel-like creatures in the family Camelidae: the two true camels,
   and the four South American camelids: Llama, Alpaca, Guanaco, and
   Vicuña.

   The name camel comes via the Greek κάμηλος (kámēlos) from the Arabic
   جمل (jamal) or the Hebrew גמל (gahmal), all meaning "camel".

   Bactrian camels have two coats: the warm inner coat of down and a rough
   outer coat which is long and hairy. They shed their fiber in clumps
   consisting of both coats, which can be gathered and separated. They
   produce about 7 kg (15 lb) of fiber annually. The fibre structure is
   similar to cashmere wool. The down is usually 2 to 8 cm (1–3 inches)
   long. Camel down does not felt easily. The down is spun into yarn for
   knitting.

   A fully-grown adult camel stands 1.85m/6 feet at the shoulder and
   2.15m/7 feet at the hump. It can run up to 40mph in short bursts, and
   sustain speeds of up to 25mph.

   Humans first domesticated camels between 3,500–3,000 years ago. The
   Dromedary and the Bactrian Camel are both still used for milk (which is
   more nutritious than cow's milk), meat, and as beasts of burden—the
   Dromedary in western Asia, and the Bactrian Camel further to the north
   and east in central Asia.

Distribution and numbers

   Map of the world showing distribution of camelids, and the separation
   of camels (on the left) and Lamas (on the right). Solid black lines
   indicate possible migration routes.
   Enlarge
   Map of the world showing distribution of camelids, and the separation
   of camels (on the left) and Lamas (on the right). Solid black lines
   indicate possible migration routes.

   Although there are almost 13 million Dromedaries alive today, the
   species is all but extinct in the wild, persisting mainly as
   domesticated animals (mostly in Sudan, Somalia, India and nearby
   countries), as well as South Africa, Namibia and Botswana. There is,
   however, a substantial feral population estimated at up to 700,000 in
   central parts of Australia, descended from individuals introduced as
   means of transport in the 19th century and early 20th century. This
   population is growing at approximately 11% per year and in recent times
   the state government of South Australia has decided to cull the animals
   using aerial marksmen, the reason being that the camels use too much of
   the limited resources needed by sheep farmers. For more information,
   see Australian feral camel.

   The Bactrian Camel once had an enormous range, but is now reduced to an
   estimated 1.4 million animals, mostly domesticated. It is thought that
   there are about 1000 wild Bactrian Camels in the Gobi Desert, and small
   numbers in Iran, Afghanistan and Kazakhstan.

   A small population of introduced camels, Dromedaries and Bactrians,
   survived in the Southwest United States until the 1900s. These animals,
   imported from Turkey, were part of the US Camel Corps experiment and
   used as draft animals in mines, and escaped or were released after the
   project fell through.

   According Reuters, the recent discovery of a previously unknown giant
   camel species in central Syria, thought to be 100,000 years old, is
   leading scientists to reconsider traditional theories of camel origins.

Camel hybrids

   Throughout their domesticated history, Camels have been used as a means
   of transportation in arid regions. Shown here is a local tribe near
   Jaisalmer, India.
   Enlarge
   Throughout their domesticated history, Camels have been used as a means
   of transportation in arid regions. Shown here is a local tribe near
   Jaisalmer, India.
   Camelus dromedarius, Wadi Rum, Jordan.
   Enlarge
   Camelus dromedarius, Wadi Rum, Jordan.
   Camelus dromedarius in the Singapore Zoo.
   Enlarge
   Camelus dromedarius in the Singapore Zoo.

   Bactrian Camels have two humps and are rugged cold-climate camels while
   Dromedaries have one hump and are desert dwellers. Dromedary hybrids
   are called Bukhts, are larger than either parent, have a single hump
   and are good draft camels. The females can be mated back to a Bactrian
   to produce ¾-bred riding camels. These hybrids are found in Kazakhstan.
   The Cama is a camel/ llama hybrid bred by scientists who wanted to see
   how closely related the parent species were. The Dromedary is six times
   the weight of a Llama, hence artificial insemination was required to
   impregnate the Llama female (Llama male to Dromedary female attempts
   have proven unsuccessful). Though born even smaller than a Llama cria,
   the Cama had the short ears and long tail of a camel, no hump and
   Llama-like cloven hooves rather than the Dromedary-like pads. At four
   years old, the Cama became sexually mature and interested in Llama and
   Guanaco females. A second Cama (female) has since been produced using
   artificial insemination. Because Camels and Llamas both have 74
   chromosomes, scientists hope that the Cama will be fertile. If so,
   there is potential for increasing size, meat/wool yield and pack/draft
   ability in South American camels. The Cama apparently inherited the
   poor temperament of both parents as well as demonstrating the
   relatedness of the New World and Old World camelids. hi

Adaptations to desert environment

   Camels are well known for their humps. They do not, however, store
   water in them as is commonly believed, though they do serve this
   purpose through roundabout means. Their humps are a reservoir of fatty
   tissue, while water is stored in their blood. However, when this tissue
   is metabolised, it is not only a source of energy, but yields through
   reaction with oxygen from the air 1111 g of water per 1000 g of fat
   converted. This allows them to survive without water for about two
   weeks, and without food for up to a month.

   Their red blood cells have an oval shape, unlike those of other
   mammals, which are circular. This is to facilitate their flow in a
   dehydrated state. These cells are also more stable , in order to
   withstand high osmotic variation without rupturing, when drinking large
   amounts of water.

   The kidneys of a camel are very efficient. Urine comes out as a thick
   syrup and their feces are so dry that fires can burn off it.

   Camels are able to withstand changes in body temperature and water
   content that would kill most other animals. Their temperature ranges
   from 34°C (93°F) at night up to 41°C (106°F) at day; only above this
   threshold will they start to sweat. This allows them to preserve about
   five litres of water a day. However, they can withstand at least 25%
   weight loss due to sweating.

   The thick coat reflects sunlight. A shaved camel has to sweat 50% more
   to avoid overheating. It also insulates them from the intense heat that
   radiates from hot desert sand. Their long legs also help with this by
   keeping them further away from the sand.

   Their mouth is very sturdy, to be able to eat thorny desert plants.
   Long eyelashes and ear hairs, together with sealable nostrils prevent
   sand from entering. Their pace (always moving both legs of one side at
   the same time) and their widened feet help them move without sinking
   in.

   All member species of the Camelids are known to have a highly unusual
   immune system, where part of the antibody repertoire is composed of
   immunoglobulins without light chain. Whether and how this contributes
   to their resistance to harsh environments is currently unknown.

Cuisine

   A hungry camel
   Enlarge
   A hungry camel

Dairy

   Camel milk is a staple food of desert nomad tribes and is richer in fat
   and protein than cow's milk. Camel milk cannot be made into butter in
   the traditional churning method; however, it can be made if it is
   soured first, churned, and then a clarifying agent is added or if it is
   churned at 24-25 °C, but times will vary greatly in achieving results.
   The milk can readily be made into yogurt. Camel milk is said to have
   many healthful properties and is used as a medicinal product in India;
   Bedouin tribes believe that camel milk has great curative powers if the
   camel's diet is of certain plants. In Ethiopia the milk is considered
   an aphrodisiac while other mystical powers are attributed to camel milk
   in other regions. Camel cheese has been made since 1993 by the Tiviski
   company in Mauritania.

Meat

   a camel's fur up close.
   Enlarge
   a camel's fur up close.

   A camel carcass can provide a substantial amount of meat. The male
   dromedary carcass can weigh 400 kg or more while the carcass of a male
   Bactrian can weigh up to 650 kg. The carcass of a female camel weighs
   less than the male ranging between 250 and 350 kg, but provides a
   substantial amount of meat nonetheless. The brisket, ribs and loin are
   some of the preferred parts of the animal, however it is the hump that
   is considered a delicacy and most favored. It is reported that camel
   meat tastes like coarse beef but older camels can prove to be tough and
   not too flavorsome.

   Camel meat has been eaten for centuries. It has been recorded by
   ancient Greek writers as an available dish in ancient Persia at
   banquets, usually roasted whole. The ancient Roman emperor Heliogabalus
   enjoyed camel's heel. Camel meat is still eaten in certain regions
   including Somalia where it is called Hilib geyl, Saudi Arabia, Egypt,
   Libya, Sudan, Kazakhstan and other arid regions where alternative forms
   of protein may be limited or where camel meat has had a long cultural
   history. Not just the meat but also blood is a consumable item as is
   the case in northern Kenya where camel blood is a source of iron,
   vitamin D, salts and minerals (although Muslims do not drink or consume
   blood products).

   A recent report leads to some caution since cases have emerged of where
   eating raw camel liver has led to human plague . Camel meat and milk
   are not considered Kosher and Jews abstain from eating it.

Other Definitions

   Camel is a figure skating terminology for a type of spin where skater
   extends one leg and aligns it with her/his back as one line and the leg
   and back, together are in a 90 degree angle position to the ice.
   Dromedary posing.
   Enlarge
   Dromedary posing.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camel"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
