   #copyright

Canadian House of Commons

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Politics and government

   The House of Commons (French: Chambre des communes) is a component of
   the Parliament of Canada, along with the Sovereign (represented by the
   Governor General) and the Senate. The House of Commons is a
   democratically elected body, consisting of 308 members, who are known
   as Members of Parliament. Members are elected for limited terms,
   holding office until Parliament is dissolved (a maximum of five years).
   Each member is elected by, and represents, one of the country's
   electoral districts, which are colloquially known as ridings.

   The House of Commons was established in 1867, when the British North
   America Act 1867 created the Dominion of Canada, and was modelled on
   the British House of Commons. The "lower" of the two houses making up
   the parliament, the House of Commons in practice holds far more power
   than the upper house, the Senate. Although the approval of both Houses
   is necessary for legislation, the Senate very rarely rejects bills
   passed by the Commons (though the Senate does occasionally amend
   bills). Moreover, the Government of Canada is responsible solely to the
   House of Commons. The Prime Minister stays in office only as long as he
   or she retains the support of the Lower House.

   It is widely thought that "Commons" is a shortening of the word
   "commoners". However, the term derives from the Anglo-Norman word
   communes, referring to the geographic and collective "communities" of
   their parliamentary representatives and not the third estate, the
   commonality. Canada remains the only nation besides the United Kingdom
   to use the name " House of Commons" for the Lower House of Parliament.

   The Canadian House of Commons is located in the Centre Block of the
   Parliament Buildings on Parliament Hill, in Ottawa, Ontario.

History

   The House of Commons came into existence in 1867, when the Parliament
   of the United Kingdom passed the British North America Act, uniting the
   Province of Canada (which was separated into Quebec and Ontario), Nova
   Scotia and New Brunswick into a single federation called the Dominion
   of Canada. The new Parliament of Canada consisted of the Queen
   (represented by the Governor General), the Senate and the House of
   Commons. The Parliament of Canada was based on the Westminster model
   (that is, the model of the Parliament of the United Kingdom). Unlike
   the Parliament of the United Kingdom, the powers of the Parliament of
   Canada were limited in that other powers were assigned exclusively to
   the provincial legislatures. The Parliament of Canada also remained
   subordinate to the Governor-general (representing both the Crown and
   the Foreign Office) and the Westminster Parliament, the supreme
   legislative authority for the entire British Empire. Greater autonomy
   was granted by the Statute of Westminster 1931, under which the United
   Kingdom ceased to interfere in Canadian affairs. Full autonomy was only
   granted by the Canada Act 1982, under which the Parliament of the
   United Kingdom relinquished all authority to legislate for Canada.

Members and elections

   The House of Commons is composed of 308 members, each of whom
   represents a single electoral district (also called a riding). Law
   requires that there be a minimum of 282 electoral districts; there are
   currently 308. Seats are distributed among the provinces in proportion
   to population, as determined by each decennial census, subject to the
   following exceptions made by the constitution. Firstly, the "senatorial
   clause" guarantees that each province will have at least as many
   Members of Parliament as Senators. Secondly, the "grandfather clause"
   guarantees each province has at least as many Members of Parliament now
   as it had in 1986. Finally, no province may lose more than fifteen per
   cent of its seats after a single decennial census.

   As a result of these three clauses, smaller provinces and provinces
   that have experienced a relative decline in population are
   over-represented in the House. Only Ontario, British Columbia, and
   Alberta — Canada's fastest-growing provinces — are represented roughly
   in proportion to their populations. Provincial boundary commissions are
   responsible for drawing the boundaries of the electoral districts.
   Territorial representation is independent of population; each territory
   is entitled to only one seat. Representation in the House of commons is
   summarised in the table below .

    Province or Territory Minimum number of seats in accordance with the
       Constitution Act, 1867 Calculations Electoral Quotient (Average
                     population per electoral district)
   Population 2001 National Quotient Rounded result Special clauses Total
          Newfoundland and Labrador 7 512 930 107 220 5 2 7 73 276
             Prince Edward Island 4 135 294 107 220 1 3 4 33 824
                Nova Scotia 11 908 007 107 220 8 3 11 82 546
               New Brunswick 10 729 498 107 220 7 3 10 72 950
                 Quebec 75 7 237 479 107 220 68 7 75 96 500
               Ontario 95 11 410 046 107 220 106 0 106 107 642
                Manitoba 14 1 119 583 107 220 10 4 14 79 970
                Saskatchewan 14 978 933 107 220 9 5 14 69 924
                Alberta 21 2 974 807 107 220 28 0 28 106 243
            British Columbia 28 3 907 738 107 220 36 0 36 108 548
                    Nunavut 1 26 745 – – – 1 26 745
             Northwest Territories 1 37 360 – – – 1 37 360
                Yukon Territory 1 28 674 – – – 1 28 674
                          TOTAL 282 30 007 094 308

   General elections occur whenever Parliament is dissolved by the
   Governor General on The Queen's behalf. The timing of the dissolution
   is normally chosen by the Prime Minister. A parliamentary term may not
   last for more than five years. Canadian law states that all federal
   elections must be held on a Monday (except on statutory holidays), and
   the campaign must be at least 36 days long. Candidates are usually
   nominated by political parties. It is possible for a candidate to run
   independently, although it is rare for such a candidate to win. Most
   successful independent candidates have been incumbents who were
   expelled from their political party (for example, John Nunziata in
   1997) or who failed to win their party's nomination (for example, Chuck
   Cadman in 2004). The most recent exception to this was the election of
   André Arthur in a Quebec City district in 2006. Most Canadian
   candidates are chosen in meetings called by their party's local
   association. In practice, the candidate who signs up the most local
   party members generally wins the nomination.

   To run for a seat in the House, candidates must file nomination papers
   bearing the signatures of at least 50 or 100 constituents (depending on
   the size of the electoral district). Each electoral district returns
   one member; the First Past the Post electoral system, under which the
   candidate with a plurality of votes wins, is used. To vote, one must be
   a citizen of Canada and at least eighteen years of age.

   Once elected, a Member of Parliament normally continues to serve until
   the next dissolution of Parliament. If a member dies, resigns, or
   ceases to be qualified, his or her seat falls vacant. It is also
   possible for the House of Commons to expel a member, but this power is
   only exercised when the member has engaged in serious misconduct or
   criminal activity. Formerly, MPs appointed to cabinet were expected to
   resign their seats, though this practice ceased in 1931. In each case,
   a vacancy may be filled by a by-election in the appropriate electoral
   district. The first past the post electoral system is used in
   by-elections, as in general elections.

   The term " Member of Parliament" is usually used only to refer to
   members of the House of Commons, even though the Senate is also a part
   of Parliament. Members of the House of Commons may use the post-nominal
   letters "MP". The annual salary of each Member of Parliament, as of
   2006, is $147,700; members may receive additional salaries in right of
   other offices they hold (for instance, the Speakership). MPs rank
   immediately below senators in the order of precedence.

Qualifications

   Under the Constitution Act, 1867, Parliament is empowered to determine
   the qualifications of members of the House of Commons. The present
   qualifications are outlined in the Canada Elections Act, which was
   passed in 2000. Under the act, an individual must be an eligible voter,
   as of the day on which he or she is nominated, in order to stand as a
   candidate. Thus, minors and individuals who are not citizens of Canada
   are not allowed to become candidates. The Canada Elections Act also
   bars prisoners from standing for election (although they may vote).
   Moreover, individuals found guilty of election-related crimes are
   prohibited from becoming members for five years (in some cases, seven
   years) after conviction.

   The act also prohibits certain officials from standing for the House of
   Commons. These officers include members of provincial and territorial
   legislatures (although this was not always the case), sheriffs, crown
   attorneys, most judges, and election officers. The Chief Electoral
   Officer and Assistant Chief Electoral Officer (the heads of Elections
   Canada, the federal agency responsible for conducting elections) are
   prohibited not only from standing as candidates, but also from voting.
   Finally, under the Constitution Act, 1867, a member of the Senate may
   not also become a member of the House of Commons and MPs must give up
   their seats when appointed to the Senate or the bench.

Officers

   The presiding officer of the House of Commons (centre) is known as the
   Speaker.
   Enlarge
   The presiding officer of the House of Commons (centre) is known as the
   Speaker.

   The House of Commons elects a presiding officer, known as the Speaker,
   at the beginning of each new parliamentary term, and also whenever a
   vacancy arises. Formerly, the Prime Minister determined who would serve
   as Speaker. Although the House voted on the matter, the voting
   constituted a mere formality. Since 1986, however, the House has
   elected Speakers by secret ballot. The Speaker is assisted by a Deputy
   Speaker, who also holds the title of Chairman of Committees of the
   Whole. Two other deputies—the Deputy Chairman of Committees of the
   Whole and the Assistant Deputy Chairman of Committees of the Whole—also
   preside. The duties of presiding over the House are divided between the
   four officers aforementioned; however, the Speaker usually presides
   over Question Period and over the most important debates.

   The Speaker controls debates by calling on members to speak. If a
   member believes that a rule (or Standing Order) has been breached, he
   or she may raise a " point of order", on which the Speaker makes a
   ruling that is not subject to any debate or appeal. The Speaker may
   also discipline members who fail to observe the rules of the House.
   When presiding, the Speaker must remain impartial. The Speaker also
   oversees the administration of the House and is Chair of the Board of
   Internal Economy, the governing body for the House of Commons. The
   current Speaker of the House of Commons is the Honourable Peter
   Milliken, MP.

   The member of the Government responsible for steering legislation
   through the House is Leader of the Government in the House of Commons.
   The Government House Leader (as he or she is more commonly known) is a
   Member of Parliament selected by the Prime Minister and holds cabinet
   rank. The Leader manages the schedule of the House of Commons, and
   attempts to secure the Opposition's support for the Government's
   legislative agenda.

   Officers of the House who are not members include the Clerk of the
   House of Commons, the Deputy Clerk, the Law Clerk and Parliamentary
   Counsel, and several other clerks. These officers advise the Speaker
   and members on the rules and procedure of the House in addition to
   exercising senior management functions within the House administration.
   Another important officer is the Sergeant-at-Arms, whose duties include
   the maintenance of order and security on the House's premises and
   inside the buildings of the Parliamentary precint. (The RCMP patrol
   Parliament Hill but are not allowed into the buildings unless asked by
   the Speaker). The Sergeant-at-Arms also carries the ceremonial mace, a
   symbol of the authority of the Crown and of the House of Commons, into
   the House each sitting. The mace is subsequently laid upon the Table of
   the House of Commons for the duration of the sitting. The House is also
   staffed by parliamentary pages, who carry messages to the members in
   the Chamber and otherwise provide assistance to the House.

Procedure

   Seats in the House of Commons Chamber are coloured green. This colour
   scheme derives from that used by the British House of Commons.
   Seats in the House of Commons Chamber are coloured green. This colour
   scheme derives from that used by the British House of Commons.

   Like the Senate, the House of Commons meets on Parliament Hill in
   Ottawa. The Commons Chamber is modestly decorated in green, in contrast
   with the more lavishly furnished red Senate Chamber. The arrangement is
   similar to the design of the Chamber of the British House of Commons.
   The seats are evenly divided between both sides of the Chamber, two and
   a half sword-lengths apart. The Speaker's chair (which can be adjusted
   for height) is at the north end of the Chamber. In front of it is the
   Table of the House, on which rests the ceremonial mace. Various "Table
   Officers"—clerks and other officials—sit at the Table, ready to advise
   the Speaker on procedure when necessary. Members of the Government sit
   on the benches on the Speaker's right, while members of the Opposition
   occupy the benches on the Speaker's left. Government ministers sit
   around the Prime Minister, who is traditionally assigned the 11th seat
   in the front row on the Speaker's right-hand side. The leader of the
   Official Opposition sits directly across from the prime minister and is
   surrounded by a shadow cabinet, or critics for the government
   portfolios. The remaining party leaders sit in the front rows. Other
   Members of Parliament who do not hold any kind of special
   responsibilities are known as "backbenchers".

   The House usually sits Monday to Friday from late January to mid-June
   and from mid-September to mid-December according to an established
   calendar, though it can modify the calendar if additional or fewer
   sittings are required. During these periods, the House generally rises
   for one week per month to allow members to work in their
   constituencies. Sittings of the House are open to the public.
   Proceedings are broadcast over cable and satellite television and over
   live streaming video on the Internet by CPAC, the Cable Public Affairs
   Channel, owned by a consortium of Canadian cable companies. They are
   also recorded in text form in print and online in Hansard, the official
   report of parliamentary debates.

   The Constitution Act, 1867 establishes a quorum of twenty members
   (including the member presiding) for the House of Commons. Any member
   may request a count of the members to ascertain the presence of a
   quorum; if, however, the Speaker feels that at least twenty members are
   clearly in the Chamber, he or she may deny the request. If a count does
   occur, and reveals that fewer than twenty members are present, the
   Speaker orders bells to be rung, so that other members on the
   parliamentary precincts may come to the Chamber. If, after a second
   count, a quorum is still not present, the Speaker must adjourn the
   House until the next sitting day.

   During debates, members may only speak if called upon by the Speaker
   (or, as is most often the case, the deputy presiding). The Speaker is
   responsible for ensuring that members of all parties have an
   opportunity to be heard. The Speaker also determines who is to speak if
   two or more members rise simultaneously, but his or her decision may be
   altered by the House. Motions must be moved by one member and seconded
   by another before debate may begin. Some motions, however, are
   non-debatable.

   Speeches may be made in either of Canada's official languages (English
   and French). Members must address their speeches to the presiding
   officer, not the House, using the words "Mr. Speaker" ("Monsieur le
   Président") or "Madam Speaker" ("Madame la Présidente"). Other members
   must be referred to in the third person. Traditionally, Members do not
   refer to each other by name, but by constituency or cabinet post, using
   forms such as "the honourable member for [electoral district]" or "the
   Minister of..."
   House of Commons in session, March 10, 1938
   Enlarge
   House of Commons in session, March 10, 1938

   No member may speak more than once on the same question (except that
   the mover of a motion is entitled to make one speech at the beginning
   of the debate and another at the end). Moreover, tediously repetitive
   or irrelevant remarks are prohibited, as are written remarks read into
   the record (although this behaviour is creeping into modern debate).
   The presiding officer may order a member making such remarks to cease
   speaking. The Standing Orders of the House of Commons prescribe time
   limits for speeches. The limits depend on the nature of the motion, but
   are most commonly between ten and twenty minutes. However, under
   certain circumstances, the Prime Minister, the Leader of the Official
   Opposition, and others are entitled to make longer speeches. Debate may
   be further restricted by the passage of "time allocation" motions.
   Alternatively, the House may end debate more quickly by passing a
   motion for " closure".

   When the debate concludes, the motion in question is put to a vote. The
   House first votes by voice vote; the presiding officer puts the
   question, and members respond either "yea" (in favour of the motion) or
   "nay" (against the motion). The presiding officer then announces the
   result of the voice vote, but five or more members may challenge his or
   her assessment, thereby forcing a recorded vote (known as a division,
   although, in fact, the House does not divide for votes the way the
   British House of Commons does.). First, members in favour of the motion
   rise, so that the clerks may record their names and votes. Then, the
   same procedure is repeated for members who oppose the motion. There is
   no formal means for recording an abstention, though a member may
   informally abstain by remaining seated during the division. If there is
   an equality of votes, the Speaker has a casting vote.

   The outcome of most votes is largely known beforehand, since political
   parties normally instruct members on how to vote. A party normally
   entrusts some Members of Parliament, known as whips, with the task of
   ensuring that all party members vote as desired. Members of Parliament
   do not tend to vote against such instructions, since those who do so
   are unlikely to reach higher political ranks in their parties. Errant
   members may be deselected as official party candidates during future
   elections, and, in serious cases, may be expelled from their parties
   outright. Thus, the independence of Members of Parliament tends to be
   extremely low, and "backbench rebellions" by members discontent with
   their party's policies are rare. In some circumstances, however,
   parties announce "free votes", allowing Members to vote as they please.
   This may be done on moral issues.

Committees

   The Parliament of Canada uses committees for a variety of purposes.
   Committees consider bills in detail, and may make amendments. Other
   committees scrutinize various Government agencies and ministries.

   Potentially, the largest of the Commons committees are the Committees
   of the Whole, which, as the name suggests, consist of all the members
   of the House. A Committee of the Whole meets in the Chamber of the
   House, but proceeds under slightly modified rules of debate. (For
   example, a member may make more than one speech on a motion in a
   Committee of the Whole, but not during a normal session of the House.)
   Instead of the Speaker, the Chairman, Deputy Chairman, or Assistant
   Deputy Chairman presides. The House resolves itself into a Committee of
   the Whole to discuss appropriation bills, and sometimes for other
   legislation.

   The House of Commons also has several standing committees, each of
   which has responsibility for a particular area of government (for
   example, finance or transport). These committees oversee the relevant
   government departments, may hold hearings and collect evidence on
   governmental operations and review departmental spending plans.
   Standing committees may also consider and amend bills. Standing
   committees consist of between sixteen and eighteen members each, and
   elect their own chairmen.

   Some bills are considered by legislative committees, each of which
   consists of up to fifteen members. The membership of each legislative
   committee roughly reflects the strength of the parties in the whole
   House. A legislative committee is appointed on an ad hoc basis to study
   and amend a specific bill. In addition, the Chairman of a legislative
   committee is not elected by the members of the committee, but is
   instead appointed by the Speaker, normally from among his deputies.
   Most bills, however, are referred to standing committees rather than
   legislative committees.

   The House may also create ad hoc committees to study matters other than
   bills. Such committees are known as special committees. Each such body,
   like a legislative committee, may consist of no more than fifteen
   members. Other committees include joint committees, which include both
   members of the House of Commons and senators; such committees may hold
   hearings and oversee government, but do not revise legislation.

List of committees

     * Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development
     * Access to Information, Privacy and Ethics
     * Agriculture and Agri-Food
     * Canadian Heritage
     * Citizenship and Immigration
     * Environment and Sustainable Development
     * Finance
     * Fisheries and Oceans
     * Foreign Affairs and International Development
     * Government Operations and Estimates
     * Health
     * Human Resources, Social Development and the Status of Persons with
       Disabilities
     * Industry, Science and Technology
     * International Trade
     * Justice and Human Rights
     * Liaison Committee
     * National Defence
     * Natural Resources
     * Official Languages
     * Procedure and House Affairs
     * Public Accounts
     * Public Safety and National Security
     * Status of Women
     * Transport, Infrastructure and Communities
     * Veterans Affairs

Legislative functions

   Although legislation may be introduced in either House, most bills
   originate in the House of Commons.

   In conformity with the British model, the Lower House alone is
   authorised to originate bills imposing taxes or appropriating public
   funds. This restriction on the power of the Senate is not merely a
   matter of convention, but is explicitly stated in the Constitution Act,
   1867. Otherwise, the power of the two Houses of Parliament is
   theoretically equal; the approval of each is necessary for a bill's
   passage. In practice, however, the House of Commons is the dominant
   chamber of Parliament, with the Senate very rarely exercising its
   powers in a way that opposes the will of the democratically elected
   chamber. The last major bill defeated in the Senate came in 1991, when
   a bill passed by the Commons restricting abortion was rejected in the
   Upper House by a tied vote.

   A clause in the Constitution Act, 1867 permits the Governor General
   (with the approval of the Queen) to appoint up to eight extra senators
   to resolve a deadlock between the two houses. The clause was invoked
   only once, in 1990, when Prime Minister Brian Mulroney advised the
   appointment of an additional eight senators in order to secure the
   Upper House's approval for the Goods and Services Tax.

Relationship with the Government

   Though it does not elect the Prime Minister, the House of Commons
   indirectly controls the premiership. By convention, the Prime Minister
   is answerable to, and must maintain the support of, the House of
   Commons. Thus, whenever the office of Prime Minister falls vacant, the
   Governor General is supposed to appoint the person most likely to
   command the support of the House—normally, the leader of the largest
   party in the Lower House, although the system allows a coalition of two
   parties. This has not happened in the Canadian federal parliament, but
   has occurred in Canadian provinces. The leader of the second-largest
   party usually becomes the Leader of the Official Opposition. Moreover,
   the Prime Minister is, by unwritten convention, a member of the House
   of Commons, rather than of the Senate. The only two Prime Ministers who
   governed from the Senate were Sir John Abbott (1891–1892) and Sir
   Mackenzie Bowell (1894–1896). Both men got the job following the death
   of a Prime Minister, and did not contest elections.

   The Prime Minister may only stay in office as long as he or she retains
   the confidence of the House of Commons. The Lower House may indicate
   its lack of support for the Government by rejecting a motion of
   confidence, or by passing a motion of no confidence. Important bills
   that form a part of the Government's agenda are generally considered
   matters of confidence, as is the any taxation or spending bill and the
   annual budget. When a Government has lost the confidence of the House
   of Commons, the Prime Minister is obliged to either resign, or request
   the Governor General to dissolve Parliament, thereby precipitating a
   general election. The Governor General may theoretically refuse to
   dissolve Parliament, thereby forcing the Prime Minister to resign. The
   last instance of a Governor General refusing to grant a dissolution was
   in 1926.

   Except when compelled to request a dissolution by an adverse vote on a
   confidence issue, the Prime Minister is allowed to choose the timing of
   dissolutions, and consequently the timing of general elections. The
   time chosen reflects political considerations, and is generally most
   opportune for the Prime Minister's party. However, no parliamentary
   term can last for more than five years from the first sitting of
   Parliament; a dissolution is automatic upon the expiry of this period.
   Normally, Parliaments do not last for full five-year terms; Prime
   Ministers typically ask for dissolutions after about three or four
   years. The present Conservative government has promised to set fixed
   election dates.

   Whatever the reason—the expiry of Parliament's five year term, the
   choice of the Prime Minister, or a Government defeat in the House of
   Commons—a dissolution is followed by general elections. If the Prime
   Minister's party retains its majority in the House of Commons, then the
   Prime Minister may remain in power. On the other hand, if his or her
   party has lost its majority, the prime minister may resign, or may
   attempt to stay in power by winning support from members of other
   parties. A Prime Minister may resign even if he or she is not defeated
   at the polls (for example, for personal health reasons); in such a
   case, the premiership goes to the new leader of the outgoing Prime
   Minister's party.

   The House of Commons scrutinizes the Government through "Question
   Period", a daily forty-five minute period during which members have the
   opportunity to ask questions of the Prime Minister and of other Cabinet
   ministers. Questions must relate to the responding minister's official
   Government activities, not to his or her activities as a party leader
   or as a private Member of Parliament. Members may also question
   Committee Chairmen on the work of their respective committees. Members
   of each party are entitled to a number of questions proportional to the
   party caucus' strength in the House. In addition to questions asked
   orally during Question Period, Members of Parliament may also make
   inquiries in writing.

   In times where there is a majority government, the House of Commons'
   scrutiny of the government is weak. Since the first-past-the-post
   electoral system is employed in elections, the governing party tends to
   enjoy a large majority in the Commons; there is often limited need to
   compromise with other parties. ( Minority governments, however, are not
   uncommon.) Modern Canadian political parties are so tightly organised
   that they leave relatively little room for free action by their MPs. In
   many cases, MPs may be expelled from their parties for voting against
   the instructions of party leaders. As well, the major parties require
   candidates' nominations to be signed by party leaders, thus giving the
   leaders the power to, effectively, end a politician's career. Thus,
   defeats of majority governments on issues of confidence are very rare.
   Paul Martin's Liberal minority government lost a vote of no confidence
   in 2005, but the last time this had occurred was in 1979, when Joe
   Clark's Tory minority government was defeated after a term of just six
   months.

Current composition

   Since the election, the following MPs have crossed the floor, resigned,
   retired, died, or have been elected in a byelection:
   MP Riding From To Date
   ^1 David Emerson Vancouver Kingsway Liberal Party Conservative Party
   February 6, 2006
   Benoît Sauvageau Repentigny Bloc Québécois (died) August 28, 2006
   ^2 Joe Fontana London North-Centre Liberal Party (resigned) September
   20, 2006
   ^3 Garth Turner Halton Conservative Party Independent
   October 18, 2006

   1. Note: David Emerson switched parties after the election but before
   the new session of parliament.

   2. Note: Joe Fontana announced on September 8, 2006 that he was leaving
   federal politics to run for Mayor of London, Ontario.

   3. Note: Garth Turner was removed from the Conservative caucus due to
   remarks posted on his blog criticizing Prime Minister Stephen Harper.
   He will sit as an independent.

   The current composition of the House is:
          Affiliation        Members
        Conservative Party       124
        Liberal Party            101
        Bloc Québécois            50
        New Democratic Party      29
        Independent
                                 2^1
        vacant                   2^2
    Total
                                 308

   ^1 André Arthur and Garth Turner.
   ^2The ridings of Repentigny and London North-Centre.

   The latest result was:

   CAPTION:
   Summary of the 23 January 2006 Canadian House of Commons election
   results

   Party Party leader Candi-
   dates Seats Popular vote
   2004 Dissol. 2006 % Change # % Change
        Conservative Party of Canada Stephen Harper 308 99 98 124 +25.3%
   5,374,071 36.3% +6.7%
        Liberal Party of Canada Paul Martin 308 135 133 103 -23.7%
   4,479,415 30.2% -6.5%
        Bloc Québécois Gilles Duceppe 75 54 53 51 -5.6% 1,553,201 10.5%
   -1.9%
        New Democratic Party Jack Layton 308 19 18 29 +52.6% 2,589,597
   17.5% +1.8%
        Independents and no affiliation 90 1 4 1^1 - 81,860 0.5% N/A
        Green Party of Canada Jim Harris 308 - - -   665,940 4.5% +0.2%
        Christian Heritage Party of Canada Ron Gray 45 - - -   28,152 0.2%
   -0.1%
        Progressive Canadian Party Tracy Parsons 25 - - -   14,446 0.1%
   0.0%
        Communist Party of Canada (Marxist-Leninist) Sandra L. Smith 69 -
   - -   14,151 0.1% 0.0%
        Marijuana Party of Canada Blair Longley 23 - - -   9,171 0.1%
   -0.1%
        Canadian Action Party Connie Fogal 34 - - -   6,102 0.0% -0.1%
        Communist Party of Canada Miguel Figueroa 21 - - -   3,022 0.0%
   0.0%
        Libertarian Party of Canada Jean-Serge Brisson 10 - - -   3,002
   0.0% 0.0%
        First Peoples National Party of Canada Barbara Wardlaw 5 * - - *
   1,201 0.0% *
        Western Block Party Doug Christie 4 * - - * 1,094 0.0% *
        Animal Alliance Environment Voters Party Liz White 1 * - - * 72
   0.0% *
        Vacant 2
   Total 1634 308 308 308 - 14,845,680 100%
   Source: Elections Canada

   Notes:

          Official candidate nominations closed January 2, 2006. Candidate
          totals cited above are based on official filings. Nominations
          were official on January 5, 2006.
          "% change" refers to change from previous election
          * indicates the party did not contest in the previous election.
          ^1 André Arthur was elected as an independent candidate in the
          Quebec City-area riding of Portneuf—Jacques-Cartier. He
          personally won 20,158 votes.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canadian_House_of_Commons"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
