   #copyright

Canadian football

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Sports

   Canadian football is a sport in which two teams of twelve players each
   compete for territorial control of a field of play 110 yards (100.6 m)
   long and 65 yards (59.4 m) wide, with end zones 20 yards (18.3 m) deep.
   At each goal line is a set of forty-foot (12.2 m) high goalposts, which
   consist of two uprights joined by a crossbar 18.5 feet (5.6 m) long
   which is ten feet (3.1 m) above the goal line. The goalposts may be
   H-shaped (both posts fixed in the ground) although in the
   higher-caliber competitions the tuning-fork design (supported by a
   single curved post behind the goal line, so that each post starts ten
   feet (3.1 m) above the ground) is preferred. The sides of the field are
   marked by white sidelines, the goal line is marked in white, and white
   lines are drawn laterally across the field every 5 yards (4.6 m) from
   the goal line.

   Canadian football shares origins with American football, and the two
   are closely related. There are, however, some rule differences between
   the two. For a discussion of differences between Canadian and American
   football see: Comparison of Canadian and American football

Play of the game

   Teams advance across the field through the execution of short, distinct
   plays, which involve the possession of a brown, ovoid ball with ends
   tapered to a point. The ball has two one-inch-wide stripes.

Kickoff

   Play begins with one team place-kicking the ball from its own 35-yard
   line. Both teams then attempt to catch the ball. The player who
   recovers the ball may run while holding the ball, or throw the ball to
   a teammate, so long as the throw is not forward.

Stoppage of play

   Play stops when the ball carrier's knee, elbow, or any other body part
   aside from the feet and hands, is forced to the ground (a tackle); when
   a touchdown (see below) or a field goal is scored; when the ball leaves
   the playing area by any means (being carried, thrown, or fumbled out of
   bounds); or when the ball carrier is in a standing position but can no
   longer move. If no score has been made, the next play starts from
   scrimmage.

Scrimmage

   Before scrimmage, an official places the ball at the spot it became
   dead, but no nearer than 24 yards from the sideline or 1 yard from the
   goalline. The line parallel to the end zone passing through the ball is
   referred to as the line of scrimmage. This line is a sort of "no-man's
   land": players must stay on their respective sides of this line until
   the play has begun again. For a scrimmage to be valid the team in
   possession of the football must have seven players, excluding the
   quarterback, within one yard of the line of scrimmage. The defending
   team, however, must stay a yard or more back from the line of
   scrimmage.

Live play

   On the field at the beginning of a play are two teams of 12. The team
   in possession of the ball is the offence and the team defending is
   referred to as the defence. Play begins with a backwards pass through
   the legs by a member of the offensive team, to the quarterback or
   punter. If the quarterback or punter receives the ball, he may then do
   any of the following:
     * run with the ball, attempting to run farther down field (gaining
       yardage). The ball-carrier may run in any direction he sees fit
       (including backwards).
     * drop-kick the ball, dropping it onto the ground and kicking it on
       the bounce. (This play is exceedingly rare in both Canadian and
       American football, although in the Canadian game it is sometimes
       used as a last-second "desperation play" if the team is behind by
       less than three points.)
     * pass the ball laterally or backwards to a teammate. This play is
       known as a lateral, and may come at any time on the play. A pass
       which has any amount of forward momentum is a forward pass (see
       below); forward passes are subject to many restrictions which do
       not apply to laterals.
     * hand-off--hand the ball off to a teammate, typically a runningback
       or the fullback.
     * punt the ball; dropping it in the air and kicking it before it
       touches the ground.
     * place the ball on the ground for a place kick
     * throw a forward pass, where the ball is thrown to a receiver
       located farther down field (closer to the opponent's goal) than the
       thrower is. Forward passes are subject to the following
       restrictions:
          + They must be made from behind the line of scrimmage
          + Only one forward pass may be made on a play
          + The pass must be made in the direction of an eligible
            receiver.

   Each play constitutes a down. The offence must advance the ball at
   least ten yards towards the opponents' goal line within three downs or
   forfeit the ball to their opponents. Once ten yards have been gained
   the offence gains a new set of three downs. It must be noted that they
   do not accumulate, so that if one completes 10 yards on their first
   play, they lose the other two downs, instead of being granted three on
   top of their remaining two. If a team fails to gain ten yards in two
   downs they usually punt the ball on third down or try to kick a field
   goal (see below), depending on their position on the field.

Change in possession

   The ball changes possession in the following instances:
     * If the offence scores; the defence has the right to claim
       possession (either by starting from scrimmage at their own 35 yard
       line, or by receiving a kickoff). The defence may also elect to
       kick the ball to their opponents; teams with a strong placekicker
       and a stout defence may choose to do this to gain better field
       position for their own offence. This also applies when the defence
       scores on a turnover which is returned for a
       touchdown--technically, they become the offence for the conclusion
       of the play, and the scored-upon team has the right to claim
       possession.

     * If the defence scores on a safety, they have the right to claim
       possession.

     * If one team kicks the ball; the other team has the right to recover
       the ball and attempt a return. If a kicked ball goes out of bounds,
       or the kicking team scores a single or field goal as a result of
       the kick, the other team likewise gets possession.

     * If the offence fails to make ten yards in three plays, the defence
       takes over on downs.

     * If the offence attempts a forward pass and it is intercepted by the
       defence; the defence takes possession immediately (and may try and
       advance the ball on the play). Note that incomplete forward passes
       (those which go out of bounds, or which touch the ground without
       being first cleanly caught by a player) result in the end of the
       play, and are not returnable by either team.

     * If the offence fumbles (a ball-carrier drops the football, or has
       it dislodged by an opponent, or if the intended player fails to
       catch a lateral pass or a snap from centre, or a kick attempt is
       blocked by an opponent), the ball may be recovered (and advanced)
       by either team. If a fumbled ball goes out of bounds, the team
       whose player last touched it is awarded possession at the spot
       where it went out of bounds. A fumble by the offence in their own
       end zone, which goes out of bounds, results in a safety.

     * When the first half ends, the team which kicked to start the first
       half may receive a kickoff to start the second half.

Rules of contact

   There are many rules to contact in this type of football. First, the
   only player on the field who may be legally tackled is the player
   currently in possession of the football (the ball carrier). Second, a
   receiver, that is to say, an offensive player sent down the field to
   receive a pass, may not be interfered with (have his motion impeded, be
   blocked, etc). unless he is within one yard of the line of scrimmage
   (as opposed to 5 yards in American football). Any player may block
   another player's passage, so long as he does not hold or trip the
   player he intends to block. The kicker may not be contacted after the
   kick, and the quarterback, having already thrown the ball, may not be
   hit or tackled.

Infractions and penalties

   Infractions of the rules are punished with penalties, typically of 5,
   10, or 15 yards. Minor violations such as offside (a player from either
   side encroaching into scrimmage zone before the play starts) are
   penalized five yards, more serious penalties (such as holding) are
   penalized 10 yards, and severe violations of the rules are typically
   penalized 15 yards. Depending on the penalty, the penalty yardage may
   be assessed from the original line of scrimmage, the spot the violation
   occurred, or the place the ball ended after the play. Penalties on the
   offence may, or may not, result in a loss of down; penalties on the
   defence may result in a first down being automatically awarded to the
   offence. For particularly severe conduct, the game official(s) may
   eject players (ejected players may be substituted for), or in
   exceptional cases, declare the game over and award victory to one side
   or the other. Penalties do not affect the yard line which the offence
   must reach in order to reach first down (unless the penalty results in
   a first down being awarded); if a penalty against the defence results
   in the first down yardage being attained, then the offence is awarded a
   first down.

   Penalties may occur before a play starts (such as offsides), during the
   play (such as holding), or in a dead-ball situation (such as
   unsportsmanlike conduct).

   Penalties never result in a score for the offence (a penalty by the
   defence committed in their end zone is not ruled a touchdown); on rare
   occasions, penalties against the offence in their own end zone may
   result in a safety being scored by the defence. If the penalty yardage,
   once assessed would move the ball into an end zone (or further than
   half the distance between the end zone and the spot the penalty is
   assessed from), a penalty of half-the-distance is assessed instead.
   Note that in Canadian football (unlike American football), no scrimmage
   may start inside either one-yard line.

   In most cases, the non-penalized team will have the option of declining
   the penalty; in which case the results of the previous play stand as if
   the penalty had not been called. One notable exception to this rule is
   if the kicking team on a 3rd down punt play is penalized before the
   kick occurs; the receiving team may not decline the penalty and take
   over on downs. (After the kick is made, change of possession occurs and
   subsequent penalties are assessed against either the spot where the
   ball is caught, or the runback).

Positions

Offence

   The offensive positions found in Canadian football (and American
   football) have, for the most part, evolved throughout the years, and
   are not officially defined in the rules. However, among offensive
   players, the rules recognize three different types of players:

   Down linemen
          Down linemen are players who, at the start of every play, line
          up at the line of scrimmage; once in their stance they may not
          move until the play begins. The offence must have at least seven
          players lined up at the line of scrimmage on every play. The
          exception to this rule is the player (typically the centre) who
          snaps the ball to the quarterback. Linemen generally do not run
          with the ball (unless they recover it on a fumble) or receive a
          hand-off or lateral pass, but there is no rule against it.
          However, the centre and the two linemen on either side are
          ineligible receivers; they may not receive a forward pass
          either. (Other players who line up at the line of scrimmage may
          receive forward passes).

   Backs
          Backs line up behind the linemen; they may run with the ball,
          receive handoffs, laterals, and forward passes. They may also be
          in motion before the play starts.

   Specific offensive positions include:

   Backs/Receivers:

   Quarterback
          Generally the leader of the offence. Calls all plays, receives
          the ball off of snap, and initiates the action usually by
          running the ball himself, passing the ball to a receiver, or
          handing the ball off to another back.

   Fullback
          Multiple roles including pass protection, receiving, and
          blocking for the running back. On short yardage situations may
          also carry the ball.

   Running back
          As the name implies, the main runner on the team. Also an
          eligible receiver and blocker on pass plays.

   Wide receiver
          Lines up on the line of scrimmage, usually at a distance from
          the centre. Runs down the field in order to catch a forward pass
          from the quarterback.

   Slotback
          Same as the wide receiver, but starts five yards back off the
          line of scrimmage and stays closer to the offensive line.

   Down Linemen:

   Centre
          Snaps the ball to the quarterback. Most important pass blocker
          on pass plays. Calls offensive-line plays.

   Left/right guard
          Stands to the left and right of the centre helps protect the
          quarterback, Usually very good run blockers to open holes up the
          middle for runners.

   Left/right tackle
          Stands on the ends of the offensive line, The biggest men on the
          line, usually about 300 pounds (140 kg). Usually very good pass
          blockers.

   Offensive lineman
          Collective name for centre, guards, and tackles.

Defence

   The rules do not constrain how the defense may arrange itself (other
   than the requirement that they must remain one yard behind the line of
   scrimmage until the play starts).

   Cornerback
          Covers the wide receivers on most plays.

   Safety
          Covers deep. Last line of defence, can offer run support or
          blitz.

   Defensive halfback
          Covers the slotback and helps contain the run from going to the
          outside.

   Defensive back
          Collective term for cornerback, safety, and defensive halfback.

   Nose tackle
          Lineman across from centre, tries to get past the offensive-line
          or take double team and open holes for blitzes.

   Defensive tackle
          Inside defensive linemen try to break through the offensive line
          and open holes for linebackers.

   Defensive end
          Main rushing lineman. Rushes the quarterback and contain

   Middle linebacker
          Lines up across from the centre 3 to 4 yards back. Quarterback
          of the defence. Calls plays for lineman and linebackers.

   Weak-side linebacker
          Lines up on the short side of field, and can drop into pass
          coverage or contain.

   Strong-side linebacker
          Lines up on the opposite side and usually rushes.

Special teams

   Special teams generally refers to kicking plays, which typically
   involve a change in possession.

   Holder
          Receives the snap on field goal tries and converts; places the
          ball in position and holds it to be kicked by the kicker.

   Kicker
          Kicks field goals, converts, kick-offs

   Punter
          Punts ball, usually on third downs

   Returners
          Fast, agile runners who specialize in fielding punts and
          kickoffs, attempting to advance them for better field position
          or a score.

Other kicks

   Canadian football distinguishes three ways of kicking the ball:

   Place kick
          Kicking a ball held on the ground by a teammate, or, on a
          kickoff (resuming play following a score), placed on a tee.

   Drop kick
          Kicking a ball after bouncing it on the ground. Although rarely
          used today, it has the same status in scoring as a place kick.
          This play is part of the game's rugby heritage, and was largely
          obsoleted when the ball with pointed ends was adapted.

   Punt
          Kicking the ball after it has been released from the kicker's
          hand and before it hits the ground). Punts may not score a field
          goal, even if one should travel through the uprights.

   On punts and field goal attempts (but not kickoffs), members of the
   kicking team, other than the kicker and any teammates who are onside
   (behind the kicker at the time of the kick), may not approach within
   five yards of the ball until it has been touched by the receiving team.

Scoring

   The methods of scoring are:

   Touchdown
          Achieved when the ball is in possession of a player in the
          opponent's goal area, or when the ball in the possession of a
          player crosses or touches the plane of the opponent's goal-line,
          worth 6 points

   Conversion (or Convert)
          After a touchdown, the team that scored attempts one scrimmage
          play from any point between the hash marks on or outside the
          opponents' 5-yard line. If they make what would normally be a
          field goal, they score one point; what would normally be a
          touchdown scores two points (a "two-point conversion"). It is
          also possible for the defence to score a safety (i.e. by
          recovering a turnover and running the ball all the way to their
          opponents' end zone). No matter what happens on the convert
          attempt, play then continues with a kickoff (see below).

   Field goal
          Scored by a drop kick or place kick (except on a kickoff) when
          the ball, after being kicked and without again touching the
          ground, goes over the cross bar and between the goal posts (or
          goal posts produced) of the opponent's goal (worth three
          points).

   Safety
          Scored when the ball becomes dead in the possession of a team in
          its own goal area, or when the ball touches or crosses the
          dead-line, or side-line-in-goal and touches the ground, a
          player, or some object beyond these lines as a result of the
          team scored against making a play. It is worth two points. This
          is different from a Single (see below) in that the team scored
          against begins with possession of the ball.

   Single
          Scored when the ball becomes dead in the possession of a team in
          its own goal area, or when the ball touches or crosses the
          dead-line, or side-line-in-goal, and touches the ground, a
          player, or some object beyond these lines as a result of the
          ball having been kicked from the field of play into the goal
          area by the scoring team. It is worth one point. This is
          different from a Safety (see above) in that team scored against
          receives possession of the ball from a kick.
          At one time the single was called a rouge (French for "red");
          this term is still recognized in the official rulebook, but is
          otherwise obsolete. In early Canadian football rules the point
          was deducted from a team failing to advance the ball from the
          end zone. If a team had no points, this put them "in the red",
          with a negative score.

Resumption of play

   Resumption of play following a score is conducted under procedures
   which vary with the type of score.
     * Following a touchdown and convert attempt (successful or not), play
       resumes with the scoring team kicking off from its own 35-yard line
       (45-yard line in amateur leagues).
     * Following a field goal, the non-scoring team may choose for play to
       resume either with a kickoff as above, or by scrimmaging the ball
       from its own 35-yard line.
     * Following a safety, the scoring team may choose for play to resume
       in either of the above ways, or it may choose to kick off from its
       own 35-yard line.
     * Following a single, play resumes with the non-scoring team
       scrimmaging from its own 35-yard line.

Game timing

   The game consists of two 30-minute halves, each of which is divided
   into two 15-minute quarters. The clock counts down from 15:00 in each
   quarter. Timing rules change when there are three minutes remaining in
   a half. A short break interval occurs after the end of each quarter (a
   longer break at halftime), and the two teams then change goals.

   In the first 27 minutes of a half, the clock stops when:
     * points are scored,
     * the ball goes out of bounds,
     * a forward pass is incomplete,
     * the ball is dead and a penalty flag has been thrown,
     * the ball is dead and teams are making substitutions (e.g.,
       possession has changed, punting situation, short yardage
       situation),
     * the ball is dead and a player is injured, or
     * the ball is dead and a captain calls a time-out.

   The clock starts again when the referee determines the ball is ready
   for scrimmage, except for team time-outs (where the clock starts at the
   snap) and kickoffs (where the clock starts not at the kick but when the
   ball is first touched after the kick).

   In the last three minutes of a half, the clock stops whenever the ball
   becomes dead. On kickoffs, the clock starts when the ball is first
   touched after the kick. On scrimmages, when it starts depends on what
   ended the previous play. The clock starts when the ball is ready for
   scrimmage except that it starts on the snap when on the previous play
     * the ball was kicked off,
     * the ball was punted,
     * the ball changed possession,
     * the ball went out of bounds,
     * there were points scored,
     * there was an incomplete forward pass,
     * there was a penalty applied (not declined), or
     * there was a team time-out.

   The clock does not run during convert attempts in the last three
   minutes of a half. If the 15 minutes of a quarter expire while the ball
   is live, the quarter is extended until the ball becomes dead. If a
   quarter's time expires while the ball is dead, the quarter is extended
   for one more scrimmage. A quarter cannot end while a penalty is
   pending: after the penalty yardage is applied, the quarter is extended
   one scrimmage. Note that the non-penalized team has the option to
   decline any penalty it considers disadvantageous, so a losing team
   cannot indefinitely prolong a game by repeatedly committing penalties.

League play

   Canadian football is played at several levels in Canada. The
   professional league in which the sport is played is the eight-team
   Canadian Football League (CFL), and its champion is awarded the Grey
   Cup, the oldest trophy in professional football. Amateur football is
   governed by Football Canada. At the university level, 27 teams play in
   four conferences under the auspices of Canadian Interuniversity Sport;
   the CIS champion is awarded the Vanier Cup. Junior football is played
   by many after high school before joining the university ranks. There
   are 18 junior teams in 3 divisions competing for the Canadian Bowl.

   Semi-professional leagues have grown in popularity in recent years,
   with the Alberta Football League becoming especially popular. The
   Canadian Major Football League is the governing body for the
   semi-professional game.

History

   The first documented football match in Canada was a game played at
   University College, University of Toronto on November 9, 1861. A
   football club was formed at the university soon afterwards, although
   its rules of play at this stage are unclear.

   In 1864, at Trinity College, Toronto, F. Barlow Cumberland and
   Frederick A. Bethune devised rules based on rugby football. However,
   modern Canadian football is widely regarded as having originated with a
   game of rugby played in Montreal, in 1865, when British Army officers
   played local civilians. The game gradually gained a following, and the
   Montreal Football Club was formed in 1868, the first recorded
   non-university football club in Canada.

   Rugby soon became popular at McGill University. It is from this varsity
   play that the game now known as American football entered the United
   States, after McGill challenged Harvard University to a game, in 1874.

   The Canadian Football League was known under various names throughout
   its history including the Canadian Rugby Football Union, and the
   Canadian Rugby Union. The CRFU, original forerunner to the current
   Canadian Football League, was established in 1882.

   As the rules of American football are very similar to Canadian
   football, the CFL has maintained a close relationship with its American
   counterpart, the National Football League (NFL).

   The CFL regular season begins in June, and play-offs are completed by
   mid-November. In cities with outdoor stadiums such as Calgary,
   Edmonton, Winnipeg, Montreal, Hamilton, and Regina, low temperatures
   and icy field conditions can seriously affect the outcome of a game.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canadian_football"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
