   #copyright

Canberra

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Oceania
(Australasia)


   This is a featured article. Click here for more information.
   Canberra
   Australian Capital Territory
   Population:
   • Density:        323,645 (2004) ( 8th)
                     401.0/km²
   Area:             805.6 km²
   Time zone:

    • Summer ( DST)
                     AEST ( UTC+10)

                     AEST ( UTC+11)
   Location:
                       * 300 km from Sydney
                       * 650 km from Melbourne

   Canberra is the capital city of Australia and with a population of just
   over 325,000, is Australia's largest inland city. The city is located
   at the northern end of the Australian Capital Territory, 300 kilometres
   (190  mi) southwest of Sydney, and 650 kilometres (400 mi) north-east
   of Melbourne. The site of Canberra was selected for the location of the
   nation's capital in 1908 as a compromise between Sydney and Melbourne,
   the two largest cities. It is unusual among Australian cities as an
   entirely purpose-built, planned city. Following an international
   contest for the city's design, a design by Chicago architect Walter
   Burley Griffin was selected and construction commenced in 1913. The
   city's design was heavily influenced by the garden city movement and
   incorporates significant areas of natural vegetation that have earned
   Canberra the title "bush capital". Although the growth and development
   of Canberra was hindered by the World Wars and the Great Depression, it
   emerged as a thriving city after World War II.

   As the seat of the government of Australia, Canberra is the site of
   Parliament House, the High Court of Australia and numerous government
   departments and agencies. It is also the location of several social and
   cultural institutions of national significance. The federal government
   contributes the largest percentage of Gross State Product and is the
   largest employer in Canberra. Canberra is also a popular destination
   for domestic and international tourists.

   Most Australians pronounce the city's name in two syllables as either
   /ˈkæn.bɹə/ or /ˈkæm.bɹə/ ('Can-bra' or 'Cam-bra'). It is also less
   commonly known as /ˈkæn.bə.ɹə/ or /kæn.ˈbe.ɹə/. The inhabitants are
   referred to as /kæn.ˈbe.ɹəns/ ('Canberrans').

History

   Blundells' Cottage, built around 1860, is one of the few remaining
   buildings built by the first European settlers of Canberra
   Enlarge
   Blundells' Cottage, built around 1860, is one of the few remaining
   buildings built by the first European settlers of Canberra

   Before European settlement, the area in which Canberra would eventually
   be constructed was seasonally inhabited by the Ngunnawal and Walgalu
   tribes. The Ngarigo lived south-east of the Canberra area, the
   Gundungurra to the north, the Yuin on the coast and the Wiradjuri to
   the west. Archaeological evidence from the Canberra region suggests
   human habitation of the area for at least 21,000 years. The word
   "Canberra" is said to be derived from the name of the local Ngabri
   people, one of the Ngunnawal family groups, or alternatively from the
   word Kambera meaning "meeting place" in the Ngunnawal language. The
   Ngunnawal name was apparently used as a reference to corroborees held
   during the seasonal migration of the Ngunawal people to feast on the
   Bogong moths that pass through the region each spring.

   European exploration and settlement started in the Canberra area as
   early as the 1820s. There were four expeditions between 1820 and 1824.
   White settlement of the area probably dates from 1824, when a homestead
   or station was built on what is now the Acton peninsula by stockmen
   employed by Joshua John Moore. He formally purchased the site in 1826,
   and named the property Canberry. The European population in the
   Canberra area continued to grow slowly throughout the 19th century.
   Foremost among them was the Campbell family of "Duntroon"; their
   imposing stone house is now the officers' mess of the Royal Military
   College, Duntroon. The Campbells sponsored settlement by other Scottish
   farmer families to work their land, such as the Southwells of "
   Weetangera". As the European presence increased, the indigenous
   population dwindled, mainly from disease such as smallpox and measles.
   Opening of Parliament House in May 1927
   Enlarge
   Opening of Parliament House in May 1927

   The district's change from a New South Wales (NSW) rural area to the
   national capital started during debates over Federation in the late
   19th century. Following a long dispute over whether Sydney or Melbourne
   should be the national capital, a compromise was reached: the new
   capital would be built in New South Wales, so long as it was no closer
   than 100 miles to Sydney, with Melbourne to be the temporary capital
   while the new capital was built. Canberra was chosen as the site in
   1908, as a result of survey work done by the government surveyor
   Charles Scrivener. The NSW government ceded the Federal Capital
   Territory (as it was then known) to the federal government. In an
   international design competition conducted by the Department of Home
   Affairs, on 1 January 1910, the design of Walter Burley Griffin was
   chosen for the city, and in 1913 Griffin was appointed Federal Capital
   Director of Design and Construction and construction began. On 12 March
   1913, the city was officially given its name by Lady Denman, the wife
   of the then Governor-General Lord Denman at a ceremony at Kurrajong
   Hill, which has since become Capital Hill and the site of the present
   Parliament House. Canberra Day is a public holiday observed in the city
   and the surrounding Australian Capital Territory (ACT) on the third
   Monday in March to celebrate the founding of Canberra.
   Two of Canberra's best-known landmarks, Parliament House and Old
   Parliament House (foreground). Commonwealth Place runs alongside the
   lake and includes the International Flag Display
   Enlarge
   Two of Canberra's best-known landmarks, Parliament House and Old
   Parliament House (foreground). Commonwealth Place runs alongside the
   lake and includes the International Flag Display

   The federal government moved to Canberra on 9 May 1927, with the
   opening of the Provisional Parliament House. The Prime Minister,
   Stanley Bruce, had officially taken up residence in The Lodge a few
   days earlier. Planned development of the city slowed significantly
   during the depression of the 1930s and during World War II. Some
   projects planned for that time, for example, Roman Catholic and
   Anglican cathedrals, were never completed. The development of Canberra
   gained pace after the Second World War, and it has grown beyond the
   original planners’ expectations since then. Several Government
   departments, together with public servants, were moved to Canberra from
   Melbourne following the war. Government housing projects were
   undertaken to accommodate the city's growing population. Parts of
   Canberra's north and south were further developed in the 1950s, and
   urban development in the districts of Woden Valley and Belconnen
   commenced in the mid and late 1960s, respectively. Lake Burley Griffin
   was completed in 1963.

   On 27 January 1972 the Aboriginal Tent Embassy was first established on
   the grounds of Parliament House; it was created to draw attention to
   indigenous rights and land issues and has been continuously occupied
   since 1992. On 9 May 1988, a larger and permanent Parliament House was
   opened on Capital Hill as part of Australia's bicentenary celebrations,
   and the Federal Parliament moved there from the Provisional Parliament
   House, now known as Old Parliament House. In December 1988, the ACT was
   granted full self-government through an Act of the Commonwealth
   Parliament. Following the first elections in February 1989, a 17-member
   Legislative Assembly sat at its offices in London Circuit, Civic, on 11
   May 1989. The Australian Labor Party formed the ACT's first government,
   led by the Chief Minister Rosemary Follett, who made history as
   Australia's first female head of government.

   On 18 January 2003, parts of Canberra were engulfed by a bushfire that
   killed four people and destroyed 491 homes and the major research
   telescopes and workshop at the Australian National University's Mount
   Stromlo Observatory.

Geography

   The location of Canberra within the ACT, Canberra's seven districts are
   shown in yellow, they are North Canberra, South Canberra, Woden Valley,
   Belconnen, Weston Creek, Tuggeranong, and Gungahlin
   Enlarge
   The location of Canberra within the ACT, Canberra's seven districts are
   shown in yellow, they are North Canberra, South Canberra, Woden Valley,
   Belconnen, Weston Creek, Tuggeranong, and Gungahlin

   Canberra covers an area of 805.6  square kilometres (311.0  sq. mi) and
   is located near the Brindabella Ranges, approximately 150  kilometres
   (93 mi) inland from Australia's east coast. It is located at altitudes
   that range from 550  metres to 700 metres (1,800 to 2,300  ft) AHD. The
   highest point is Mount Majura at 888 metres (2,913 ft). Other large
   hills include Mt Taylor, Mt Ainslie, Mt Mugga Mugga and Black Mountain.
   The surrounding bushland and the original bushland that Canberra was
   built in is a mixture of eucalyptus savanna, scrubland, swamp and dry
   eucalyptus forests.

   The Molonglo River flows through Canberra and has been dammed to form
   the body of water in the centre of the city called Lake Burley Griffin.
   The Molonglo then flows into the Murrumbidgee north-west of Canberra,
   which in turn flows north-west toward the New South Wales town of Yass.
   The Queanbeyan River joins the Molonglo River at Oaks Estate just
   within the ACT. A number of creeks, including Jerrabomberra and
   Yarralumla Creeks, flow into the Molonglo and Murrumbidgee. Two of
   these creeks, the Ginninderra and Tuggeranong, have similarly been
   dammed to form Lakes Ginninderra and Tuggeranong. Until recently the
   Molonglo had a history of sometimes lethal floods; the area was a flood
   plain prior to the filling of Lake Burley Griffin.

Climate

   Because of its latitude, elevation and distance from the coast,
   Canberra has four distinct seasons. The climates of most Australian
   coastal areas, which include all the state capital cities, are
   moderated by the sea. Canberra experiences hot, dry summers, and mild
   winters with heavy fog and frequent frosts, with a rare spot of snow in
   the CBD and surrounding areas. The highest recorded maximum temperature
   was 42.2 °C (108 °F) on 1 February 1968. The lowest recorded minimum
   temperature is −10.0 °C (14 °F) on 11 July 1971. Light snow falls in
   the city in one out of approximately three winters but is usually not
   widespread and quickly dissipates. Thunderstorms can occur between
   October and March, with rainfall maximums in spring and summer.

   CAPTION: Daily temperature

   Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Year
   Mean daily maximum temperature ( °C) 27.8 27.1 24.4 19.9 15.4 12.2 11.3
   12.9 16.0 19.2 22.5 26.1 19.6
   Mean daily minimum temperature ( °C) 13.0 13.0 10.7 6.7 3.1 0.9 -0.2
   0.9 3.2 6.0 8.6 11.3 6.4
   Source: Bureau of Meteorology

Urban structure

   Inner Canberra demonstrates some aspects of the Griffin plan, in
   particular the Parliamentary Triangle
   Enlarge
   Inner Canberra demonstrates some aspects of the Griffin plan, in
   particular the Parliamentary Triangle

   Canberra is a planned city that was originally designed by Walter
   Burley Griffin, a major 20th century American architect. The city
   centre is laid out on two perpendicular axes: a water axis stretching
   along Lake Burley Griffin, and a ceremonial land axis stretching from
   Parliament House on Capital Hill north-eastward along ANZAC Avenue to
   the Australian War Memorial at the foot of Mt Ainslie. The area known
   as the Parliamentary Triangle is formed by three of Burley Griffin's
   axes, stretching from Capital Hill along Commonwealth Avenue to the
   Civic Centre around City Hill, along Constitution Avenue to the Defence
   precinct on Russell Hill, and along Kings Avenue back to Capital Hill.

   The urban areas of Canberra are organised into a hierarchy of
   districts, town centres, group centres, local suburbs as well as other
   industrial areas and villages. There are seven districts, each of which
   is divided into smaller suburbs, and most of which have a town centre
   which is the focus of commercial and social activities. The districts
   were settled in the following chronological order:
     * North Canberra, mostly settled in the 1920s and '30s, with
       expansion up to the 1960s, now 15 suburbs
     * South Canberra, settled from the 1920s to '60s, 12 suburbs
     * Woden Valley, first settled in 1963, 13 suburbs
     * Belconnen, first settled in 1967, 25 suburbs
     * Weston Creek, settled in 1969, 8 suburbs
     * Tuggeranong, settled in 1974, 19 suburbs
     * Gungahlin, settled in the early 1990s, 7 suburbs to date

   View from Tuggeranong Hill, looking down into Tuggeranong Valley
   Enlarge
   View from Tuggeranong Hill, looking down into Tuggeranong Valley

   The North and South Canberra districts are substantially based on
   Walter Burley Griffin's designs. In 1967 the then National Capital
   Development Commission adopted the "Y Plan" which laid out future urban
   development in Canberra around a series of central shopping and
   commercial area known as the 'town centres' linked by freeways, the
   layout of which roughly resembled the shape of the letter Y, with
   Tuggeranong at the base of the Y and Belconnen and Gungahlin located at
   the ends of the arms of the Y. Development in Canberra has been closely
   regulated by government, both through the town planning process, but
   also through the use of crown lease terms that have tightly limited the
   use of parcels of land. All land in the ACT is held on 99 year leases
   from the national government, although most leases are now administered
   by the Territory government.

   Most suburbs have their own local shops, and are located close to a
   larger shopping centre serving a group of suburbs. Community facilites
   and schools are often also located near local shops or group shopping
   centres. Many of Canberra's suburbs are named after famous Australians,
   early settlers, or use Aboriginal words for their title. Street names
   typically follow a particular theme; for example, the streets of Duffy
   are named after Australian dams and weirs, and the streets of Page are
   named after biologists and naturalists. Most diplomatic missions are
   located in the suburbs of Yarralumla, Deakin and O'Malley. There are
   three light industrial areas: the suburbs of Fyshwick, Mitchell and
   Hume.

Governance

   ACT Legislative Assembly & the statue Ethos (Tom Bass, 1961)
   Enlarge
   ACT Legislative Assembly
   & the statue Ethos (Tom Bass, 1961)

   Outside Canberra, the Australian Capital Territory has no settlements
   larger than a village. The Australian Capital Territory Legislative
   Assembly performs the roles of both a city council and territory
   government. The Assembly consists of 17 members, elected from three
   districts using proportional representation. The three districts are
   Molongolo, Gininderra and Brindabella, which elect seven, five and five
   members, respectively. The Chief Minister is elected by the Members of
   the Legislative Assembly (MLA) and selects another four MLAs to serve
   as Ministers to form, with the Chief Minister, an Executive (known
   informally as the cabinet.) At the 2004 election the Australian Labor
   Party, headed by Chief Minister Jon Stanhope, won nine of the 17 seats
   and formed the ACT's first majority government.

   The Australian national government retains some influence over the ACT
   government. In the administrative sphere, most frequently this is
   through the actions of the National Capital Authority which is
   responsible for planning and development in areas of Canberra which are
   considered to be of national importance or which are central to
   Griffin's plan for the city, such as the Parliamentary Triangle, major
   approach and processional roads, areas where the Commonwealth retains
   ownership of the land or undeveloped hills and ridge-lines (which form
   part of the Canberra Nature Park). The national government also retains
   a level of control over the Territory Assembly through the provisions
   of the Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988. This
   Act of the national Parliament is the constitution for the ACT and
   limits the range of matters upon which the Assembly can legislate.

   The Australian Federal Police provides all of the police services of a
   state police force under a contractual agreement with the Australian
   Capital Territory Government. People who have been charged with
   offences are tried either in the ACT Magistrate's Court or, for more
   severe offences, the ACT Supreme Court. Prisoners can be held in remand
   at the Belconnen Remand Centre in the ACT; as at 2006 there is no
   prison in the ACT, so people who have been sentenced to imprisonment
   serve their sentence in NSW. Courts such as a Small Claims Tribunal and
   a Family Court exist for civil law actions and other non-criminal legal
   matters.

Economy

   Many Canberrans are employed by Government departments such as the
   Australian Treasury
   Enlarge
   Many Canberrans are employed by Government departments such as the
   Australian Treasury

   As of July 2006, the unemployment rate in Canberra is 2.8%, well below
   the national unemployment rate of 4.8%, with labour shortages reported
   in some sectors. As a result of low unemployment and substantial levels
   of public sector and commercial employment, Canberra has the highest
   mean weekly disposable income of any Australian capital city. The gross
   average weekly wage of a Canberra resident is $1,208.50, compared with
   the Australia wide average of $1,043.10. The median house price in
   Canberra as of June 2005 was $352,500, lower than Sydney and Melbourne
   but higher than all other capital cities. The median weekly rent paid
   by Canberra residents is higher than rents in all other states and
   territories. As at the June quarter of 2006 the median rent for a 3
   bedroom house was $320 per week. This is the highest of all capital
   cities in Australia. The median rent for 'other' dwellings is $300 per
   week.

   The city's main industry is government administration and defence,
   which accounted for 26.1% of Gross Territory Product in 2003–04 and
   employed over 40% of Canberra's workforce. The major public-sector
   employers in Canberra include the parliament, government departments
   such as Department of Defence, Finance, Foreign Affairs and Trade, and
   Treasury. A number of Australian Defence Force establishments are
   located in or near Canberra, most notably the Australian Defence Force
   headquarters and HMAS Harman, which is a naval communications centre
   that is being converted into a tri-service, multiuser depot. The former
   RAAF Fairbairn, adjacent to the Canberra International Airport was sold
   to the operators of the Airport, but the base continues to be used for
   RAAF VIP flights.

   Property and business services, construction, health and community
   services, and education are other significant contributors to the
   economy of Canberra. A large amount of Australian and international
   visitors make tourism a significant contributor to the economy. The
   most popular seasons are spring and autumn; the annual Floriade spring
   flower display in September is a major attraction.

Demographics

   Shopping at the weekly Old Bus Depot Markets, Kingston
   Enlarge
   Shopping at the weekly Old Bus Depot Markets, Kingston

   As of 2003, the population of Canberra was 323,004 people, and the city
   has a population density of 401.0 persons per square kilometre
   (1,038.6/sq. mi), which is dense with respect to other Australian
   cities. The 2001 census showed that 1.2% of Canberra's population were
   of indigenous origin and 21.6% were born overseas. The largest group of
   people born overseas came from English-speaking countries, led by the
   United Kingdom and then New Zealand. Significant numbers of immigrants
   have also come from Germany, Italy and Vietnam. Recent immigrants have
   arrived from countries in east and south Asia. Most Canberrans are
   native speakers of English; many have a second language, the most
   common being Chinese, Italian, Croatian and Greek.

   Canberrans are relatively young, highly mobile, and well educated. The
   average age is 32 years, and only 8.3% of the population is aged over
   65 years. Between 1996 and 2001, 61.9% of the population either moved
   to or from Canberra, which is the second highest mobility rate of any
   Australian capital city. As of May 2004, 30% of people in the ACT aged
   15–64 had a level of educational attainment equal to at least a
   bachelor's degree, significantly higher that the national average of
   19%. Approximately 63% of Canberra residents describe themselves as
   Christian, the most common denominations being Catholic and Anglican;
   less than 3% of the population practice a non-Christian religion and
   19% are not religious.

   As of 2002 the most common crimes in Canberra are property related
   crimes, unlawful entry with intent and motor vehicle theft. They affect
   1,961 and 630 of every 100,000 persons respectively. Homicide and
   related offences affect 1.5/100,000 persons which is below the national
   average of 4.9/100,000 persons. Rates of assault and sexual assault are
   also below the national average.

Education

   ANU School of Art (formerly the Canberra High School)
   Enlarge
   ANU School of Art (formerly the Canberra High School)

   The two main tertiary institutions are the Australian National
   University (ANU) in Acton and the University of Canberra (UC) in Bruce.
   The ANU was established as a research university in 1946; it continues
   to have a strong research focus and is ranked among the best
   universities in the world in The Times Higher Education Supplement and
   the Shanghai Jiao Tong World University Rankings, and is ranked as
   Australia's best university. Both ANU and UC also have campuses
   interstate and overseas. There are also two religious university
   campuses in Canberra: Signadou in the North Canberra suburb of Watson
   is a campus of the Australian Catholic University; St Mark's
   Theological College adjacent to the Parliament House is a campus of
   Charles Sturt University.

   The Australian Defence Force Academy (ADFA) and the Royal Military
   College, Duntroon are near the suburb of Campbell in Canberra's inner
   north-east. ADFA teaches military undergraduates and postgraduates and
   is officially a campus of the University of New South Wales; Duntroon
   provides Australian Army Officer training. Tertiary level vocational
   education is also available through the multi-campus Canberra Institute
   of Technology.

   In February 2004 there were 140 public and non-governmental schools in
   Canberra; 96 were operated by the Government and 44 are non-Government.
   Most suburbs are planned to include a primary school and a nearby
   preschool, and schools are usually located near open areas for play and
   sports. Preschool is not a compulsory year, but many children attend
   for the government-funded 10.5 hours a week (12 from 2006). Primary
   school consists of seven grades: kindergarten and years 1 to 6. From
   years 7 to 10 children attend high school and in years 11 to 12 attend
   a college, unlike the rest of Australia where high school comprises
   year 7 to year 12. The ACT has the highest retention rate in Australia
   with 89% of students who were enrolled in year 7 in 1999 being enrolled
   full-time in year 12 in 2004. This retention rate has declined from a
   peak in 1994 when the rate was nearly 5% more, probably because of poor
   job prospects for young people at that time compared with 2004.

Culture

Arts and entertainment

   The National Museum of Australia established in 2001 records
   Australia's social history and is one of Canberra's more
   architecturally daring buildings
   Enlarge
   The National Museum of Australia established in 2001 records
   Australia's social history and is one of Canberra's more
   architecturally daring buildings

   Canberra is home to many national monuments and institutions such as
   the Australian War Memorial, the National Gallery of Australia, the
   National Portrait Gallery currently housed at Old Parliament House, the
   National Library of Australia, the National Archives of Australia, and
   the National Museum of Australia. Many Commonwealth government
   buildings in Canberra are open to the public, including Parliament
   House, the High Court and the Royal Australian Mint. Lake Burley
   Griffin is the site of the Captain Cook Memorial and the National
   Carillon. Other sites of interest include the Telstra Tower and the
   Australian National Botanic Gardens on Black Mountain, the National Zoo
   and Aquarium on Scrivener Dam, the National Dinosaur Museum and
   Questacon – the National Science and Technology Centre.
   A copy of every book published in Australia is required by law to be
   held by the National Library of Australia
   Enlarge
   A copy of every book published in Australia is required by law to be
   held by the National Library of Australia

   The Canberra Museum and Gallery in Civic is a repository of local
   history and art. Several historic homes are open to the public: Lanyon
   and Tuggeranong Homesteads in the Tuggeranong Valley, Mugga-Mugga in
   Symonston, and Blundell's Cottage in Parkes all display the lifestyle
   of the early European settlers. Calthorpes' House in Red Hill is a well
   preserved example of a 1920s house from Canberra's very early days.
   Duntroon House, in the suburb of Campbell, was one of the district's
   earliest homesteads and is now the officers' mess at Royal Military
   College; it is occasionally open to the public.
   The Floriade flower festival attracts many tourists each spring
   Enlarge
   The Floriade flower festival attracts many tourists each spring

   Canberra has many venues for live music and theatre: the Canberra
   Theatre and Playhouse which host many major concerts and productions;
   and Llewellyn Hall (within the ANU School of Music), a world-class
   concert hall. The Street Theatre, also located at the Australian
   National University, hosts many amateur student and community theatre
   groups. Stonefest at the University of Canberra is Canberra's largest
   music festival. There are numerous bars and nightclubs which also offer
   live entertainment, particularly concentrated in the areas of Dickson,
   Kingston and the City Centre. Most town centres have facilities for a
   community theatre and a cinema, and they all have a library. Popular
   cultural events include the National Folk Festival, the Royal Canberra
   Show, the Summernats car festival and the Celebrate Canberra festival
   which is held over 10 days in March in conjunction with Canberra Day.

   Canberra has a number of sister cities, including Atlanta in the United
   States, Beijing in China, Dili in East Timor, Nara in Japan, and
   Versailles in France. Cultural exchange happens to some extent with
   each city. The largest community event associated with a sister city is
   the Canberra Nara Candle Festival which is held in October.

Sport

   A rugby league match at Canberra Stadium
   Enlarge
   A rugby league match at Canberra Stadium

   In addition to local sporting leagues, Canberra has a number of
   sporting teams that compete in national and international leagues. The
   best known teams are the Canberra Raiders and the Brumbies who play
   rugby league and rugby union respectively, and who have both been
   champions of their leagues. Both teams play their home games at
   Canberra Stadium, which is Canberra's largest stadium and was used to
   hold preliminary soccer matches for the 2000 Summer Olympics and
   matches for the 2003 Rugby World Cup. Canberra also has a successful
   basketball team, the Canberra Capitals. The Canberra Capitals won the
   2006 women's basketball Grand Final.

   There are also teams that participate in national competitions in
   netball, field hockey, ice hockey and cricket. Manuka Oval is another
   large outdoor sporting facility where cricket and Australian Rules
   football are played. The Melbourne based AFL team the Kangaroos played
   some home games at Manuka Oval until July 2006. Following the move of
   their alternative home ground to Carrara in Queensland, Melbourne and
   the Western Bulldogs will play home games at Manuka Oval from 2007.
   Canberra is also home to the Barassi International Australian Football
   Youth Tournament. The historic Prime Minister's XI cricket match is
   played at Manuka Oval annually. Other significant annual sporting
   events include the Canberra Marathon, the City of Canberra Half Ironman
   Triathlon and the Canberra Women's Tennis Classic held in the lead up
   to the Australian Open.

   The Australian Institute of Sport (AIS) is located in the Canberra
   suburb of Bruce. The AIS is a specialised educational and training
   institution providing coaching for elite junior and senior athletes in
   a number of sports. The AIS has been operating since 1981 and has
   achieved significant success in producing elite athletes. It is also a
   popular tourist destination.

   Canberra has numerous sporting ovals, golf courses, skate parks, tennis
   courts and swimming pools that are open to the public. A Canberra-wide
   series of bicycle paths are available to cyclists for recreational and
   sporting purposes. Canberra Nature Parks have a large range of walking
   paths, horse and mountain bike trails. Water sports like sailing,
   rowing and water skiing are popular activities on Canberra's lakes. The
   Rally of Canberra is an annual motor sport event and a facility for
   drag racing is currently being planned for construction.

Infrastructure

Health

   The Canberra Hospital
   Enlarge
   The Canberra Hospital

   Canberra has two large public hospitals, the 500 bed Canberra Hospital
   - formerly the Woden Valley Hospital - located in Garran and the
   smaller 174 bed Calvary Public Hospital located in Bruce. Both public
   hospitals are also teaching hospitals. The largest private hospital in
   Canberra is the John James Memorial Hospital Hospital in Deakin.
   Calvary Private Hospital in Bruce and Healthscope's National Capital
   Private in Garran are also major healthcare providers. The city has 10
   aged care facilities. Canberra's hospitals receive emergency cases from
   throughout southern New South Wales. The ACT Ambulance Service is one
   of four operational agencies of the ACT Emergency Services Authority.

Transport

   The car is by far the dominant form of transport in Canberra. Past
   planning policies have resulted in well developed good quality roads
   and a low population density spread over a relatively large area of the
   city. Canberra's districts are generally connected by 'parkways' -
   limited access dual carriageway roads with speed limits generally set
   at 80 km/h to 100 km/h. An example is the Tuggeranong Parkway which
   links Canberra's CBD and Tuggeranong, and bypasses Weston Creek. In
   most districts, discrete residential suburbs are bounded by access
   roads.

   A publicly run bus service, the Australian Capital Territory Internal
   Omnibus Network (ACTION), provides public transport throughout the
   city. A very good and widepread network of cycleways has been
   established. Only 4.6% of the population use the bus system. Another
   5.5% walk or cycle to work, a higher proportion than in any other
   Australian capital city. There is no urban rail network in Canberra,
   although the Griffin's original plans contemplated both a heavy rail
   line servicing the north of the city and trams servicing other areas. A
   private bus service operates between Canberra and Queanbeyan, an
   adjoining town in New South Wales.

   An interstate CountryLink railway service connects Canberra to Sydney.
   Canberra's railway station is in the inner south suburb of Kingston.
   Between 1920 and 1922 the train line crossed the Molonglo River and ran
   as far north as the city centre, although the line was closed following
   major flooding and was never rebuilt. Train services to Melbourne are
   provided by way of a CountryLink bus service which connects with a rail
   service between Sydney and Melbourne in Yass, about one hour's drive
   from Canberra. Plans to establish a very fast train , or TGV service
   between Melbourne, Canberra and Sydney have been contemplated, but not
   implemented by both government and private enterprise, as various
   proposals have not been deemed economically viable.

   Canberra is about three hours by road from Sydney on the Federal
   Highway (National Highway 23), which connects with the Hume Highway
   (National Highway 31) near Goulburn, and seven hours by road from
   Melbourne on the Barton Highway (National Highway 25), which joins the
   Hume Highway at Yass. It is a two hour drive on the Monaro Highway
   (National Highway 23) to the ski fields of the Snowy Mountains and the
   Kosciuszko National Park. Batemans Bay, a popular holiday spot on the
   New South Wales coast, is also two hours away via the Kings Highway.

   Canberra International Airport provides direct domestic services to
   Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide and Perth, with connections to
   other domestic centres. There are direct daily flights to Albury and
   Newcastle in New South Wales. Regular international flights have been
   considered, but to date only chartered international flights have
   connected Canberra directly with overseas destinations. Until 2003 the
   civilian airport shared runways with RAAF Base Fairbairn. On 27 June of
   that year, the Air Force base was decommissioned and from that time the
   airport was fully under civilian control.

Utilities

   Telstra Tower is a landmark and tourist attraction in addition to
   providing telecommunications
   Enlarge
   Telstra Tower is a landmark and tourist attraction in addition to
   providing telecommunications

   The ACT government owned ACTEW Corporation manages Canberra's water and
   sewerage infrastructure. ActewAGL is a joint venture between ACTEW and
   AGL, and is the retail provider of Canberra's utility services
   including water, natural gas, electricity, and also some
   telecommunications services via a subsidiary TransACT. Canberra's water
   is stored in four reservoirs, the Corin, Bendora and Cotter dams on the
   Cotter River and the Googong Dam on the Queanbeyan River. The Googong
   Dam is in New South Wales but it is managed by the ACT government.
   ACTEW Corporation owns Canberra's two wastewater treatment plants,
   located at Fyshwick and at Lower Molonglo on the Molonglo River.

   Electricity for Canberra comes from the national power grid through
   substations at Holt and Fyshwick (via Queanbeyan). Some limited local
   renewable power is produced via a hydro generator on the main water
   supply pipeline for Canberra at Mount Stromlo and methane plants at
   waste landfill sites at Belconnen and Mugga Lane. The first domestic
   power supply in Canberra was in 1913 for the suburb of Acton. Unlike
   most Australian cities, the power poles in Canberra's older suburbs are
   located along the rear boundaries of residential housing lots rather
   than on the street front. In newer areas the power supply and
   communications cabling are located underground.

   As in other parts of Australia, terrestrial and mobile
   telecommunications services are provided by a range of competing
   companies. The majority of the infrastructure is owned by Telstra but
   some is owned by TransACT (a Canberra-based communications company) as
   well as other providers. The ACT has the highest rate of computer use
   and internet connection in Australia.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canberra"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
