   #copyright

Cape Town

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography


   This is a featured article. Click here for more information.

                                                        CAPTION: Cape Town
                                                                  Kaapstad
                                                                     iKapa


                                                         Flag of Cape Town
                                                         ( In detail)

                        City motto: Spes Bona (Latin: Good Hope)
              Location of the City of Cape Town in Western Cape Province
               Location of the City of Cape Town in Western Cape Province
                     Province                                 Western Cape
                        Mayor                                  Helen Zille
                         Area
                    - % water                                   2,499 km²
                                                                       N/A
                   Population
               - Total (2004)
                    - Density                        Not ranked
                                                     2,893,251
                                                                 1,158/km²
                  Established                                         1652
                    Time zone                                SAST ( UTC+2)
                 Calling code                                          021

   Cape Town (Afrikaans: Kaapstad /ˈkɑːpstɑt/; Xhosa: iKapa) is the third
   most populous city in South Africa, forming part of the metropolitan
   municipality of the City of Cape Town. It is the provincial capital of
   the Western Cape, as well as the legislative capital of South Africa,
   where the National Parliament and many government offices are located.
   Cape Town is famous for its harbour as well as its natural setting in
   the Cape floral kingdom, including such well-known landmarks as Table
   Mountain and Cape Point. Often regarded as one of the world's most
   beautiful cities because of its geography, Cape Town is the most
   popular South African destination for tourism.

   Cape Town originally developed as a victualling station for Dutch ships
   sailing to Eastern Africa, India, and Asia. Jan van Riebeeck's arrival
   on 6 April 1652 established the first permanent European settlement in
   sub-Saharan Africa. Cape Town quickly outgrew its original purpose as
   the first European outpost at the Castle of Good Hope. It was the
   largest city in South Africa until the growth of Johannesburg and
   Durban.

   According to the 2001 Census, the city has a population of 2.9 million.
   Cape Town's land area of 2,499  square kilometres (965  sq mi) is
   larger than other South African cities, resulting in a comparatively
   lower population density of 1,158 people per square kilometre
   (2,999/sq mi). Cape Town is town twinned with Nice in France.

History

   The first known people of the Western Cape area arrived from the north
   around 100,000 B.C. Little is known of the history of the region's
   first residents, as there is no written history of the area before it
   was first mentioned by Portuguese explorer Bartolomeu Dias in 1486.
   Vasco da Gama recorded a sighting of the Cape of Good Hope in 1497, but
   the area did not have regular contact with Europeans until 1652, when
   the Netherlands' Jan van Riebeeck and other employees of the Dutch East
   India Company (Dutch: Verenigde Oost-indische Compagnie, VOC) were sent
   to the Cape to establish a way-station for ships travelling to the
   Dutch East Indies. The city grew slowly during this period, as it was
   hard to find adequate labourers. This labour shortage prompted the city
   to import slaves from Indonesia and Madagascar; many of whom would come
   to form the first of the Cape Coloured communities.

   The British successfully gained outright control of Cape Town in 1795,
   during the Battle of Muizenberg. Under the terms of a peace agreement
   negotiated after the war, the Cape was returned to the Dutch in 1803.
   The war resumed later that year, and British forces re-occupied the
   Cape, after winning the Battle of Blaauwberg in 1806. In the 1814 peace
   treaty which ended the war in Europe, the Cape was permanently
   incorporated into the British Empire. As the territory under British
   control grew even larger outward from the city, it became the capital
   of the newly formed Cape Colony.
   A painting of the arrival of Jan van Riebeeck in Table Bay
   Enlarge
   A painting of the arrival of Jan van Riebeeck in Table Bay

   The discovery of diamonds in Griqualand West in 1869, and gold on the
   Witwatersrand in 1886, near the present-day city of Johannesburg
   prompted a massive gold rush. Johannesburg grew rapidly as the country
   was flooded with immigrants. Tensions also emerged between the Boers,
   who had taken part in the Great Trek and established republics in the
   centre of the country; the new migrants, known as uitlanders; and the
   British colonial government. This conflict resulted in the Second
   Anglo-Boer War. After the British won this war and acquired control of
   the gold and diamond industries, they unified the Cape Colony with the
   two defeated Boer Republics (the South African Republic and the Orange
   Free State) and the British colony of Natal to form the Union of South
   Africa, which was proclaimed in 1910 with Cape Town as its legislative
   capital, a function it has continued to serve for the Republic of South
   Africa from 1961 to the present.

   In 1948, the National Party was elected on election promises of racial
   segregation laws, collectively known by the Afrikaans word apartheid.
   As a consequence of the Group Areas Act, which classified all areas of
   the country and city according to race, formerly multi-racial suburbs
   were either purged of unlawful residents or demolished. The most
   infamous example of this in Cape Town is District Six, which was
   demolished in 1965, prompting the forced removal of over 60,000
   residents after it was declared a whites-only region. Many of these
   residents were relocated to the Cape Flats. Under apartheid, the Cape
   was considered a " Coloured labour preference area", to the exclusion
   of Black Africans.

   Cape Town was home to many leaders of the anti-apartheid movement,
   despite many of the group's leaders' internment on Robben Island, a
   penitentiary island 10 kilometres out to sea from the city, where many
   famous political prisoners were held for many years. In one of the most
   famous moments marking the end of apartheid, Nelson Mandela made his
   first public speech in decades on 11 February 1990 from the balcony of
   Cape Town City Hall hours after being released. His speech heralded the
   beginning of a new era for the country, and the first democratic
   election was held four years later, on 27 April 1994. Since 1994, the
   city has struggled with major problems such as HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis,
   and a surge in violent drug-related crime. At the same time, the
   economy has surged to unprecedented levels due to the boom in the
   tourism and the real estate industries.

Geography

   A NASA satellite image of Cape Town and its environment taken by a
   Landsat satellite in February 2000
   Enlarge
   A NASA satellite image of Cape Town and its environment taken by a
   Landsat satellite in February 2000

   The centre of Cape Town is located at the northern end of the Cape
   Peninsula. Table Mountain forms a dramatic backdrop to the city bowl,
   with its plateau well over one kilometre (3,300  ft) high; it is
   surrounded by near-vertical cliffs, Devil's Peak and Lion's Head.
   Sometimes a thin strip of cloud forms over the mountain, and owing to
   its appearance, it is affectionately known as the "tablecloth". The
   peninsula consists of a dramatic mountainous spine jutting southwards
   into the Atlantic Ocean, ending at Cape Point. There are over 70 peaks
   above 1,000 feet (304.8  m) (the American definition of a mountain)
   within Cape Town's official city limits. Many of the suburbs of Cape
   Town are on the large plain of the Cape Flats, which joins the
   peninsula to the mainland. The Cape Flats lie on what is known as a
   rising marine plain, consisting mostly of sandy geology which shows
   that at one point Table Mountain itself was an island.

Climate

   The Cape Peninsula has a Mediterranean climate with well-defined
   seasons. In winter, which lasts from May to August, large cold fronts
   come across from the Atlantic Ocean with heavy precipitation and strong
   north-westerly winds. The winter months are cool, with an average
   minimum temperature of 7 ° C (45 ° F). Most of the city's annual
   rainfall occurs in wintertime, but due to the mountainous topography of
   the city, rainfall amounts for specific areas can vary dramatically.
   The suburb of Newlands which is to the south of the city is the wettest
   place in South Africa. The valleys and coastal plains average 515
   millimetres (20  in) of rain per annum, while mountain areas can
   average as much as 1,500 millimetres (60 in) per annum. Summer, which
   lasts from November to February, is warm and dry. The Peninsula gets
   frequent strong winds from the south-east, known locally as the Cape
   Doctor, because it blows away pollution and cleans the air. The
   south-easterly wind is caused by a high-pressure system which sits in
   the South Atlantic to the west of Cape Town, known as the
   South-Atlantic High. Summer temperatures are mild, with an average
   maximum of 26 °C (79 °F).

   CAPTION: Climate Table

   Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Year
   Highest recorded temperature ( °C) 39 38 41 39 34 30 29 32 33 37 40 35
   41
   Average daily maximum temperature ( °C) 26 27 25 23 20 18 18 18 19 21
   24 25 22
   Average daily minimum temperature ( °C) 16 16 14 12 9 8 7 8 9 11 13 15
   11
   Lowest recorded temperature ( °C) 7 6 5 2 1 -1 -1 0 0 1 4 6 -1
   Average monthly precipitation ( mm) 15 17 20 41 69 93 82 77 40 30 14 17
   515
   Average number of rain days (>= 1 mm) 6 5 5 8 11 13 12 14 10 9 5 6 103
   Source: South African Weather Service

Government

   The Cape Town City Hall, located in the City Bowl
   Enlarge
   The Cape Town City Hall, located in the City Bowl

   Cape Town's local government is the City of Cape Town, which is a
   metropolitan municipality. Cape Town is governed by a 210-member city
   council, which reports to a 28-member executive council. The executive
   council, in turn, is presided over by a city manager and an executive
   mayor. The city is divided into 105 electoral wards; each ward directly
   elects one member of the council, whilst the other 105 councillors are
   elected by a party-list proportional representation system. The mayor
   is chosen by the city council.

   The current mayor is Helen Zille of the Democratic Alliance. In the
   most recent local government elections, the Democratic Alliance was the
   largest single party with 90 of the 210 seats on the council, ahead of
   the African National Congress's 81 seats, but with no party holding a
   majority. A subsequent by-election has increased the DA's seats to 91.

   Before the unification of Cape Town's local government into the
   so-called "Unicity", it was divided into six regional
   "Administrations"; many functions of the Unicity are still divided
   according to the old Administrations. The administrations include Cape
   Town, which has the regions of City Bowl, the Atlantic Seaboard, the
   southern suburbs, Pinelands, Langa and Mitchell's Plain. The South
   Peninsula includes Hout Bay, Wynberg, Constantia, Fish Hoek, Kommetjie,
   Noordhoek and Simon's Town. The Blaauwberg region includes Milnerton,
   Tableview, and Bloubergstrand. Tygerberg has its own region, with
   Durbanville, Bellville, and Khayelitsha added to it. Oostenberg
   includes Kraaifontein, Brackenfell, Kuilsrivier, Blue Downs, and Eerste
   Rivier. The last administration, Helderberg, includes Somerset West,
   Strand, and Gordon's Bay.

Demographics

   Geographical distribution of home languages in Cape Town
   Enlarge
   Geographical distribution of home languages in Cape Town

   According to the South African National Census of 2001, the population
   of Cape Town is 2,893,251 people. There are 759,767 formal households,
   of which 87.4% have a flush or chemical toilet, and 94.4% have refuse
   removed by the municipality at least once a week. 80.1% of households
   use electricity as the main source of energy. 16.1% of households are
   headed by one person.

   Coloured people account for 48.13% of the population, followed by Black
   Africans at 31%, Whites at 18.75%, and Asians at 1.43%. 46.6% of the
   population is under the age of 24, whilst 5% are over the age of 65.
   The median age in the city is 26 years old, and for every 100 females,
   there are 92.4 males. 19.4% of city residents are unemployed; 58.3% of
   the unemployed are black, 38.1% are Coloured, 3.1% are White and 0.5%
   are Asian.

   41.4% of Cape Town residents speak Afrikaans at home, 28.7% speak
   Xhosa, 27.9% speak English, 0.7% speak Sesotho, 0.3% speak Zulu, 0.1%
   speak Setswana and 0.7% of the population speaks a non-official
   language at home. 76.6% of residents are Christian, 10.7% have no
   religion, 9.7% are Muslim, 0.5% are Jewish and 0.2% are Hindu. 2.3%
   have other or undetermined beliefs.

   4.2% of residents aged 20 and over have received no schooling; 11.8%
   have had some primary school; 7.1% have completed only primary school;
   38.9% have had some high school education; 25.4% have finished only
   high school and 12.6% have an education higher than the high school
   level. Overall, 38.0% of residents have completed high school. The
   median annual income of working adults aged 15-65 is ZAR 25 774. Males
   have a median annual income of ZAR 28 406 versus ZAR 22 265 for
   females.

Crime

   There has been a number of robberies and murders targeting Somali
   shopkeepers. Many believe the reasons are xenophobic. A notable robbery
   was in Masiphumelele when 200 to 300 residents attacked a Somali shop.

   Crime has become a hotly debated topic. Most tourist areas are as safe
   as their counterparts anywhere in the world. The highest crime areas
   are mostly often the poorer suburbs.

Economy

   The main entrance to the Cape Town International Convention Centre
   Enlarge
   The main entrance to the Cape Town International Convention Centre

   Cape Town is the economic centre of the Western Cape and serves as the
   regional manufacturing centre. It is also has the primary harbour and
   airport in the Western Cape. The large government presence in the city,
   both as the capital of the Western Cape and the seat of the National
   Parliament, has led to increased revenue and growth in industries that
   serve the government. Cape Town hosts many conferences, particularly in
   the new Cape Town International Convention Centre, which opened in June
   2003. The city has recently enjoyed a booming real estate and
   construction market, with many people buying summer homes in the city
   as well as relocating there permanently. The central business district
   is under an extensive urban renewal programme, with numerous new
   buildings and renovations taking place under the guidance of the Cape
   Town Partnership.

   High school attendance rates and the city's well-established higher
   education infrastructure have helped Cape Town to attract foreign
   investors, as there are more people with internationally recognised
   certification and diplomas.

   The Western Cape also generates a quarter of the South African
   agricultural sector's total gross income and more than half of South
   Africa's exports. Much of the produce is handled through the Port of
   Cape Town or Cape Town International Airport. Most major ship-building
   companies have offices and manufacturing locations in Cape Town. The
   Province is also a centre of energy development for the country, with
   the existing Koeberg nuclear power station providing energy for the
   majority of Cape Town's needs. Recently, scientists have discovered oil
   and natural gas off of the coast in the Atlantic Ocean.

   The Western Cape is an important tourist region in South Africa; the
   tourism industry accounts for 9.8% of the GDP of the province and
   employs 9.6% of the province's workforce. In 2004, over 1.5 million
   international tourists visited the area.

Tourism

   The Victoria & Alfred Waterfront with Table Mountain and its
   characteristic tablecloth in the background
   Enlarge
   The Victoria & Alfred Waterfront with Table Mountain and its
   characteristic tablecloth in the background
   The distinctive Cape Malay Bo-Kaap is one of the most visited areas in
   Cape Town.
   Enlarge
   The distinctive Cape Malay Bo-Kaap is one of the most visited areas in
   Cape Town.

   Cape Town is one of the most popular tourist destinations in South
   Africa due to its good climate, natural setting, and relatively
   well-developed infrastructure. The city has several well-known natural
   features that attract tourists, most notably Table Mountain, which
   forms the majority of Table Mountain National Park and is the back end
   of the City Bowl. Reaching the top of the mountain can be achieved
   either by hiking up, or by taking the Table Mountain Cableway. Cape
   Point is recognised as the dramatic headland at the end of the Cape
   Peninsula. Many tourists also drive along Chapman's Peak Drive, a
   narrow road that links Noordhoek with Hout Bay, for the views of the
   Atlantic Ocean and nearby mountains. It is possible to either drive or
   hike up Signal Hill for closer views of the City Bowl and Table
   Mountain.

   Many tourists also visit Cape Town's beaches, which are popular with
   local residents. Due to the city's unique geography, it is possible to
   visit several different beaches in the same day, each with a different
   setting and atmosphere. Beaches located on the Atlantic Coast tend to
   have very cold water as the water is mostly glacial melt from
   Antarctica. The water at False Bay beaches is often warmer by up to 10
   °C (18 °F). Both coasts are equally popular, although the beaches in
   affluent Clifton and elsewhere on the Atlantic Coast are better
   developed with restaurants and cafés. The most famous beach in Cape
   Town, Boulders Beach, is known for its colony of African penguins.
   Surfing is also popular and the city hosts the Red Bull Big Wave Africa
   surfing competition every year.

   The city also has several notable cultural attractions. The Victoria &
   Alfred Waterfront, built on top of part of the docks of the Port of
   Cape Town, is now one of the city's most popular shopping venues, with
   several hundred shops and the Two Oceans Aquarium. Part of the V&A's
   charm, as it is locally known, is that the Port continues to operate
   and visitors can watch ships enter and leave. The V&A also hosts the
   Nelson Mandela Gateway, through which ferries depart for Robben Island.
   It is possible to take a ferry from the V&A to Hout Bay, Simon's Town
   and the Cape Fur Seal colonies on Seal and Duiker Islands. Several
   companies offer tours of the Cape Flats, a mostly Coloured township,
   and Khayelitsha, a mostly black township. It is also possible to sleep
   overnight in Cape Town's townships. There are several B&B's where you
   can spend a safe and real African night.

   Cape Town is also noted for its architectural heritage, with the
   highest density of Cape Dutch style buildings in the world. Cape Dutch
   style, which combines the architectural traditions of France, the
   Netherlands, and Germany, is most visible in Constantia, the old
   government buildings in the Central Business District, and along Long
   Street. The annual Cape Town Minstrel Carnival, also known by its
   Afrikaans name of Kaapse Klopse, is a large minstrel festival held
   annually on January 2 or "Tweede Nuwe Jaar" (Afrikaans: Second New
   Year). Competing teams of minstrels parade in brightly coloured
   costumes, either carrying colourful umbrellas or playing an array of
   musical instruments. The Artscape Theatre Centre is the main performing
   arts venue in Cape Town.

   Cape Town's transport system links it to the rest of South Africa; it
   serves as the gateway to other destinations within the province. The
   Cape Winelands and in particular the towns of Stellenbosch, Paarl and
   Franschhoek are popular day trips from the city for sightseeing and
   wine tasting. Whale watching is popular amongst tourists: Southern
   Right Whales can be found off the coast during the breeding season
   (August to November) and Bryde's Whales can be seen any time of the
   year. The nearby town of Hermanus is known for its Whale Festival, but
   whales can also be seen in False Bay. Heaviside's dolphins are endemic
   to the area and can be seen from the coast north of Cape Town; dusky
   dolphins live along the same coast and can occasionally be seen from
   the ferry to Robben Island.

   Approximately 1.5 million tourists visited in Cape Town during 2004,
   bringing in a total of R10 billion in revenue. The forecasts for 2006
   anticipate 1.6 million tourists spending a total of R12 billion. The
   most popular areas for visitors to stay include Camps Bay, Sea Point, V
   & A Waterfront, Hout Bay, Rondebosch, Hermanus, Constantia, City Bowl,
   Somerset West and Newlands.

Sports teams and stadia

         Club          Sport             League                  Stadium
   Ajax Cape Town   Football    Premier Soccer League    Philippi Stadium
   Cape Cobras      Cricket     Standard Bank Cup Series Newlands Cricket Ground
   Santos           Football    Premier Soccer League    Athlone Stadium
   Stormers         Rugby union Super 14                 Newlands Stadium
   Western Province Rugby union Currie Cup               Newlands Stadium

   Cape Town's most popular sports by participation are cricket,
   association football, swimming, and rugby. The Stormers represent
   Western Province and Boland in the Southern Hemisphere's Super 14 rugby
   union competition. Cape Town is the home of the Western Province Rugby
   Union, who play at Newlands Stadium and compete in the Currie Cup. Cape
   Town also regularly hosts the national team, the Springboks, and hosted
   matches during the 1995 Rugby World Cup, including a semi-final.

   Football, which is better known as soccer in South Africa, is also
   popular. Two clubs from Cape Town play in the Premier Soccer League
   (PSL), South Africa's premier league. These teams are Ajax Cape Town,
   which formed as a result of the 1999 amalgamation of the Seven Stars
   and the Cape Town Spurs; and Santos. Cape Town will also be the
   location of several of the matches of the FIFA 2010 World Cup, which is
   to be held in South Africa. The Mother City is planning a new 70.000
   seat stadium in the Greenpoint area.

   In cricket, the Cape Cobras represent Cape Town at the Newlands Cricket
   Ground. The team is the result of an amalgamation of the Western
   Province Cricket and Boland Cricket teams. They take part in the
   Supersport and Standard Bank Cup Series.

   Cape Town also has Olympic aspirations: in 1996, Cape Town was one of
   the five candidate cities shortlisted by the IOC to launch official
   candidatures to host the 2004 Summer Olympics. Although the games
   ultimately went to Athens, Cape Town came in an impressive third place,
   edging out Stockholm and Buenos Aires in the first three rounds of
   voting. There has been some speculation that Cape Town is seeking the
   South African Olympic Committee's nomination to be South Africa's bid
   city for either the 2016 or the 2020 Summer Olympic Games.

Transport

   The N2, also known as the Eastern Boulevard, as it enters the City Bowl
   and ends in the Central Business District
   Enlarge
   The N2, also known as the Eastern Boulevard, as it enters the City Bowl
   and ends in the Central Business District

   Air

   Cape Town International Airport serves both domestic and international
   flights. It is the second-largest airport in South Africa and serves as
   a major gateway for travellers to the Cape region. Cape Town has direct
   flights to most cities in South Africa as well as a number of
   international destinations.

   As of June 2006, Cape Town International Airport is being upgraded to
   handle an expected increase in air traffic as tourism numbers will
   increase in the lead-up to the 2010 FIFA World Cup. The renovations
   include several large new parking garages, a revamped domestic
   departure terminal and a new international terminal. The airport's
   cargo facilities are also being expanded and several large empty lots
   are being developed into office space and hotels.

   Sea

   Cape Town has a long tradition as a port city. The Port of Cape Town,
   the city's main port, is located in Table Bay directly to the north of
   the central business district. The port is a hub for ships in the
   southern Atlantic: it is located along one of the busiest shipping
   corridors in the world. It is also a busy container port, second in
   South Africa only to Durban. In 2004, it handled 3,161 ships and 9.2
   million tonnes of cargo.

   Simon's Town Harbour on the False Bay coast of the Cape Peninsula is
   the main base of the South African Navy.

   Rail

   The interior of Cape Town Railway Station
   Enlarge
   The interior of Cape Town Railway Station

   The Shosholoza Meyl is the passenger rail operations of Spoornet and
   operates two long-distance passenger rail services from Cape Town: a
   daily service to and from Johannesburg via Kimberley and a weekly
   service to and from Durban via Kimberley, Bloemfontein and
   Pietermaritzburg. These trains terminate at Cape Town Railway Station
   and make a brief stop at Bellville. Cape Town is also one terminus of
   the luxury tourist-oriented Blue Train.

   Metrorail operates a commuter rail service in Cape Town and the
   surrounding area. The Metrorail network consists of 96 stations
   throughout the suburbs and outskirts of Cape Town.

   Road

   The M3 as it passes the University of Cape Town. The M3 is the major
   link between the City Bowl and the southern suburbs.
   Enlarge
   The M3 as it passes the University of Cape Town. The M3 is the major
   link between the City Bowl and the southern suburbs.

   Three national roads start in Cape Town: the N1 which links Cape Town
   with Bloemfontein, Johannesburg, Pretoria and Zimbabwe; the N2 which
   links Cape Town with Port Elizabeth, East London and Durban; and the N7
   which links Cape Town with the Northern Cape Province and Namibia. The
   N1 and N2 both start in the Central Business District, and split to the
   east of the CBD, with the N1 continuing to the north east and the N2
   heading south east past Cape Town International Airport. The N7 starts
   in Mitchells Plain and runs north, intersecting with the N1 and the N2
   before leaving the city.

   Cape Town also has a system of freeway and dual carriageway M-roads,
   which connect different parts of the city. The M3 splits from the N2
   and runs to the south along the eastern slopes of Table Mountain,
   connecting the City Bowl with Muizenberg. The M5 splits from the N1
   further east than the M3, and links the Cape Flats to the CBD. The
   R300, which is informally known as the Cape Flats Freeway, links
   Mitchells Plain with Bellville, the N1 and the N2.

   Buses

   Golden Arrow Bus Services operates scheduled bus services throughout
   the Cape Town metropolitan area. Several companies run long-distance
   bus services from Cape Town to the other cities in South Africa.

   Taxis

   Cape Town taxi rank above train station
   Enlarge
   Cape Town taxi rank above train station

   Cape Town has two kinds of taxis: metered taxis and minibus taxis.
   Unlike many cities, metered taxis are not allowed to drive around the
   city to solicit fares and instead must be called to a specific
   location.

   Minibus taxis are the standard form of transport for the majority of
   the population who cannot afford private vehicles. Although essential,
   these taxis are often poorly maintained and are frequently not
   road-worthy. These taxis make frequent unscheduled stops to pick up
   passengers, which causes accidents when drivers to the rear are unable
   to stop in time. With the high demand for transport by the working
   class of South Africa, minibus taxis are often filled over their legal
   passenger allowance, making for high casualty rates when minibuses are
   involved in accidents. Minibuses are generally owned and operated in
   fleets, and inter-operator violence flares up from time to time,
   especially as turf wars occur over lucrative taxi routes.

Universities

   The University of Cape Town's main campus with Devil's Peak behind it
   Enlarge
   The University of Cape Town's main campus with Devil's Peak behind it

   Cape Town has a well-developed higher education system of public
   universities. Cape Town is served by two public universities: the
   University of Cape Town (UCT) and the University of the Western Cape
   (UWC). Stellenbosch University, while not in the city itself, is 50
   kilometres from the City Bowl and has additional campuses, such as the
   Tygerberg Faculty of Health Sciences and the Bellville Business Park
   closer to the City.

   Both the University of Cape Town and Stellenbosch University are
   leading universities in South Africa. This is due in large part to
   substantial financial contributions made to these institutions by both
   the public and private sector. Since the African National Congress has
   come into governmental power, some restructuring of Western Cape
   universities has taken place and as such, traditionally non-white
   universities have seen increased financing, which has benefitted the
   University of the Western Cape.

   The public Cape Peninsula University of Technology was formed on
   January 1, 2005, when two separate institutions— Cape Technikon and
   Peninsula Technikon— were merged together. The new university offers
   education primarily in English, although one may take courses in any of
   South Africa's official languages. The institution generally awards the
   National Diploma.

   See also the African Institute of Mathematical Sciences.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cape_Town"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
