   #copyright

Cardiff

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

   CAPTION: City of Cardiff

   Image:WalesCardiff.png
   Geography
   Area
   - Total
   - % Water Ranked 19th
   140 km²
   ? %
   Admin HQ Cardiff
   ISO 3166-2 GB-CRF
   Postcode CF-- ---
   Telephone code 029
   ONS code 00PT
   Traditional county Glamorgan
   Ceremonial county South Glamorgan
   Coordinates 51°29N 3°11W
   Demographics
   Population:
   - (2005 est.)
   - Density
     Ranked 1st
   319,700
   Ranked 1st
   2,263 / km²
   Ethnicity 91.57% White
   1.99% Mixed
   3.96% S. Asian
   1.28% Black
   1.20% Chinese or other.
   Welsh language
   - Any skills Ranked 18th
   16.3%
   Politics
   Cardiff County Council
   http://www.cardiff.gov.uk/
   Control NOC (Liberal Democrat administration)
   Welsh Assembly and UK Parliament Constituencies
     * Cardiff West
     * Cardiff South
     * Cardiff North
     * Cardiff Central
     * Vale of Glamorgan

   Cardiff (English: Cardiff  Welsh: Caerdydd ) is the capital of Wales
   and its largest city. Located on the south coast of Wales it is
   administered as a unitary authority. It was a small town until the
   early nineteenth century and came to prominence following the arrival
   of industry in the region and the use of Cardiff as a major port for
   the transport of coal. It eventually grew to become the largest city in
   Wales and a major centre of culture, sport and history in the UK.
   Cardiff was made a city in 1905 and proclaimed capital of Wales in
   1955.

Geography

   Millennium Stadium
   Enlarge
   Millennium Stadium

   Cardiff is bordered to the west by the rural district known as the Vale
   of Glamorgan, to the east by the city of Newport, to the north by the
   South Wales Valleys and to the south by the Bristol Channel. The River
   Taff (Afon Taf in Welsh) winds through the centre of the city and
   together with the River Ely (Afon Elai in Welsh) flows into the
   freshwater lake of Cardiff Bay. A third river, the Rhymney (Afon Rhymni
   in Welsh) flows through the east of the city entering directly into the
   Bristol Channel. A fourth river, the Lleucu, (Afon Lleucu in Welsh) has
   been culverted.

   Cardiff is built on reclaimed marshland on a bed of Triassic stones;
   this reclaimed marshland stretches from Chepstow to the Ely estuary,
   which is the natural boundary of Cardiff and the Vale of Glamorgan.
   Triassic landscapes are usually shallow and low-lying which accounts
   and explains Cardiff's flatness. The classic Triassic marl, sand and
   conglomorate rocks are used predominantly throughout Cardiff as
   building materials. Many of these Triassic rocks have a purple
   complexion, especially the coastal marl found near Penarth. One of the
   Triassic rocks used in Cardiff is "Radyr Stone", a free-stone which as
   it name suggests is quarried in the Radyr district. Cardiff has also
   imported some materials for buildings: Devonian sandstones (the Old Red
   Sandstone) from the Brecon Beacons has been used. Most famously, the
   superbly elegant buildings of Cathays Park, arguably Britain's finest
   civic centre buildings are built of Portland stone which was imported
   from Dorset. A widely used building stone in Cardiff are the surreal
   yellow-grey Lias limestone rocks of the Vale of Glamorgan, including
   the very rare "Sutton Stone", a conglomerate of lias limestone and
   carboniferous limestone that is, apart from Radyr Stone, the only
   free-stone in South-East Wales (freestones can be cut to a perfectly
   smooth surface). The yellow-ish complexion of the lias limestone used
   mainly in the city centre give Cardiff an unusually sunny, light and
   breezy complexion for a city in the U.K..

   Cardiff is situated near to the Glamorgan Heritage Coast, stretching
   westward from Penarth and Barry (which are commuter towns of Cardiff),
   with its striped yellow-blue Jurassic "lias" limestone/carboniferous
   limestone cliffs that thrust outwards towards the Bristol Channel. The
   Glamorgan coast is the only part of the Celtic Sea that has exposed
   Jurassic ( blue lias) geology. This west facing stretch of coast, which
   takes the brunt of brutal Atlantic westerlies and has reefs, sandbanks
   and serrated cliffs aplenty (like Cornwall) was a ship graveyard during
   the age of sail; ships sailing upto Cardiff during the industrial era
   often never made it as far as Cardiff as most were wrecked around this
   hostile coastline during brutal west/south-westerly gales.
   Consequently, just like its Celtic cousin in Cornwall, smuggling,
   deliberate shipwrecking and attacks on ships became a way of life for
   many people living in the small coastal villages of the Vale.

   Cardiff is linked to the West Somerset/North Devon seaside resorts
   (such as Minehead, Ilfracombe and Lundy Island) via the paddle steamers
   Waverley and Balmoral which sail from Penarth pier, as they have done
   for over 150 years. Sailing across the Bristol Channel to North Devon
   is a much a part of Cardiffian life as a pint of Brains and watching
   rugby. In fact, Devon's tourist trade began in the 19th century when
   the paddle steamers spent weekends crusing the Bristol Channel taking
   the expanding population of Cardiff to places such as Lynmouth,
   Ilfracombe, Bideford and Clovelly.

   Cardiff is a relatively flat city and its geographic features were
   influential in its development as one of the world's largest coal
   ports. Most notably this included its proximity and easy access to the
   coal fields of the south Wales valleys. Cardiff has a relatively dry
   climate compared to most of Wales , with an average rainfall of
   1,065 mm. It is also a relatively mild city, with an average January
   temperature of 4.5 °C and an average July temperature of 16 °C

   Since 1922 Cardiff has included the suburban cathedral 'village' of
   Llandaff, whose bishop is currently Archbishop of Wales. Since 1916
   Cardiff has been the seat of a Catholic archbishop, but there appears
   to have been a fall in the estimated Catholic and Jewish population of
   the city. There are a significant number of Nonconformist chapels.

Districts

   There have been seven major expansions to Cardiff's boundaries between
   the years 1875-1996. Before 1875 Cardiff was comprised of the two
   parishes of St John and St Mary and totalled an area of 7.86 km²,
   however this had increased to 139.53 km² by 1996. The first expansion,
   of 1875 included the areas of and around Canton and Roath. The
   expansion of 1922 took in the areas between Ely and Llanishen. The next
   expansion in 1938 incorporated Rumney in Monmouthshire into the city.
   Further expansion in 1974 included an arc from St Fagans in the west,
   through Lisvane in the north and St Mellons in the east. The most
   recent expansion of 1996 has brought the areas of and around Creigiau
   and Pentyrch into the city's boundaries.

   Roughly speaking, "Inner Cardiff" can be considered to consist of the
   following wards: Penylan, Plasnewydd, Gabalfa, Roath, Cathays,
   Adamsdown and Splott ward on the north and east of the city centre, and
   Butetown, Grangetown, Riverside and Canton to the south and west. The
   inner-city areas to the south of the A4161 road known as the "Southern
   Arc" are, with the exception of affluent and trendy Cardiff Bay, some
   of the poorest districts of Wales with low levels of economic activity
   and high ethnic minority populations. The proximity of these areas to
   Cardiff Bay have led some critics of the project to argue that the
   regeneration scheme has failed as it has done little to improve the
   economic prospects of local people, and may have worsened problems of
   exclusion and alienation. On the other hand Gabalfa, Plasnewydd and
   Cathays have very large student populations, and Pontcanna in Riverside
   is a favourite for young professionals. Penylan which lies to the north
   east side of Roath Park is an affluent area popular with those with
   older children and the retired.

   "Suburban Cardiff" can be broken down into three distinct areas. To the
   west lie Ely, Caerau and Fairwater which contain some of the largest
   housing estates in the United Kingdom. With the exception of some of
   the outlying privately built estates at Michaelston Super Ely and 1930s
   developments near Waun-Gron Road, this is an economically disadvantaged
   area with high numbers of workless households. Radyr, Llandaff,
   Llandaff North, Whitchurch & Tongwynlais, Rhiwbina, Heath, Llanishen,
   Lisvane, and Cyncoed which lie in an arc from thenorth west to the
   north east of the centre can be considered the main middle class
   suburbs of the city. In particular, Cyncoed, Radyr and Lisvane contain
   some of the most expensive housing in Wales, and the last of these is
   likely to see considerable expansion in coming years with the council
   planning 4000 houses in the area. Further to the east lie the wards of
   Pontprennau & Old St Mellons, Rumney, Pentwyn, Llanrumney and
   Trowbridge. The latter 3 are again largely of public housing stock,
   although new private housing is being built in Trowbridge in
   considerable number. Pontprennau is the newest 'suburb' of Cardiff,
   whilst Old St Mellons has a history going back to the Norman Conquest.

   To the North West of the city lies a region that may be called "Rural
   Cardiff" containing the villages of St Fagans, Creigiau and Pentyrch.
   The latter two are primarily "planned" communities developed from the
   mid 20th century and are popular with families looking for green space
   close to the city. St Fagans, home to the Museum of Welsh Life, is
   protected from further development.

History

   The Norman Keep, Cardiff Castle.
   Enlarge
   The Norman Keep, Cardiff Castle.

   The name Cardiff is an Anglicisation of the Welsh name "Caerdydd".
   There is uncertainty concerning the origin of "Caerdydd"—"Caer" means
   "fort" or "castle," but although "Dydd" means "Day" in modern Welsh, it
   is unclear what was meant in this context. Some believe that "Dydd" or
   "Diff" was a corruption of " Taff", the river on which Cardiff castle
   stands, in which case "Cardiff" would mean "the fort on the river Taff"
   (in Welsh the T mutates to D).

   Others favour a link with Aulus Didius Gallus, as it is known that the
   Romans established a fort in Cardiff when he was governor of the nearby
   province, in which case Cardiff might mean "the Fort of Didius". A
   Norman castle still exists, within the site of the earlier Roman fort,
   but was substantially altered and extended during the Victorian period
   by John Crichton-Stuart, 3rd Marquess of Bute, and the architect
   William Burges. Original Roman work can, however, still be
   distinguished in the wall facings.

   There is a second castle north of the city, called Castell Coch (Welsh:
   "the Red Castle"). The current castle is an elaborately decorated
   Victorian folly designed by Burges for the Marquess and built in the
   1870s. However, the Victorian castle stands on the footings of a much
   older medieval castle possibly built by Ivor Bach, a regional baron
   with links to Cardiff Castle also. The exterior has become a popular
   location for film and television productions.

   Situated on the narrowest part of the south Wales coastal plain,
   Cardiff had a crucial strategic importance in the wars between the
   Normans (who had occupied lowland Wales) and the Welsh who maintained
   their hold on the Uplands. As a result Cardiff claims to have the
   largest concentration of Castles of any city in Europe. As well as
   Cardiff Castle and Castell Coch the remains of Castell Morgraig,
   Bishop's Castle, Y Twmpath, Ruperra Castle and Saint Fagans Castle are
   still in existence while Whitchurch Castle and King's Castle have
   disappeared under later developments.

Language

   Cardiff has a chequered linguistic history with Latin, English, Welsh,
   and Norse dominating at different times. Although it was the Romans who
   established the "castle on the Taff" it was the Vikings who first began
   developing the maritime trade from which the town (later to become a
   city) was to derive its prosperity. The Vikings - who controlled the
   Bristol Channel - used Cardiff as a raiding base, a port and a trading
   post. Many street-names in Cardiff are of Viking origin including
   Dumballs Road and the oldest street in the city, Womanby Street.
   Womanby Street is a corruption of the original Norse name Humandaby
   Street. Some believe that Welsh was the majority language from the
   thirteenth century until the city's explosive growth in Victorian
   times. As late as 1850 five of the twelve Anglican churches within the
   current city boundaries conducted their services exclusively in Welsh,
   while only two worshipped exclusively in English.

   A substantial Irish population settled in Cardiff during the 19th
   century. They were drawn to Cardiff by the work available on major
   building and engineering projects in the docks and the city itself. The
   Irish are credited with having introduced the distinctive flat-vowelled
   "Cardiff accent". By 1891 the percentage of Welsh speakers had dropped
   to 27.9% and only Lisvane, Llanedyrn and Creigiau remained as majority
   Welsh-speaking communities. The Welsh language became grouped around a
   small cluster of Chapels and Churches, the most notable of which is
   Tabernacl in the city centre, one of four UK churches chosen to hold
   official services to commemerate the new millennium. Following the
   establishment of the city's first Welsh School Ysgol Gymraeg Bryntaf in
   the 1950s Welsh has slowly regained some ground.

   Aided by Welsh-medium education and migration from rural Wales the
   number of Welsh speakers in Cardiff rose by 14,451 between 1991 and
   2001 and is now spoken by 11% of Cardiffians. The highest percentage of
   Welsh speakers is in Creigiau where over twenty per cent of the
   population are able to speak the language.

Capital City Status

   King Edward VII granted Cardiff city status on October 28, 1905. It was
   then proclaimed capital city of Wales on December 20, 1955, by a
   Written Reply by the Home Secretary. Caernarfon had also vied for this
   title. Cardiff therefore celebrated two important anniversaries in
   2005.

   The city is county town of Glamorgan, although this role has diminished
   since council reorganisation in 1974 paired Cardiff and the Vale of
   Glamorgan together as the new county of South Glamorgan. Further local
   government restructuring in 1996 resulted in Cardiff City's district
   council becoming a unitary authority.

   On March 1, 2004, Cardiff was granted Fairtrade City status.

Demographics

   Cardiff's population is a growing one, with a likely population figure
   exceeding 321,000 in 2006 representing an increase of over 10,000 since
   the 2001 final revised Census estimates of 310,400. The Council has
   also predicted growth of 16,000 in the decade following 2011, which,
   extrapolating current growth rates until that date would give a
   population of the county borough of 333,000 in 2011 and 349,000 in
   2021. The population of the urban area (which officially includes Dinas
   Powys & Penarth) will thus pass 380,000 within the next 15 years. If
   one also includes the towns of Caerphilly, Barry, Llantrisant and some
   other neighbouring towns in an unofficial larger metropolitan area, the
   population would approach 500,000 by the same date. The ethnic make-up
   of Cardiff's population ,at the time of the 2001 census was: 91.6%
   white, 2% mixed race, 4% Asian, 1.3% Black, 1.2% Chinese or other
   ethnic origin. 66.9% described themselves as Christian, below the Welsh
   and UK average, while 3.7% described themselves as Muslim,
   significantly above the Welsh average but in line with the UK average.
   The proportion of people declaring themselves to be Hindu, Sikh and
   Jewish were all considerably higher than the Welsh averages, but less
   than the UK figures. 18.8% stated they had no religion, while 8.6% did
   not state a religion.

   Official estimates derived from the census are controversial. The city
   council has published two articles that argue the 2001 census seriously
   under reports the population of Cardiff and, in particular, the ethnic
   minority population of some inner city areas. If this work is given
   credence, a current official population of approximately 340,000 with
   up to 11% ethnic minority would be preferred. </ref>

               Year Population Year Population Year Population
               1801      6,342 1941    257,112 1981    274,500
               1851     26,630 1951    267,356 1991    272,557
               1901    172,629 1961    278,552 2001    305,340
               1921    227,753 1971    290,227      Source:

Economy

   Cardiff Central Market on St Mary Street in the Town Centre
   Enlarge
   Cardiff Central Market on St Mary Street in the Town Centre

Industry

   Cardiff was originally a small town - much smaller than Swansea and
   Merthyr Tydfil. What changed it was the demand for iron, brought to the
   sea by packhorse from Merthyr. The Ironmasters, the proprietors of the
   smelters in Dowlais and Merthyr, wanted to reduce the cost of carrying
   iron by road to ships berthed in the estuary of the River Taff at
   Cardiff. They sought permission of Parliament to build a 25-mile long
   canal from Merthyr (510 feet above sea-level) to the Taff Estuary at
   Cardiff.

   Work on building the Glamorganshire Canal began in 1790, took eight
   years and involved installing 50 locks. The Cardiff Sea Lock, which
   enabled barges to unload iron into sea-going ships, was built at
   Harrowby St (Harrowby - a Viking place-name - had been the original
   Norse trading post in Cardiff). Eventually the Taff Vale Railway
   replaced the canal barges and massive marshalling yards sprang up as
   new docks were developed in Cardiff - all prompted by the soaring
   world-wide demand for South Wales coal.

   Cardiff's port, known as Tiger Bay, became one of the busiest ports in
   the world and - for some time - the world's most important coal port.
   Indeed, Cardiff's Coal Exchange was reputedly the first host to a
   business deal for a million pounds Sterling.

   The Tiger Bay area also housed one of the UK's earliest immigrant
   communities. After a long period of neglect as Cardiff Bay, it is now
   being regenerated as a popular area for arts, entertainment and
   night-life. Much of the growth has been thanks to the building of the
   Cardiff Barrage.

Present day

   Today, Cardiff is the principal finance and business services centre in
   Wales, and as such there is a strong representation of finance and
   business services in the local economy. In December 2003, 19 % of the
   city's workforce (33,850 individuals) were employed in the sector -
   higher than the proportion across both Wales (9.6%) and Great Britain
   (15.4%). However many analysts claim that Cardiff suffers from the
   failure to attract high value added jobs in this sector when similar
   cities such as Bristol and Leeds are more successful.

   Companies such as Legal & General, Barclays, Admiral Insurance, HBOS,
   Zürich, ING Direct, The AA, Principality Building Society, 118118,
   British Gas, SWALEC Energy and BT all operate contact centres in the
   city. Other major employers include NHS Wales and the National Assembly
   for Wales.

   Cardiff is home to BBC Wales, S4C and ITV Wales and is the UK's largest
   Film, TV & Multimedia sector outside London. Employment in the sector
   has grown significantly in recent years, and currently provides
   employment for 2.1% of the City's workforce - higher than the level
   across Wales (1.1%) and marginally lower than that across Great Britain
   as a whole (2.2%).

   Retail also plays a strong role in the city's employment, with it being
   crowned the 8th best place to shop in UK according to recent surveys,
   and this ranking is likely to rise into the top 5 once the St David's 2
   shopping development is completed. The majority of Cardiff's shopping
   portfolio is in the city centre around Queen St and St Mary's St, and
   there are numerous out of town retail parks.

   The city is also host to S A Brain, a brewery with premises in Cardiff
   since 1882.

   In 2003 Cardiff combined with the Vale of Glamorgan had a GDP of £8.335
   billion GBP. The GDP per head was £18,794, making the city more
   affluent than the UK as a whole, at 130% of the national average..

   CAPTION: Trend of regional gross value added of Cardiff and the Vale at
   current basic prices . Figures in millions of British Pounds Sterling.

   Year Regional Gross Value Added Agriculture Industry Services
   1995 4,797                      11          1,121    3,666
   2000 6,584                      11          1,260    5,313
   2003 8,335                      11          1,410    6,913

Culture

   The Wales Millennium Centre.
   Enlarge
   The Wales Millennium Centre.

   Cardiff has a strong and varied culture, with sites varying from the
   historical Cardiff Castle and out of town Castle Coch to the more
   modern Wales Millenium Centre and Cardiff Bay which have raised the
   cities cultural profile considerably as a mahor tourist attraction.

Attractions

   Cardiff is home to Cardiff Castle, the National Assembly for Wales, St.
   David's Hall, the National Museum and Gallery, and Cathays Park
   (including municipal buildings modelled on those in New Delhi), and the
   Cardiff Metropolitan Cathedral. The Welsh National Opera moved into the
   Wales Millennium Centre in November 2004. Cardiff was a European
   Capital of Culture finalist for 2008.

   Cardiff Castle is a major tourist attraction in the city and is
   situated in the heart of the city centre, near to the main shopping
   streets of Queen St and St Mary's St.

   Other major tourist attractions are the Cardiff Bay regeneration sites
   which include the recently opened Wales Millenium Centre and the
   National Assembly for Wales and many other cultural and sites of
   interest including the Cardiff Bay Barrage and the famous Coal
   Exchange. The New Theatre was founded in 1906 and completely
   refurbished in the 1980s. Until the opening of the Wales Millennium
   Centre in 2004, it was the premier venue in Wales for touring theatre
   and dance companies, and is located in the city centre.

Festivals

   The Big Weekend Festival, is held annually in late July/August in the
   city centre and is the place for many theme park events, rides and
   regularly attracts annually over 200,000 visitors. The annual Cardiff
   Festival claims to be the UK's largest free outdoor festival and plays
   host to a range of different festivals including the Children's
   Festival that takes place in the grounds of Cardiff Castle.

   Cardiff hosted the National Eisteddfod in 1883, 1899, 1938, 1960 and
   1978, and is set to host it again in 2008. Cardiff is unique in Wales
   in having two permanent stone circles used by the Gorsedd of Bards
   during Eisteddfodau. The original circle stands in Gorsedd Gardens in
   front of the National Museum while its 1978 replacement is situated in
   Bute Park.

   Every other year, Cardiff plays host to the BBC Cardiff Singer of the
   World competition, a world renowned event on the Opera Calender.

   Cardiff Philatelic Society is the oldest Philatelic Society in Wales.
   It was formed in 1899.

   The city now hosts The Cardiff Design Festival and began showcasing the
   best of Welsh design during the summer of 2005. Since then the festival
   has grown into a diverse range of designers exhibiting their wares at
   the 2006 portable exhibition.

Parks

   Cardiff's centre is a particularly green one with Bute Park, formerly
   the castle grounds, extending northwards from the top of the Cardiff's
   main shopping street (Queen Street); when combined with the adjacent
   Llandaff Fields to the north west it produces a massive open space
   skirting the river Taff. The popular name of Taffy, for the Welshman
   abroad has its origins in the name of the river. Other popular parks
   include Roath Park in the north, donated to the city by the 3rd
   Marquess of Bute in 1887 and which includes a very popular boating
   lake; Victoria Park, Cardiff's first official park; and Thompson's
   Park, formerly home to an aviary removed in the 1970s.

   It is possible to cycle from Cardiff to Brecon almost completely off
   road on the Taff Trail, a cycle route which follows the River Taff and
   many of the old disused railways of the Glamorganshire valleys.

Music and nightlife

   Cardiff has an established and wide-ranging music scene. It is the home
   to the BBC National Orchestra of Wales and Welsh National Opera. It has
   produced several leading acts itself and, as a Capital City, has acted
   as a springboard for numerous Welsh bands to go and become famous both
   nationally and internationally. These include Charlotte Church, The
   Automatic, Catatonia, Super Furry Animals, Lost Prophets, The
   Stereophonics, Manic Street Preachers, Budgie and Shakin Stevens, among
   others.

   Cardiff has a strong nightlife and is home to many bars, pubs and
   clubs. Most clubs and bars are situated in the city centre especially
   St Mary's St and more recently Cardiff Bay has built up a strong night
   scene. Cardiff is home to one of only four Barfly venues in the UK.

Sports

   The city has a regional rugby union team, Cardiff Blues who play in the
   Celtic League at their Cardiff Arms Park stadium. Cardiff has one main
   professional football club, Cardiff City F.C. who currently play in the
   English Coca-Cola Championship and are also known locally as the
   Bluebirds. Their stadium is at Ninian Park in South Cardiff, but are
   currently in a process to build a new stadium across the road in
   Leckwith which is due to be opened in 2009. Cardiff also has a county
   cricket side, Glamorgan CCC, who play at the city centre's Sophia
   Gardens ground, and will undergo a multi-million pound improvement in
   time to host a Test Match as part of the Ashes in 2009. Cardiff also
   plays host to a rugby league side, Cardiff Demons and a professional
   ice-hockey team, the Cardiff Devils.

   Cardiff hosted the 1958 British Empire and Commonwealth Games. The
   Wales Empire Swimming Pool was demolished to make way for the
   Millennium Stadium, and eventually, a 50 metre replacement pool will be
   built in Cardiff Bay as part of the International Sports Village. Of
   the venues used for the Games only the cycling track at Maindy remains.
   Cardiff also plays host to motorsport's World Rally Championship.

   The city also features an international sporting venue, the 74,500
   capacity Millennium Stadium, where the Welsh rugby team and the Welsh
   national football team plays, however they also play occasionally at
   Swansea and Wrexham. The 1999 Rugby Union World Cup final was held at
   the Millennium Stadium, and also doubles up as a venue for other
   concerts and festivals. The first ever indoor special stages of the
   World Rally Championship were held at the Millennium Stadium in
   September 2005.

Government and politics

   Cardiff is host to the National Assembly for Wales, which is situated
   in Cardiff Bay. The building which is now known as the Senedd
   (parliament in Welsh) was opened on March 1, 2006, by the Queen. The
   executive and civil servants are based in Cardiff's Cathays Park while
   the Assembly Members, the Assembly Parliamentary Service and
   Ministerial support staff are based in Cardiff Bay.

   Cardiff City Council is based at County Hall in Atlantic Wharf, Cardiff
   Bay.

   Cardiff elects 4 AM's to the Welsh Assembly and 4 MP's to the UK
   Parliament. There is also an electoral region for Cardiff, South Wales
   Central, that provides top-up seats to parties in the Assembly. Cardiff
   is part of the Wales constituency in European Parliament elections.

Local government

   Since local government reorganisation in 1996, Cardiff has been
   governed by Cardiff City Council. Voters elect 75 councillors every
   four years, with the next elections due to be held in 2008.

   Following the 2004 local elections, no individual political party has a
   majority on Cardiff City Council. The Liberal Democrats have 32
   councillors (33 were elected, but one councillor crossed the floor to
   Plaid Cymru) and have formed a minority administration, Labour have 27,
   the Conservatives have 12 and Plaid Cymru have 4. The Leader of the
   Council, Cllr Rodney Berman, is from the Liberal Democrats.

National Assembly for Wales

   The National Assembly for Wales is based in Cardiff Bay since 1999.
   Cardiff elects 4 constituency AMs to the Assembly, with the individual
   constituencies for the Assembly being the same as for the UK
   Parliament. All of the cities residents have an extra vote for the
   South Wales Central region which increases proportionality to the
   Assembly. The next Welsh Assembly elections are due to be held on May
   5, 2007.

Political representation

   Cardiff is presently split into four parliamentary constituencies which
   form the electoral basis for elections to the United Kingdom Parliament
   and the National Assembly for Wales.

   The constituencies and their representatives are:
     * Cardiff Central: MP Jenny Willott, AM Jenny Randerson
     * Cardiff North: MP Julie Morgan, AM Sue Essex
     * Cardiff South and Penarth: MP Alun Michael, AM Lorraine Barrett
     * Cardiff West: MP Kevin Brennan, AM Rhodri Morgan

   Famous politicians who have represented Cardiff constituencies include:
     * Lord Callaghan
     * George Thomas, 1st Viscount Tonypandy

Transport

   Cardiff is a major transport hub in Wales and is the focus for many
   arterial road and rail routes that connect the city to the rest of
   South and West Wales and England.

Road

   The M4 motorway is the principal motorway in the region that connects
   Cardiff with towns in West Wales such as Llanelli, Swansea and
   Camarthen, and also England, principally, Bristol and London.

   The A48(M) motorway is another motorway within the city, acting as a
   short spur off the M4 to the city centre. The A470 is another major
   road within the city that provides an important link with the Heads of
   the Valleys.

   As with many other cities car traffic has caused congestion problems
   and as such the council has designated bus lanes to improve transport
   into and out of the city centre. There are also ideas to introduce
   congestion charging, as in London

   There are several road and rail bridges that cross the River Taff in
   Cardiff. These include the Clarence Road bridge, a comparatively modern
   bridge which replaced a swing bridge. The original bridge was named
   after the Duke of Clarence.

Rail and Bus

   Cardiff enjoys a comprehensive bus network, with council-owned Cardiff
   Bus providing the vast majority of routes in the city and out as far as
   Newport, Penarth, Barry and Llantwit Major. Cardiff Bus has recently
   introduced "bendy buses" on the popular 17 and 18 routes to Canton, Ely
   and Caerau and on the Cardiff Bay route.

   National Express provides direct services to most cities in the UK,
   including high frequency services to nearby Swansea and Merthyr Tydfil.

   Train transport is well developed in Cardiff with there being 20 train
   stations in the city. The largest stations are Cardiff Central and
   Cardiff Queen Street which are both in the city centre. Over 10m
   passengers use these two stations every year.

   Arriva Trains Wales operates train services connecting the city centre
   to all other stations in Cardiff as well as the Valleys. Cardiff
   Central is the largest railway station in Wales and one of the busiest
   in the country which provides an interchange for many local services.

   Cardiff Queen Street railway station is the second busiest in Wales and
   is hub for routes via the Valley Lines services that connect the South
   Wales Valleys and the Cardiff suburbs with the city centre and is
   situated on the eastern end of the city centre which is quite
   convenient for shoppers. This station is also for services to Cardiff
   Bay (from Platform 3), which do not call at Central.

   Cardiff benefits from having a centralised and integrated transport
   system. The central bus and train stations are sited together in the
   centre of the city, allowing passengers to easily utilise both methods
   of transport in journeys.

   Proposals to include a light-rail network in the city have been shelved
   due to rising costs.

Air

   Cardiff and South & West Wales are also served by Cardiff International
   Airport (CWL), the only large airport in the whole of Wales. It is
   served by scheduled and charter airlines as well as low-cost carriers
   such as bmibaby which provide links internationally as well as some
   domestic flights. It is situated in the town of Rhoose 10 miles west of
   the city. There are regular bus services linking the airport with the
   Cardiff Bus Station as well as a train service from Rhoose Cardiff
   International Airport railway station to Cardiff Central.

   The Taff Trail enables cyclists to cycles across Cardiff Bay and into
   the Brecon Beacons uninterrupted.

Education

Universities and Colleges

   Cardiff is home to three major institutions of higher education:
   Cardiff University, founded by Royal Charter in 1883,, is a " red
   brick" university and member of the Russell Group of leading research
   led universities; University of Wales Institute, Cardiff (UWIC) gained
   university status in 1992; The Royal Welsh College of Music & Drama is
   a conservatoire established in 1949 and is based in the grounds of
   Cardiff Castle. The University of Glamorgan will also have a Cardiff
   campus from 2007.

   The City also has two dedicated further education (FE) colleges: Coleg
   Glan Hafren and St David's College.

   Cardiff University was home to Millicent McKenzie who was possibly the
   first female in Britain to be addressed as ‘Professor’, becoming
   associate Professor in 1904 and full Professor in 1910.. Famous alumni
   of Cardiff University include Neil Kinnock, Glenys Kinnock, millionaire
   businessman and philanthropist Julian Hodge, the BBC newsreader Huw
   Edwards, and fellow BBC personalities Jeremy Bowen and Adrian Chiles.

Schools

   Cardiff has eighty-three state primary schools (two bilingual, ten
   Welsh medium), and twenty state secondary schools, of which two are
   Welsh medium.. There are also a number of independent schools in the
   City, including Llandaff Cathedral School and Howell's School, a
   single-sex girls' school. Notable schools include Whitchurch High
   School, the largest in Wales, and Ysgol Gyfun Gymraeg Glantaf the
   largest Welsh medium secondary in the country.

   As well as academic institutions, Cardiff is also home to other
   educational and learning organisations such as Techniquest, a hands on
   science discovery centre that now has franchises throughout Britain.
   Techniquest is also part of the Wales Gene Park in collaboration with
   Cardiff University, NHS Wales and the Welsh Development Agency (WDA).

Health

   There are seven major hospitals in the city. The University Hospital of
   Wales, which is also known simply as 'The Heath', is the third largest
   hospital in the UK and deals with most Accidents and Emergencies.
   Llandough Hospital is located in the south of the city. The city's
   newest hospital, St David's Hospital (built behind the former building)
   is located in the Canton area and provides services for the elderly and
   children. Cardiff Royal Infirmary closed in 1999 but reopened as a
   medical centre in 2003. There is also Rookwood Hosptial, Llandaff and
   Velindre Hospital, Whitchurch. BUPA has a hospital in the city which is
   located in Pentwyn.

Twinning

   Cardiff has twinning arrangements with:

   Regions
     * Hordaland, Norway Norway
     * Luhans'k, Ukraine Ukraine

   Cities
     * Pernik, Pernik, Bulgaria Bulgaria
     * Nantes, Pays de la Loire, France France
     * Stuttgart, Baden-Württemberg, Germany Germany
     * Xiamen, Fujian, People's Republic of China China

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cardiff"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
