   #copyright

Carnivore

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: General Biology

   This tiger's sharp teeth and strong jaws are the classical physical
   traits expected from carnivorous mammalian predators
   Enlarge
   This tiger's sharp teeth and strong jaws are the classical physical
   traits expected from carnivorous mammalian predators

   A carnivore ( IPA: ['kɑ(r)nivɔ(r)]), meaning 'meat eater' (Latin carne
   meaning 'flesh' and vorare meaning 'to devour'), is an animal that eats
   a diet consisting mainly of meat, whether it comes from live animals or
   dead ones ( scavenging). Some animals are considered carnivores even if
   their diets contain very little meat (e.g., predatory arthropods such
   as spiders or mantids that may rarely consume small vertebrate prey).
   Animals that subsist on a diet consisting only of meat are referred to
   as obligate carnivores.

   The word also refers to the mammals of the Order Carnivora, many (but
   not all) of which fit the first definition. Bears are an example of
   members of Carnivora that are not true carnivores. Carnivores that eat
   insects primarily or exclusively are called insectivores, while those
   that eat fish primarily or exclusively are called piscivores.

   There are also several species of carnivorous plants, though most are
   primarily insectivorous.

   The theropod dinosaurs such as Tyrannosaurus rex were mostly obligate
   carnivores, while sauropod and ornithischian dinosaurs were mostly
   herbivorous.

Characteristics of carnivores

   In contrast to the tiger, these Emperor penguins show that teeth and
   claws aren't necessary to be a carnivore. They feed on crustaceans,
   fish, squid and other small marine life.
   Enlarge
   In contrast to the tiger, these Emperor penguins show that teeth and
   claws aren't necessary to be a carnivore. They feed on crustaceans,
   fish, squid and other small marine life.

   Characteristics commonly 'associated' with carnivores include organs
   for capturing and disarticulating prey (teeth and claws serve these
   functions in many vertebrates) and status as a hunter. In truth, these
   assumptions may be misleading, as some carnivores do not hunt and are
   scavengers (though most hunting carnivores will scavenge when the
   opportunity exists). Thus they do not have the characteristics
   associated with hunting carnivores.

Obligate carnivores

   An obligate or true carnivore is an animal that subsists on a diet
   consisting only of meat. They may consume other products presented to
   them, especially animal products like cheese and bone marrow or sweet
   sugary substances like honey and syrup but, as these items are not
   essential, they do not consume these on a regular basis. True
   carnivores lack the physiology required for the efficient digestion of
   vegetable matter and, in fact, some carnivorous mammals eat vegetation
   specifically as an emetic.

Plant material

   In most cases, some plant material is essential for adequate nutrition,
   particularly with regard to minerals, vitamins and fibre. Most wild
   carnivores consume this in the digestive system of their prey. Many
   carnivores also eat herbivore dung, presumably to obtain essential
   nutrients that they could not otherwise obtain, since their dentition
   and digestive system do not permit efficient processing of vegetable
   matter.

As food

   Carnivores are forbidden to be eaten according to Islamic dietary laws.

List of carnivores

   Wolves surrounding a bison. Wolves are members of the Carnivora, and
   their diet consists largely of mammals.
   Enlarge
   Wolves surrounding a bison. Wolves are members of the Carnivora, and
   their diet consists largely of mammals.
     * Felines, ranging from domestic cats to lions, tigers, and other
       large predators.
     * Some canines, such the Gray Wolf but not the Red Wolf or coyote.
       Domestic dogs are broadly considered carnivorous but the
       classification is often debated.
     * Hyenas
     * Some mustelids, including ferrets
     * Polar Bears
     * Pinnipeds ( seals, sea lions, walruses, etc.)
     * Birds of prey, including hawks, eagles, falcons and owls
     * Scavenger birds, like vultures
     * Several species of waterfowl including gulls, penguins, pelicans,
       storks, and herons
     * Anurans (frogs and toads)
     * Snakes
     * Some lizards, such as the Gila Monster
     * Crocodilians
     * Sharks and many other species of fish
     * Toothed whales
     * Octopuses and squid
     * Spiders, scorpions, and many other arachnids
     * Mantids, Giant water bugs, and many other insects
     * Cnidarians
     * Carnivorous Marsupials

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carnivore"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
