   #copyright

Cassowary

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

                iCassowaries
   Southern Cassowary
   Southern Cassowary
         Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Aves
   Order:   Struthioniformes
   Family:  Casuariidae
   Genus:   Casuarius
            Brisson, 1760

                                   Species

   Casuarius casuarius
   Casuarius unappendiculatus
   Casuarius bennetti

   Cassowaries ( genus Casuarius) are very large flightless birds native
   to the tropical forests of New Guinea and northeastern Australia. Some
   nearby islands also have small cassowary populations, but it is not
   known if these are natural or the result of the New Guinea trade in
   young birds. They are frugivorous; fallen fruit and fruit on low
   branches is the mainstay of their diet. They also eat fungi, snails,
   insects, frogs, snakes and other small animals. Recently, they have
   also been observed to attack humans, though this usually only occurs in
   self-defense when humans intrude upon the birds' territory or cause
   them to feel threatened.

   Cassowaries (from the Indonesian name kasuari) are part of the ratite
   group, which also includes the emu, rhea, ostrich, moa, and kiwi. There
   are three species recognized today:
     * Southern Cassowary or double-wattled cassowary C. casuarius of
       Australia and New Guinea.
     * Dwarf Cassowary C. bennetti of New Guinea and New Britain.
     * Northern Cassowary C. unappendiculatus of New Guinea.

   The Northern and Dwarf Cassowaries are not well known. All cassowaries
   are usually shy, secretive birds of the deep forest, adept at
   disappearing long before a human knows they are there. Even the more
   accessible Southern Cassowary of the far north Queensland rain forests
   is not well understood.

   The evolutionary history of cassowaries, as all ratites, is not well
   known. A fossil species was reported from Australia, but for reasons of
   biogeography this assignment is not certain and it might belong to the
   prehistoric "emuwaries", Emuarius, which were cassowary-like primitive
   emus.
   Detail of Cassowary head
   Enlarge
   Detail of Cassowary head

   The Southern Cassowary is the second-largest bird in Australia and the
   third-largest remaining bird in the world (after the ostrich and emu).
   Adult Southern Cassowaries are 1.5 to 1.8 m (5 to 6 feet) tall,
   although some may reach 2m (6 feet 8 inches), and weigh about 60
   kilograms (130 pounds). They have a bony casque on the head that is
   used to batter through underbrush, making them the only armoured bird
   in the world. Females are bigger and more brightly coloured.

   A cassowary's three- toed feet have sharp claws; the dagger-like middle
   claw is 120 mm (5 inches) long. This claw is particularly dangerous
   since the Cassowary can use it to kill an enemy, disemboweling it with
   a single kick. They can run up to 50 km/h (32 mph) through the dense
   forest, pushing aside small trees and brush with their bony casques.
   They can jump up to 1.5 m (5 feet) and they are good swimmers.

   The 2004 edition of the Guinness World Records lists the cassowary as
   the world's most dangerous bird. Normally cassowaries are very shy but
   when disturbed can lash out dangerously with their powerful legs.
   During World War II American and Australian troops stationed in New
   Guinea were warned to steer clear of the birds. They are capable of
   inflicting fatal injuries to an adult human. Usually, attacks are the
   result of provocation. Wounded or cornered birds are particularly
   dangerous. Cassowaries, deftly using their surroundings to conceal
   their movements, have been known to out-flank organized groups of human
   predators. Cassowaries are considered to be one of the most dangerous
   animals to keep in zoos, based on the frequency and severity of
   injuries incurred by zookeepers.

   More recently, Cassowaries have been known to lose their natural fear
   of people. As a result, large areas of Australian National Parks have
   been temporarily closed to avoid human contact with the bird.

   Females lay three to eight large, pale green-blue eggs in each clutch.
   These eggs measure about 9 by 14 cm (3½ by 5½ inches) — only ostrich
   and emu eggs are larger. The female does not care for the eggs or the
   chicks; the male incubates the eggs for two months, then cares for the
   brown-striped chicks for nine months.

   Southern and Northern Cassowaries are threatened species because of
   habitat loss; estimates of their current population range from 1500 to
   10,000 individuals. About 40 are kept in captivity in Australia.
   Habitat loss has caused some cassowaries to venture out of the
   rainforest into human communities. This has caused conflict
   particularly with fruit growers. However, in some locations such as
   Mission Beach, Queensland, tourism involving the birds has been
   launched.
   Distribution of Casuarius bennetti
   Enlarge
   Distribution of Casuarius bennetti
   Distribution of Casuarius casuarius
   Enlarge
   Distribution of Casuarius casuarius
   Distribution of Casuarius unappendiculatus
   Enlarge
   Distribution of Casuarius unappendiculatus

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cassowary"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
