   #copyright

Cat

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mammals

                       iCat
   other images of cats
   other images of cats

                             Conservation status

   Domesticated
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom:    Animalia
   Phylum:     Chordata
   Class:      Mammalia
   Order:      Carnivora
   Family:     Felidae
   Genus:      Felis
   Species:    F. silvestris
   Subspecies: F.s. catus

                               Trinomial name

   Felis silvestris catus
   (Linnaeus, 1758)

   The cat (or domestic cat, house cat) is a small domesticated
   carnivorous mammal. It is valued by humans for its ability to destroy
   vermin. A skilled predator, the cat is known to hunt over 1,000 species
   for food. Intelligent, the cat can can be trained to obey simple
   commands, and has been known to teach itself to manipulate simple
   mechanisms (see cat intelligence).

   The trinomial name of the domestic cat is Felis silvestris catus. Its
   closest pre-domesticated ancestor is believed to be the African wild
   cat, Felis silvestris lybica. Humans have developed several dozen
   breeds of cat, in a variety of colours.

   Cats have lived in close association with humans for at least 9,500
   years,. Legends and myths about the cat exist in many cultures, from
   the ancient Egyptians and Chinese to the Vikings. They have been both
   revered and vilified by different cultures.

   Cats use more than one hundred vocalizations and types of body language
   for communication, including mewing ("meow" or "miaou"), purring,
   hissing, growling, chirping, clicking, and grunting. Cats have even
   been observed mimicking the calls of birds.

   Like horses and other domesticated animals, cats can sometimes become
   feral, living effectively in the wild. Feral cats will often form small
   feral cat colonies. Animal welfare organizations note that few
   abandoned cats are able to survive long enough to become feral, most
   being killed by vehicles, or succumbing to starvation, predators,
   exposure, or disease.

Nomenclature

   A group of cats is referred to as a clowder, a male cat is called a
   tom, and a female is called a queen. The male progenitor of a cat,
   especially a pedigreed cat, is its sire, and its female progenitor is
   its dam. An immature cat is called a kitten (which is also an
   alternative name for young rats, rabbits, hedgehogs, beavers, squirrels
   and skunks). In medieval Britain, the word kitten was interchangeable
   with the word catling. A cat whose ancestry is formally registered is
   called a pedigreed cat, purebred cat, or a show cat (although not all
   show cats are pedigreed or purebred). In strict terms, a purebred cat
   is one whose ancestry contains only individuals of the same breed. A
   pedigreed cat is one whose ancestry is recorded, but may have ancestors
   of different breeds (almost exclusively new breeds; cat registries are
   very strict about which breeds can be mated together). Cats of mixed
   ancestry are referred to as domestic longhairs and domestic shorthairs
   or commonly as random-bred, moggies, mongrels, mutt-cats or alley cats.
   The ratio of pedigree/purebred cats to random-bred cats varies from
   country to country. However, generally speaking, purebreds are less
   than ten percent of the total feline population.

   The word cat derives from Old English catt, which belongs to a group of
   related words in European languages, including Latin cattus, Byzantine
   Greek κάττα, Old Irish cat, and Old Church Slavonic kotka. The ultimate
   source of all these terms, however, is unknown.

   The term puss (as in pussycat or Puss in boots) may come from Dutch
   (from "poes", a female cat, or the diminutive "poesje", an endearing
   term for any cat) or from other Germanic languages.

Scientific classification

   The domestic cat was named Felis catus by Carolus Linnaeus in his
   Systema Naturae of 1758. Johann Christian Daniel von Schreber named the
   wild cat Felis silvestris in 1775. The domestic cat is now considered a
   subspecies of the wild cat: by the strict rule of priority of the
   International Code of Zoological Nomenclature the name for the species
   thus ought to be F. catus since Linnaeus published first. However, in
   practice almost all biologists use F. silvestris for the wild species,
   using F. catus only for the domesticated form.

   In opinion 2027 (published in Volume 60, Part 1 of the Bulletin of
   Zoological Nomenclature, March 31 2003) the International Commission on
   Zoological Nomenclature "conserved the usage of 17 specific names based
   on wild species, which are predated by or contemporary with those based
   on domestic forms", thus confirming F. silvestris for the wild cat and
   F. silvestris catus for its domesticated subspecies. (F. catus is still
   valid if the domestic form is considered a separate species.)

   Johann Christian Polycarp Erxleben named the domestic cat Felis
   domesticus in his Anfangsgründe der Naturlehre and Systema regni
   animalis of 1777. This name, and its variants Felis catus domesticus
   and Felis silvestris domesticus, are often seen, but they are not valid
   scientific names under the rules of the International Code of
   Zoological Nomenclature.

Characteristics

Physical features

   A cat grooming itself
   Enlarge
   A cat grooming itself

   Cats typically weigh between 2.5 and 7 kg (5.5–16 pounds); however,
   some breeds, such as the Maine Coon can exceed 11.3 kg (25 pounds).
   Some have been known to reach up to 23 kg (50 pounds) due to
   overfeeding. Conversely, very small cats (less than 1.8 kg / 4.0 lbs)
   have been reported.

   In captivity, indoor cats typically live 14 to 20 years, though the
   oldest-known cat lived to age 36. Domestic cats tend to live longer if
   they are not permitted to go outdoors (reducing the risk of injury from
   fights or accidents and exposure to diseases) and if they are spayed or
   neutered. Some such benefits are: neutered male cats cannot develop
   testicular cancer, spayed female cats cannot develop ovarian cancer,
   and both have a reduced risk of mammary cancer.

   Cats also possess rather loose skin; this enables them to turn and
   confront a predator or another cat in a fight, even when it has a grip
   on them. This is also an advantage for veterinary purposes, as it
   simplifies injections . In fact, the life of cats with kidney failure
   can sometimes be extended for years by the regular injection of large
   volumes of fluid subcutaneously, which serves as an alternative to
   dialysis , The particular loose skin at the back of the neck is known
   as the scruff, and is the area by which a mother cat grips her kittens
   to carry them. As a result, cats have a tendency to relax and become
   quiet and passive when gripped there which often extends into
   adulthood, and can be useful when attempting to treat or move an
   uncooperative cat. However, since the adult cat is quite a bit heavier
   than a kitten, she should not be carried with her weight entirely
   hanging from the scruff, but should also have her weight supported at
   the abdomen and hind legs , . Some advise against "scruffing" an adult
   cat at all ,,.

Ears

   Sixty-two individual muscles in the ear allow for a manner of
   directional hearing: the cat can move each ear independently of the
   other. Because of this mobility, a cat can move its body in one
   direction and point its ears in another direction. Most cats have
   straight ears pointing upward. Unlike dogs, flap-eared breeds are
   extremely rare. ( Scottish Folds are one such exceptional genetic
   mutation.) When angry or frightened, a cat will lay its ears back, to
   accompany the growling or hissing sounds it makes. Cats will also turn
   their ears back when they are playing, or occasionally to show interest
   in a sound coming from behind them.

Metabolism

   Cats commonly sleep curled into a tight ball.
   Enlarge
   Cats commonly sleep curled into a tight ball.

   Cats conserve energy by sleeping more than most animals, especially as
   they grow older. Daily durations of sleep vary, usually 12–16 hours,
   with 13–14 being the average. Some cats can sleep as much as 20 hours
   in a 24-hour period. The term cat nap refers to the cat's ability to
   fall asleep (lightly) for a brief period and has entered the English
   lexicon – someone who nods off for a few minutes is said to be "taking
   a cat nap".

   Due to their crepuscular nature, cats are often known to enter a period
   of increased hyperactivity and playfulness during the evening and early
   morning, dubbed the "evening crazies", "night crazies" or "mad half
   hour" by some.

   The temperament of a cat can vary depending on the breed and
   socialization. Cats with "oriental" body types tend to be thinner and
   more active, while cats that have a "cobby" body type tend to be
   heavier and less active.

   The normal body temperature of a cat is between 38 and 39 ° C (101 and
   102.2 ° F). A cat is considered febrile ( hyperthermic) if it has a
   temperature of 39.5 °C (103 °F) or greater, or hypothermic if less than
   37.5 °C (100 °F). For comparison, humans have a normal temperature of
   approximately 36.8 °C (98.2 °F). A domestic cat's normal heart rate
   ranges from 140 to 220 beats per minute, and is largely dependent on
   how excited the cat is. For a cat at rest, the average heart rate
   should be between 150 and 180 bpm, about twice that of a human.

Legs

   A cat jumping.
   Enlarge
   A cat jumping.

   Cats, like dogs, are digitigrades: they walk directly on their toes,
   the bones of their feet making up the lower part of the visible leg.
   Cats are capable of walking very precisely, because like all felines
   they directly register; that is, they place each hind paw (almost)
   directly in the print of the corresponding forepaw, minimizing noise
   and visible tracks. This also provides sure footing for their hind paws
   when they navigate rough terrain.

   Unlike dogs and most mammals, cats walk by moving both legs on one side
   and then both legs on the other. Most mammals move legs on alternate
   sides in sequence. Cats share this unusual gait with camels, giraffes,
   and a select few other mammals. There is no known connection between
   these animals which might explain this.

   Like all members of family Felidae except the cheetah, cats have
   retractable claws. In their normal, relaxed position the claws are
   sheathed with the skin and fur around the toe pads. This keeps the
   claws sharp by preventing wear from contact with the ground and allows
   the silent stalking of prey. The claws on the forefeet are typically
   sharper than those on the hind feet. Cats can extend their claws
   voluntarily on one or more paws at will. Cats may extend their claws in
   hunting or self-defense, climbing, " kneading", or for extra traction
   on soft surfaces (bedspreads, thick rugs, etc.). The curved claws may
   become entangled in carpet or thick fabric, which may cause injury if
   the cat is unable to free itself.

   Most cats have 5 claws at their front paws, and 4 or 5 at their rear
   paws. But because of a mutation, cats are prone to polydactyly, and may
   have 6 or 7 toes. The 5th front claw, the thumb, is on much higher
   position than those of the other fingers. Then even higher, there seems
   to be a 6th finger, but it is not. This special feature of the front
   paws, on the inside of the wrists, is the carpal pad, also found on the
   paws of big cats and dogs. It has no function in normal walking but is
   thought to be an anti-skidding device during jumping. If present, the
   5th claw at the rear legs, corresponding with the big toe, is called
   the dew-claw.

Perching and falling

   A cat in a tree
   Enlarge
   A cat in a tree

   Most breeds of cat have a noted fondness for settling in high places,
   or perching. Animal behaviorists have posited a number of explanations,
   the most common being that height gives the cat a better observation
   point, allowing it to survey its "territory" and become aware of
   activities of people and other pets in the area. In the wild, a higher
   place may serve as concealed site from which to hunt; domestic cats are
   known to strike prey by pouncing from such a perch as a tree branch, as
   does a leopard, or a fence rail. Height, therefore, can also give cats
   a sense of security and prestige.

   This fondness for high spaces, however, can dangerously test the
   popular axiom that a cat "always lands on its feet." The American
   Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals warns owners to
   safeguard the more dangerous perches in their homes, to avoid
   "high-rise syndrome," where an overconfident cat falls from an extreme
   height.

   During a fall, a cat can reflexively twist its body and right itself
   using its acute sense of balance and flexibility. This is known as the
   cat's " righting reflex." It always rights itself in the same way,
   provided it has the time to do so during a fall. Thus, high
   (multi-story) falls can be less dangerous to them than those of only a
   few meters. Many cases are known of cats falling from substantial
   heights (5 to 10 stories) and surviving almost unscathed. Contrary to
   popular belief, cats without a tail also have this ability, since a cat
   mostly moves its hindlegs and relies on conservation of angular
   momentum to set up for landing, and the tail is in fact little used for
   this feat.

Senses

   A close-up of a cat's eye
   Enlarge
   A close-up of a cat's eye

   Measuring the senses of any animal can be difficult because there is
   usually no explicit communication (e.g., reading aloud the letters of a
   Snellen chart) between the subject and the tester.

   While a cat's senses of smell may not be as keen as, say, that of a
   mouse, it is superior in many ways to those of humans. These along with
   the cat's highly advanced hearing, eyesight, taste, and touch receptors
   make the cat extremely sensitive among mammals.

Sight

   The tapetum lucidum reflecting green in the pupils of a cat.
   Enlarge
   The tapetum lucidum reflecting green in the pupils of a cat.

   Testing indicates that a cat's vision is superior at night in
   comparison to humans, and inferior in daylight. Cats, like dogs and
   many other animals, have a tapetum lucidum that reflects extra light to
   the retina. While this enhances the ability to see in low light, it
   appears to reduce net visual acuity, thus detracting when light is
   abundant. In very bright light, the slit-like iris closes very narrowly
   over the eye, reducing the amount of light on the sensitive retina, and
   improving depth of field. The tapetum and other mechanisms give the cat
   a minimum light detection threshold up to seven times lower than that
   of humans. Variation in colour of cats' eyes in flash photographs is
   largely due to the interaction of the flash with the tapetum.

   Average cats have a visual field of view estimated at 200°, versus 180°
   in humans, with a binocular field (overlap in the images from each eye)
   narrower than that of humans. As with most predators, their eyes face
   forward, affording depth perception at the expense of field of view.
   Field of view is largely dependent upon the placement of the eyes, but
   may also be related to the eye's construction. Instead of the fovea
   which gives humans sharp central vision, cats have a central band known
   as the visual streak. Cats can apparently differentiate among colors,
   especially at close range, but without appreciable subtlety.
   A white cat with differently coloured eyes.
   Enlarge
   A white cat with differently coloured eyes.

   Cats have a third eyelid, the nictitating membrane, which is a thin
   cover that closes from the side and appears when the cat's eyelid
   opens. This membrane partially closes if the cat is sick; although in a
   sleepy, content cat this membrane is often visible. If a cat
   chronically shows the third eyelid, it should be taken to a
   veterinarian for evaluation.

   Cats have a wide variation in eye colour, the most typical colors being
   golden, green and orange. Blue eyes are usually associated with the
   Siamese breed, but they are also found in white cats. If a white cat
   has two blue eyes, it is oftentimes deaf; however, orange eyes usually
   indicate the cat is free of hearing problems. White cats having one
   blue and one other-colored eye are called "odd-eyed" and may be deaf on
   the same side as the blue eye. This is the result of the yellow iris
   pigmentation rising to the surface of only one eye, as blue eyes are
   normal at birth before the adult pigmentation has had a chance to
   express itself in the eye(s).

Hearing

   Humans and cats have a similar range of hearing on the low end of the
   scale, but cats can hear much higher-pitched sounds, up to 64 kHz,
   which is 1.6 octaves above the range of a human, and even 1 octave
   above the range of a dog. When listening for something, a cat's ears
   will swivel in that direction; a cat's ear flaps ( pinnae) can
   independently point backwards as well as forwards and sideways to
   pinpoint the source of the sound. Cats can judge within three inches
   (7.5 cm) the location of a sound being made one yard (approximately one
   meter) away - this can be useful for localizing prey, etc.

Smell

   A cat using its senses for exploration
   Enlarge
   A cat using its senses for exploration

   A domestic cat's sense of smell is about fourteen times as strong as a
   human's. Cats have twice as many smell-sensitive cells in their noses
   as people do, which means they can smell things we are not even aware
   of. Cats also have a scent organ in the roof of their mouths called the
   vomeronasal, or Jacobson's organ. When a cat wrinkles its muzzle,
   lowers its chin, and lets its tongue hang a bit, it is opening the
   passage to the vomeronasal. This is called gaping, "sneering", or
   "flehming". Gaping is the equivalent of the Flehmen response in other
   animals, such as dogs, horses and big cats.

Touch

   Whiskers clearly distinguishable on the wrist of even a long haired cat
   Enlarge
   Whiskers clearly distinguishable on the wrist of even a long haired cat

   A cat has about twenty-four movable vibrissae ("whiskers"), in four
   rows on each upper lip on each side of its nose (some cats may have
   more), in addition to a few on each cheek, tufts over the eyes,
   bristles on the chin, the cat's inner "wrists", and at the back of the
   legs. The Sphynx (a nearly hairless breed) may have full length, short,
   or no whiskers at all.

   Vibrissae aid with navigation and sensation. The upper two rows of
   whiskers can move independently from the lower two rows for even more
   precise measuring. Whiskers are more than twice as thick as ordinary
   hairs, and their roots are set three times deeper than hairs in a cat's
   tissue. Richly supplied with nerve endings, whiskers give cats
   extraordinarily detailed information about air movements, air pressure
   and anything they touch. Vibrissae possess exquisite sensitivity to
   vibrations in air currents. As air swirls and eddies around objects,
   whiskers vibrate too. Whiskers may detect very small shifts in air
   currents, enabling a cat to know it is near obstructions without
   actually seeing them. Cats use messages in these vibrations to sense
   the presence, size, and shape of obstacles without seeing or touching
   them.

   Whiskers are also good hunting tools. The structure of the brain region
   which receives information from the vibrissae is similar to that found
   in the visual cortex, suggesting that the nature of the cat's
   perception through its whiskers is similar to that via its vision. , ,
   Stop motion photography reveals that at the moment a cat's prey is so
   close to its mouth to be too near for accurate vision, its whiskers
   move so as to form a basket shape around its muzzle in order to
   precisely detect the prey's location., A cat whose whiskers have been
   damaged may bite the wrong part of a mouse it's attacking, indicating
   that signals from these delicate structures provide cats with vital
   information about the shape and activity of its prey — interestingly,
   whiskers also help cats detect scents.

   It is thought that a cat may choose to rely on the whiskers in dim
   light where fully dilating the pupils would reduce its ability to focus
   on close objects. The whiskers also spread out roughly as wide as the
   cat's body making it able to judge if it can fit through an opening.

   Whiskers are also an indication of the cat's attitude. Whiskers point
   forward when the cat is inquisitive and friendly, and lie flat on the
   face when the cat is being defensive or aggressive.

   Whiskers can also be a bother to a cat, especially when the cat tries
   to eat food out of a bowl. The end of the whiskers touching the side of
   the bowl transfer irritating sensations to its brain, making it hard
   for it to continue eating.

   When a kitten is cleaned by its mother, she may chew off some or all of
   the whiskers.

Taste

   The cat family has been shown in 2005 to lack the T1R2 protein, one of
   two required for function of the sweetness sensory receptor; a deletion
   in the relevant gene (Tas1r2) causes a shift in the genetic reading
   frame, leading to transcription stopping early and no detectable mRNA
   or protein produced. The other protein, T1R3 is present and identical
   to that of other animals, and the relevant taste buds are still present
   but inactive. Such a genetic marker found in the entire family and not
   other animals must be the result of a mutation in an early ancestor of
   the entire family; as a deletion mutation it could not revert, and thus
   would be inherited by all descendants, even as the evolutionary tree
   branched out. Most scientists now believe this is the root of the cat
   family's extremely specialized evolutionary niche as a hunter and
   carnivore. Their modified sense of taste would cause them to some
   degree to ignore plants, a large part of whose taste appeal derives
   from their high sugar content, in favour of a high protein carnivorous
   diet which would still stimulate their remaining taste receptors.

Communication

Hunting and diet

   Cat eating a mouse
   Enlarge
   Cat eating a mouse

   Cats are evolutionarily highly specialized for hunting, compared to
   other mammals such as dogs. This is now thought to be the indirect
   result of the mutation which caused their ancestor to lose the ability
   to taste sugars, thereby reducing their intake of plant foods. Since
   they have a greatly reduced need to digest plants, their digestive
   tract has evolved to be shorter, too short for effective digestion of
   plants but less of a weight penalty for the rapid movement required for
   hunting. Hunting has likewise become central to their behaviour
   patterns, even to their predeliction for short burst of intense
   exercise punctuating long periods of rest.

   Much like the big cats, domestic cats are very effective predators.
   They ambush and immobilize vertebrate prey using tactics similar to
   those of leopards and tigers by pouncing; then they deliver a lethal
   neck bite with their long canine teeth that severs the victim's spinal
   cord, causes fatal bleeding by puncturing the carotid artery or the
   jugular vein, or asphyxiate it by crushing its trachea. The domestic
   cat can hunt and eat about one thousand species—many big cats will eat
   fewer than 100. Although, theoretically, big cats can kill most of
   these species as well, they often do not due to the relatively low
   nutritional content that smaller animals provide for the effort. An
   exception is the leopard, which commonly hunts rabbits and many other
   smaller animals.

   Even well-fed domestic cats hunt and kill birds, mice, rats, scorpions,
   and other small animals in the vicinity. They often present such
   trophies to their owner. The motivation is not entirely clear, but
   friendly bonding behaviors are often associated with such an action. It
   is probable that cats in this situation expect to be praised for their
   symbolic contribution to the group. Some theories suggest that cats see
   their owners gone for long times of the day and assume they are out
   hunting, as they always have plenty of food available. It is thought
   that a cat presenting its owner with a dead animal thinks it's 'helping
   out' by bringing home the kill. Ethologist Paul Leyhausen, in an
   extensive study of social and predatory behaviour in domestic cats
   (documented in his book Cat Behaviour}, proposed a mechanism which
   explains this presenting behaviour. In simple terms, cats adopt humans
   into their social group, and share excess kill with others in the group
   according to the local pecking order, in which humans place at or near
   the top.

   Due to their hunting behaviour, in many countries feral cats are
   considered pests. Domestic cats are occasionally also required to have
   contained cat runs or to be kept inside entirely, as they can be
   hazardous to locally endangered bird species. For instance, various
   municipalities in Australia have enacted such legislation. In some
   localities, owners fit their cat with a bell in order to warn prey of
   its approach. Sometimes, the bell has the unwanted effect of "training"
   the cat to be an even stealthier killer.
   A cat yawning, showing characteristic canine teeth
   Enlarge
   A cat yawning, showing characteristic canine teeth

   Cats have highly specialized teeth and a digestive tract suitable to
   the digestion of meat. The premolar and first molar together compose
   the carnassial pair on each side of the mouth, which efficiently
   functions to shear meat like a pair of scissors. While this is present
   in canines, it is highly developed in felines. The cat's tongue has
   sharp spines, or papillae, useful for retaining and ripping flesh from
   a carcass. These papillae are small backward-facing hooks that contain
   keratin and assist in their grooming. Domesticated cats eat fairly
   little vegetable matter. It is quite common, however, for cats to
   occasionally supplement their carnivorous diets with small amounts of
   grass or other plant matter to help their digestive tract. Whereas
   bears and dogs commonly supplement their diet of meat with fruits,
   berries, roots, and honey when they can get them, cats prefer to mostly
   feed on meat. All felines, including the big cats, have a genetic
   anomaly that prevents them from tasting sweetness, which, more than
   likely, is related to their meat-dominated eating habits, and almost
   certainly related to their aversion to fruits and berries. However,
   many domesticated cats are known to like vegetables. The majority of
   brand-name cat foods are primarily meat based, but often contain large
   amounts of corn or rice and supplemented with meat byproducts and
   minerals and vitamins. Cats are also known to munch on grass, leaves,
   shrubs and houseplants to facilitate regurgitation of whatever may be
   upsetting their digestion.

   Cats are obligate carnivores, and cannot live on an unsupplemented
   vegetarian diet because they cannot synthesize several required
   nutrients which are absent or rare in plant food. This applies mainly
   to taurine, vitamin A (cats cannot convert the pro-vitamin A that is
   abundant in plants to vitamin A proper) and to certain fatty acids. The
   absence of taurine causes the cat's retina to slowly degenerate,
   causing eye problems and (eventually) irreversible blindness. This
   condition is called central retinal degeneration (CRD). Cow's milk is a
   poor source of taurine and adult cats are generally lactose intolerant.
   Lactose-free milk is perfectly safe, but still not a substitute for
   meat.

   Some vegetarians, however, feed their cats a vegetarian diet, with a
   supplement containing these specific nutrients and others tailored to
   meet the needs of cats. Vegan pre-supplemented kibble is also
   available.

   Some houseplants are harmful to cats. The leaves of the Easter Lily can
   cause permanent and life-threatening kidney damage to cats.
   Philodendron are also poisonous to cats. Cat Fancy has a full list of
   plants harmful to cats.

   Some cats have a fondness for catnip. While they generally do not
   consume it, they will often roll in it, paw at it, and occasionally
   chew on it (as catnip is sensed by the cat's vomeronasal organ). The
   effect is usually relatively short, lasting for only a few minutes.
   After two hours or less, susceptible cats gain interest again. Several
   other species of plants cause this effect, to a lesser degree.

   Cats can be fussy eaters, possibly due to the mutation which caused
   their ancestor to lose the ability to taste sugars. Unlike most
   mammals, cats can voluntarily starve themselves indefinitely despite
   being presented with palatable food, even a food which they had
   previously readily consumed. This can happen when the vomeronasal or
   Jacobson's organ becomes accustomed to a specific food, or if the cats
   are spoiled by their owners, in which case the cat will reject any food
   that does not fit the pattern it is expecting. It is also known for
   cats to merely become bored with their given food and decide to stop
   eating until they are tempted into eating again. Although it is
   extremely rare for a cat to deliberately starve itself to the point of
   injury, the sudden loss of weight can cause a fatal condition called
   hepatic lipidosis, a liver dysfunction which causes pathological loss
   of appetite and reinforces the starvation, which can lead to death
   within as little as 48 hours.

   Additionally, cats have been known to develop a fondness for "people
   food" such as chicken, bread, French fries, pizza, ice cream, tomato
   soup, bacon, carrot juice, olives, mushrooms, and carnitas burritos, as
   well as such cat diet exotica as corn kernels and diced cantaloupe or
   cantaloupe skin. A diet consisting of people food or unlimited access
   to normal cat food often leads to the cat becoming obese. This may lead
   to several health complications, such as diabetes, especially in
   neutered males. Such health conditions can be prevented through diet
   and exercise (playing), especially for cats living exclusively indoors.

   Cats can also develop pica. Pica is a condition in which animals chew
   or eat unusual things such as fabric, plastic or wool. In cats, this is
   mostly harmless as they do not digest most of it, but can be fatal or
   require surgical removal if a large amount of foreign material is
   ingested (for example, an entire sock). It tends to occur more often in
   Siamese, Burmese, and breeds with these in their ancestry.

   Domestic cats, especially young kittens, are known for their love of
   string play. Many cats cannot resist a dangling piece of string, or a
   piece of rope drawn randomly and enticingly across the floor. This well
   known love of string is often depicted in cartoons and photographs,
   which show kittens or cats playing with balls of yarn. It is probably
   related to hunting instincts, including the common practice of kittens
   practice hunting of their mother's, and each other's, tail. If string
   is ingested, however, it can become caught in the cat’s stomach or
   intestines, causing illness, or in extreme cases, death. Due to
   possible complications caused by ingesting a string, string play is
   sometimes replaced with a laser pointer's dot, which some cats will
   chase. Some also discourage the use of laser pointers for pet play,
   however, because of the potential damage to sensitive eyes and/or the
   possible loss of satisfaction associated with the successful capture of
   an actual prey object, play or real.

   Because of their small size, domestic cats pose almost no danger to
   humans — the main hazard is the possibility of infection (e.g., cat
   scratch disease, or, rarely, rabies) from a cat bite or scratch. Cats
   can also potentially inflict severe scratches or puncture an eye,
   though this is quite rare. Dogs have been known to be blinded by cats
   in fights, in which the cat specifically targeted the eyes of the
   larger animal with some accuracy.

   Cats can be destructive to ecosystems in which they are not native and
   whose species have not had time to adapt to their introduction. In some
   cases, cats have contributed to or caused extinctions -— for example,
   see the case of the Stephens Island Wren.

Poisoning

   The liver of a cat is less effective at detoxification than those of
   humans or dogs, which limits the use of pesticides and medications
   where they may be exposed. For instance, the common painkiller,
   paracetamol, is extremely toxic to cats. Because they naturally lack
   enzymes needed to digest it, even minute portions of doses safe for
   humans can be fatal. Any suspected ingestion warrants immediate
   veterinary attention. Similarly, phenol based products often used for
   cleaning and disinfecting, such as Pine-Sol, Lysol, hexachlorophene,
   etc., are more toxic to cats than to humans or dogs , , and exposure
   has been known to be fatal.

   Many human foods are toxic to cats; chocolate, for example, can be
   fatal due to the presence of theobromine (see theobromine poisoning),
   although few cats will eat chocolate.

Hygiene

   Grooming tabby
   Enlarge
   Grooming tabby

   Cats are known for their fastidious cleanliness. They groom themselves
   by licking their fur, employing their hooked pappilae and saliva. Their
   saliva is a powerful cleaning agent, but it can provoke allergic
   reactions in humans. Some people who are allergic to cats—typically
   manifested by hay fever, asthma or a skin rash —quickly acclimate
   themselves to a particular animal and live comfortably in the same
   house with it, while retaining an allergy to cats in general. Many cats
   also enjoy grooming humans or other cats. Some cats occasionally
   regurgitate hair balls of fur that have collected in their stomachs as
   a result of their grooming. Longhair cats are more prone to this than
   shorthairs. Hairballs can be prevented with certain cat foods and
   remedies that ease elimination of the hair and regular grooming of the
   coat with a comb or stiff brush. Cats expend nearly as much fluid
   grooming as they do urinating.

   Indoor cats are usually provided with a litter box containing litter,
   typically bentonite, but sometimes other absorbent material such as
   shredded paper or wood chips, or sometimes sand or similar material.
   This arrangement serves the same purpose as a toilet for humans. It
   should be cleaned daily and changed often, depending on the number of
   cats in a household and the type of litter; if it is not kept clean, a
   cat may be fastidious enough to find other locations in the house for
   urination or defecation. This may also happen for other reasons; for
   instance, if a cat becomes constipated and defecation is uncomfortable,
   it may associate the discomfort with the litter box and avoid it in
   favour of another location. A litterbox is recommended for
   indoor-outdoor cats as well. Daily attention to the litter box also
   serves as a monitor of the cat's health. Numerous variations on litter
   and litter box design exist, including some which automatically sift
   the litter after each use. Clumping litter is a variation which absorbs
   urine into clumps which can be sifted out along with feces, and thus
   stays cleaner longer with regular sifting, but has sometimes been
   reported to cause health problems in some cats.
   Toilet-trained cat
   Enlarge
   Toilet-trained cat

   Litterboxes may pose a risk of toxoplasmosis transmission to
   susceptible pregnant women and immuno-compromised individuals, although
   this risk is greatly decreased in indoor-only cats which would not
   normally be exposed to the disease. Transmission risk may be reduced by
   daily litterbox cleaning by someone other than the susceptible
   individual.

   Some cats can be toilet trained, eliminating the litterbox and its
   attendant expense and smell. Training involves two or three weeks of
   incremental moves, such as moving and elevating the litterbox until it
   is near the toilet. For a short time, an adapter, such as a bowl or
   small box, may be used to suspend the litter above the toilet bowl;
   numerous kits and other aids are marketed to help toilet-train cats.
   When training is complete, the cat uses the toilet by perching over the
   bowl. Occasional accidental dunkings, which can traumatize the cat to
   the point of its avoidance of the toilet, urinating and defecating in
   undesirable locations around the house, can be avoided by use of a
   simple insert of one or two crossbars or a widely spaced grid to
   prevent falling in but allow feces to pass; such safety devices have
   recently become commercially available. Otherwise, if a cat is not
   trained to use the toilet, it is wise to keep the lid shut to prevent
   thirsty or curious cats from falling in.

Scratching

   Cat scratching wooden post.
   Enlarge
   Cat scratching wooden post.

   Cats are naturally driven to periodically hook their front claws into
   suitable surfaces and pull backwards, in order to sharpen the claws and
   remove the worn outer sheath as well as exercising and stretching their
   muscles. This scratching behaviour seems enjoyable to the cat, and even
   declawed cats will go through elaborate scratching routines with every
   evidence of great satisfaction, despite the total lack of results.
   Indoor cats benefit from being provided with a scratching post so that
   they are less likely to use carpet or furniture which they can easily
   ruin. Commercial scratching posts typically are covered in carpeting or
   upholstery, but some authorities advise against this practice, as not
   making it clear to the cat which surfaces are permissible and which are
   not; they suggest using a plain wooden surface, or reversing the
   carpeting on the posts so that the rougher texture of the carpet
   backing is a more attractive alternative to the cat than the floor
   covering. Some indoor cats, however, especially those that were taken
   as kittens from feral colonies, may not understand the concept of a
   scratching post, and as a result will ignore it.
   Close-up of a cat's claw, with the quick clearly visible
   Enlarge
   Close-up of a cat's claw, with the quick clearly visible

   Although scratching can serve cats to keep their claws from growing
   excessively long, their nails can be trimmed if necessary, with a small
   nail trimmer designed for humans, a small pair of electrical diagonal
   cutting pliers, or a guillotine type cutter specifically designed for
   animal nail trimming. Care must always be taken to avoid cutting the
   quick of the claw, analogous to cutting into the tip of a finger and
   equally painful and bloody. The position of the quick can be easily
   seen through the translucent nail of a cat with light colored claws but
   not in cats with dark colored nails, who therefore require carefully
   trimming of only small amounts from the nails.

Declawing

   Declawing is a major surgery known as onychectomy, performed under
   anesthesia, which removes the tip of each digit (from the first knuckle
   out) of the cat's forepaws (and rarely the hind paws). The primary
   reason for declawing cats is to prevent them from damaging furniture;
   in the United States, some landlords may require that tenants' cats be
   declawed. Rarely, vicious cats, cats that frequently fight with other
   pets, or cats that are too efficient at predation of songbirds etc. are
   declawed.

   Many veterinarians are critical of the procedure, and some refuse to
   perform it because the absence of claws in a cat:
    1. Deprives it of its main defense abilities, both fighting as well as
       escaping by climbing trees;
    2. Can impair its stretching and exercise habits, leading to muscle
       atrophy;
    3. Compromises its ability to grip and balance on thin surfaces such
       as railings and fence tops, leading to injury from falls;
    4. Can cause insecurity and a subsequent tendency to bite.

   For these reasons, all authorities recommend that declawed cats never
   be allowed to freely roam outdoors. This surgery is generally not
   recommended for an adult animal, and is rare outside of North America,
   being considered an act of animal cruelty in many Western countries. In
   Finland, Germany, the Netherlands and Switzerland, declawing is
   forbidden by the laws against cruelty to animals. In many other
   European countries, it is forbidden under the terms of the European
   Convention for the Protection of Pet Animals, unless "a veterinarian
   considers [such] non-curative procedures necessary either for
   veterinary medical reasons or for the benefit of (the) animal". In
   Britain, animal shelters find it difficult to place imported cats that
   have been declawed and subsequently most are euthanized. In 2003, West
   Hollywood, California became the first U.S. jurisdiction to outlaw
   declawing by veterinarians or animal groomers practicing in city
   limits.

   While some people suggest cats not be declawed until 5-6 months of age,
   many veterinarians who practice this surgery are of the opinion that it
   is advantageous to declaw the cat as soon as it is old enough to
   sustain surgery (around 2-3 months of age, depending on size),
   reasoning that younger cats are more adaptable to the amputation, and
   that distal phalanges in the cat at this age are still flexible
   cartilage rather than bone, making the operation less severe.
   Close-up of a declawed paw.
   Enlarge
   Close-up of a declawed paw.

   After a cat has been declawed, it should be allowed to rest, and
   restrained from jumping (if possible) for a few days. After being
   declawed, as with after any surgery, there may be a period of about a
   week, sometimes less, when the cat will be uncomfortable being played
   with or picked up. As with any surgery, there is a slight risk of
   death, as well as complications which may leave the cat with an
   increased risk of infection and/or life-long discomfort in its paws.

   An alternative to declawing is the application of blunt, vinyl nail
   caps that are affixed to the claws with nontoxic glue, requiring
   periodic replacement when the cat sheds its claw sheaths (about every
   four to six weeks). However, the cat will still experience difficulties
   because the capped nails are not as effective as claws.

Environment

   The wild cat, ancestor of the domestic cat, is believed to have evolved
   in a desert climate, as evident in the behaviour common to both the
   domestic and wild forms. Wild cats are native to all continents other
   than Australia and Antarctica. Their feces are usually dry, and cats
   prefer to bury them in sandy places. Urine is highly concentrated,
   which allows the cat to retain as much fluid as possible. They are able
   to remain motionless for long periods, especially when observing prey
   and preparing to pounce. In North Africa there are still small wildcats
   that are probably related closely to the ancestors of today's
   domesticated breeds.

   Cats enjoy heat and solar exposure, often sleeping in a sunny area
   during the heat of the day. Cats prefer warmer temperatures than humans
   do. People start to feel uncomfortable when their skin's temperature
   gets higher than about 44.5 °C (112 °F), but cats don't start to show
   signs of discomfort until their skin reaches about 52 °C (126 °F).

   Being closely related to desert animals, cats can easily withstand the
   heat and cold of a temperate climate, but not for extended periods.
   Although certain breeds such as the Norwegian Forest Cat and Maine Coon
   have developed heavier coats of fur than other cats, they have little
   resistance against moist cold (eg, fog, rain and snow) and struggle to
   maintain their 39 °C (102 °F) body temperature when wet.

   Most cats dislike immersion in water; one major exception is the
   Turkish Van breed which has an unusual fondness for water . Abyssinians
   are also reported to be more tolerant of water than most cats.

Reproduction and genetics

   Four kittens being nursed
   Enlarge
   Four kittens being nursed

   Cats are seasonally polyestrous, which means they may have many periods
   of heat over the course of a year. A heat period lasts about 4 to 7
   days if the female is bred; if she is not, the heat period lasts
   longer.

   The male cat's penis has spines which point backwards. Upon withdrawal
   of the penis, the spines rake the walls of the female's vagina. The
   female needs this stimulation for ovulation to begin. Because this does
   not always occur, females are rarely impregnated by the first male with
   which they mate. Furthermore, cats are superfecund; that is, a female
   may mate with more than one male when she is in heat, meaning different
   kittens in a litter may have different fathers.

   The reproduction process can be very loud, as both cats vocalize
   loudly. If one is not used to the sounds of cats mating, it will sound
   like a cat fight.

   The gestation period for cats is approximately 63-65 days. The size of
   a litter averages three to five kittens, with the first litter usually
   smaller than subsequent litters. Kittens are weaned at between six and
   seven weeks, and cats normally reach sexual maturity at 4-10 months
   (females) and to 5-7 months (males).
   A kitten that has opened its eyes for the very first time.
   Enlarge
   A kitten that has opened its eyes for the very first time.

   The pregnant cat will exhibit physical and personality changes.
   Pregnant cat physical changes include abdominal enlargement, vomiting,
   increased appetite, pinking of nipples, and cessation of heat cycle.
   Pregnant cat personality changes include nesting behaviour during the
   terminal stages of pregnancy and also increased affection throughout
   the stages of pregnancy.

   Cats are ready to go to new homes at about 12 weeks old (the
   recommended minimum age by Fédération Internationale Féline), or when
   they are ready to leave their mother. Cats can be surgically sterilized
   (spayed or neutered) as early as 6-8 weeks to limit unwanted
   reproduction. This surgery also prevents undesirable sex-related
   behaviour, such as territory marking (spraying urine) in males and
   yowling (calling) in females. If an animal is neutered after such
   behaviour has been learned, however, it may persist.
   Blue-eyed cats with white fur have a higher incidence of genetic
   deafness.
   Enlarge
   Blue-eyed cats with white fur have a higher incidence of genetic
   deafness.

   The domestic cat and its closest wild ancestor both possess 38
   chromosomes, in which over 200 heritable genetic defects have been
   identified, many homologous to human inborn errors. Specific metabolic
   defects have been identified underlying many of these feline diseases.
   There are several genes responsible for the hair colour identified. The
   combination of them gives different phenotypes. See Cat coat genetics.

   Features like hair length, lack of tail or presence of a very short
   tail (bobtail cat) are also determined by single alleles and modified
   by polygenes.

   The Cat Genome Project, sponsored by the Laboratory of Genomic
   Diversity at the U.S. National Cancer Institute Frederick Cancer
   Research and Development Centre in Frederick, Maryland, focuses on the
   development of the cat as an animal model for human hereditary disease,
   infectious disease, genome evolution, comparative research initiatives
   within the family Felidae, and forensic potential.

Domestication

   In 2004, a grave was excavated in Cyprus that contained the skeletons,
   laid close to one another, of both a human and a cat. The grave is
   estimated to be 9,500 years old, pushing back the earliest known
   feline-human association significantly. Like some other domesticated
   animals, cats live in a mutualistic arrangement with humans. It is
   believed that the benefit of removing rats and mice from humans' food
   stores outweighed the trouble of extending the protection of a human
   settlement to a formerly wild animal, almost certainly for humans who
   had adopted a farming economy. Unlike the dog, which also hunts and
   kills rodents, the cat does not eat grains, fruits, or vegetables. A
   cat that is good at hunting rodents is referred to as a mouser.

   The simile "like herding cats" refers to the seeming intractability of
   the ordinary house cat to training in anything, unlike dogs. Despite
   cohabitation in colonies, cats are lone hunters. It is no coincidence
   that cats are also "clean" animals; the chemistry of their saliva,
   expended during their frequent grooming, appears to be a natural
   deodorant. If so, the function of this cleanliness is to decrease the
   chance a prey animal will notice the cat's presence in time. In
   contrast, dog's odour is an advantage in hunting, for a dog is a pack
   hunter; part of the pack stations itself upwind, and its odour drives
   prey towards the rest of the pack stationed downwind. This requires a
   cooperative effort, which in turn requires communications skills. No
   such communications skills are required of a lone hunter. It is likely
   this is part of the reason interacting with such an animal is
   problematic; cats in particular are labeled as opaque or inscrutable,
   if not obtuse, as well as aloof and self-sufficient. However, cats can
   be very affectionate towards their human companions, especially if they
   imprint on them at a very young age and are treated with consistent
   affection.

   Human attitudes toward cats vary widely. Some people keep cats for
   companionship as pets. Others go to great lengths to pamper their cats,
   sometimes treating them as if they were children. When a cat bonds with
   its owner, the cat may, at times, display behaviors similar to that of
   a human. Such behavior may include a trip to the litter box before
   bedtime or snuggling up close to its companion in bed or on the sofa.
   Other such behaviour includes mimicking sounds of the owner or using
   certain sounds the cat picks up from the human; sounds representing
   specific needs of the cat, which the owner would recognize, such as a
   specific tone of meow along with eye contact that may represent "I'm
   hungry." The cat may also be capable of learning to communicate with
   the human using non-spoken language or body language such as rubbing
   for affection (confirmation), facial expressions and making eye contact
   with the owner if something needs to be addressed (e.g., finding a bug
   crawling on the floor for the owner to get rid of). Some owners like to
   train their cat to perform "tricks" commonly exhibited by dogs such as
   jumping, though this is rare.

   Allergies to cat dander are one of the most common reasons people cite
   for disliking cats. However, in some instances, humans find the rewards
   of cat companionship outweigh the discomfort and problems associated
   with these allergies. Many choose to cope with cat allergies by taking
   prescription allergy medicine and bathing their cats frequently, since
   weekly bathing will eliminate about 90% of the cat dander present in
   the environment. Recent studies have indicated that humans who are
   exposed to cats or dogs within the first year of their lives develop
   few animal allergies, while most adults who are allergic to animals did
   not have a cat or a dog as a pet in childhood .

   In urban areas, some people find feral and free-roaming pet cats
   annoying and intrusive. Unaltered animals can engage in persistent
   nighttime calling (termed caterwauling) and defecation or "marking" of
   private property. Indoor confinement of pets and TNR (trap, neuter,
   return) programs for feral cats can help; some people also use cat
   deterrents to discourage cats from entering their property.

   In rural areas, farms often have dozens of semi-feral cats. Hunting in
   the barns and the fields, they kill and eat rodents that would
   otherwise spoil large parts of the grain crop. Many pet cats
   successfully hunt and kill rabbits, rodents, birds, lizards, frogs,
   fish, and large insects by instinct, but might not eat their prey. They
   may even present their kills, dead or maimed, to their humans, perhaps
   expecting them to praise or reward them, or possibly even to complete
   the kill and eat the mouse. Others speculate that the behaviour is a
   part of the odd relationship between human and cat, in which the cat is
   sometimes a 'kitten' (playing, being picked up and carried) and
   sometimes an adult (teaching these very large and peculiar kittens how
   to hunt by demonstrating what the point of it all is).
   Cat arching its back and hissing
   Enlarge
   Cat arching its back and hissing

   Despite its reputation as a solitary animal, the domestic cat is social
   enough to form colonies, but does not attack in groups as lions do.
   Some breeds like bengal, ocicat and manx are very social, but are
   exceptions. While each cat holds a distinct territory (sexually active
   males having the largest territories, and neutered cats having the
   smallest), there are "neutral" areas where cats watch and greet one
   another without territorial conflicts. Outside these neutral areas,
   territory holders usually aggressively chase away stranger cats, at
   first by staring, hissing, and growling, and if that does not work, by
   short but noisy and violent attacks. Fighting cats make themselves
   appear more impressive and threatening by raising their fur and arching
   their backs, thus increasing their visual size. Cats also behave this
   way while playing. Attacks usually comprise powerful slaps to the face
   and body with the forepaws as well as bites, but serious damage is
   rare; usually the loser runs away with little more than a few scratches
   to the face, and perhaps the ears. Normally, serious negative effects
   will be limited to possible infections of the scratches and bites;
   though these have been known to sometimes kill cats if untreated. In
   addition, such fighting is believed to be the primary route of
   transmission of feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV). Sexually active
   males will usually be in many fights during their lives, and often have
   decidedly battered faces with obvious scars and cuts to the ears and
   nose. Not only males will fight; females will also fight over territory
   or to defend their kittens, and even neutered cats will defend their
   (smaller) territories aggressively.

Feral cats

   Feral cats are thought to be a major predator of Hawaiian coastal and
   forest habitats, and are one species among many responsible for the
   decline of endemic forest bird species as well as seabirds like the
   Wedge-tailed Shearwater. In one study of 56 cat scats, the remains of
   44 birds were found, 40 of which were endemic species.
   Enlarge
   Feral cats are thought to be a major predator of Hawaiian coastal and
   forest habitats, and are one species among many responsible for the
   decline of endemic forest bird species as well as seabirds like the
   Wedge-tailed Shearwater. In one study of 56 cat scats, the remains of
   44 birds were found, 40 of which were endemic species.

   Feral cats may live alone, but most are found in large groups called
   feral colonies with communal nurseries, depending on resource
   availability. Some lost or abandoned pet cats succeed in joining these
   colonies, probably for lack of an alternative. The average lifespan of
   such feral cats is much shorter than a domestic housecat, which can
   live sixteen years or more. Urban areas in the developed world are not
   friendly, nor adapted environments for cats; most domestic cats are
   descended from cats in desert climates and were distributed throughout
   the world by humans. Nevertheless, some feral cat colonies are found in
   large cities, e.g., around the Colosseum and Forum Romanum in Rome.

   Although cats are adaptable, feral felines are unable to thrive in
   extreme cold and heat, and with a very high protein requirement, few
   find adequate nutrition on their own in cities. They have little
   protection or understanding of the dangers from dogs, coyotes, and even
   automobiles. However, there are thousands of volunteers and
   organizations that trap these unadoptable feral felines, spay or neuter
   them, immunize the cats against rabies and feline leukemia, and treat
   them with long-lasting flea products. Before release back into their
   feral colonies, the attending veterinarian often nips the tip off one
   ear to mark the feral as spayed/neutered and inoculated, since these
   cats will more than likely find themselves trapped again. Volunteers
   continue to feed and give care to these cats throughout their lives,
   and not only is their lifespan greatly increased, but behaviour and
   nuisance problems, due to competition for food, are also greatly
   reduced. In time, if an entire colony is successfully spayed and
   neutered, no additional kittens are born and the feral colony
   disappears. Many hope to see an end to urban feral cat colonies through
   these efforts.

Environmental issues

   There are two divergent views about cats’ relationship with the natural
   environment.
     * The first says: The environmental impact of feral cat programs and
       of indoor/outdoor cats is a subject of debate. Part of this stems
       from humane concern for the cats themselves and part arises from
       concerns about cat predation on endangered species. Nearly all
       studies agree that abandoned animals lead hard lives. Owners who
       can no longer keep their cats would do best to give them to
       friends, rescue organizations, or shelters. The amount of
       ecological damage done by indoor/outdoor cats depends on local
       conditions. The most severe effect occurs to island ecologies.
       Serious concerns also exist in places such as Florida where
       housecats are not native, where several small-sized endangered
       species live near human populations, and where the climate allows
       cats to breed throughout the year. Environmental concerns may be
       minimal in most of the UK where cats are an established species and
       few to none of the local prey species are endangered. Pet owners
       can contact veterinarians, ecological organizations, and
       universities for opinions about whether local conditions are
       suitable for outdoor cats. Additional concerns include potential
       dangers from larger predators and infectious diseases. Coyotes kill
       large numbers of housecats in the Southwestern United States, even
       in urban zones. FELV (feline leukemia), FIV (feline
       immunodeficiency virus), or rabies may be present in the area. If
       faced with conflicting evidence, the safe choice is to keep a cat
       indoors. Experts recommend a gradual transition to indoor life for
       cats who are accustomed to going outside.
     * Those opposing this view stress this allegation has never been
       proved. They say that damaging effects do not follow necessarily
       from the fact that cats are predators. They point out that cats
       have played a useful role in vermin control for centuries, and that
       for many animals, especially in urban areas, cats are the only
       animal available to fill the vital role of predator. Without cats
       these species would overpopulate.

Overpopulation

   According to the Humane Society of the United States, 3-4 million cats
   and dogs are euthanized each year in the United States and many more
   are confined to cages in shelters because there are significantly more
   animals being born than there are homes. Spaying or neutering pets
   helps keep the overpopulation down. Local humane societies, SPCA's and
   other animal protection organizations urge people to spay or neuter
   their pets and to adopt animals from shelters instead of purchasing
   them.

Varieties of domestic cat

   Cat with a van pattern.
   Enlarge
   Cat with a van pattern.

   The list of cat breeds is quite large: most cat registries recognize
   between 35 and 70 breeds of cats, and several more are in development,
   with one or more new breeds being recognized each year on average,
   having distinct features and heritage. The owners and breeders of show
   cats compete to see whose animal bears the closest resemblance to the
   "ideal" definition of the breed (see selective breeding). Because of
   common crossbreeding in populated areas, many cats are simply
   identified as belonging to the homogeneous breeds of domestic longhair
   and domestic shorthair, depending on their type of fur. In the United
   Kingdom and Australia, non-purebred cats are referred in slang as
   moggies (derived from "Maggie", short for Margaret, reputed to have
   been a common name for cows and calves in 18th-century England and
   latter applied to housecats during the Victorian era). In the United
   States, a non-purebred cat is sometimes referred to in slang as a barn
   or alley cat, even if it is not a stray.

   Cats come in a variety of colors and patterns. These are physical
   properties and should not be confused with a breed of cat.

   Household cats are divided into:
     * Domestic longhaired
     * Domestic shorthaired

Coat patterns

   Cat coat genetics can produce a variety of coat patterns. Some of the
   most common are:
   A male tuxedo cat.
   Enlarge
   A male tuxedo cat.
   A male bicolor cat.
   Enlarge
   A male bicolor cat.

   Bicolor, Tuxedo and Van
          This pattern varies between the tuxedo cat which is mostly black
          with a white chest, and possibly markings on the face and
          paws/legs, all the way to the Van pattern (so named after the
          Lake Van area in Turkey, which gave rise to the Turkish Van
          breed), where the only colored parts of the cat are the tail
          (usually including the base of the tail proper), and the top of
          the head (often including the ears). There are several other
          terms for amounts of white between these two extremes, such as
          harlequin or jellicle cat. Bicolor cats can have as their
          primary (non-white) colour black, red, any dilution thereof and
          tortoiseshell (see below for definition).

   A classic example of a mackerel tabby.
   Enlarge
   A classic example of a mackerel tabby.

   Tabby cat
          Striped, with a variety of patterns. The classic "blotched"
          tabby (or "marbled") pattern is the most common and consists of
          butterflies and bullseyes. The "mackerel" or "striped" tabby is
          a series of vertical stripes down the cat's side (resembling the
          fish). This pattern broken into spots is referred to as a
          "spotted" tabby. Finally, the tabby markings may look like a
          series of ticks on the fur, thus the "ticked" tabby, which is
          almost exclusively associated with the Abyssinian breed of cats.
          The worldwide evolution of the cat means that certain types of
          tabby are associated with certain countries; for instance,
          blotched tabbies are quite rare outside NW Europe, where they
          are the most common type.

   This tortoiseshell cat has black-orange-white fur and green eyes.
   Enlarge
   This tortoiseshell cat has black-orange-white fur and green eyes.

   Tortoiseshell and Calico
          This cat is also known as a Calimanco cat or Clouded Tiger cat,
          and by the nickname "tortie". In the cat fancy, a tortoiseshell
          cat is randomly patched over with red (or its dilute form,
          cream) and black (or its dilute blue) mottled throughout the
          coat. Additionally, the cat may have white spots in its fur,
          which make it a "tortoiseshell and white" cat or, if there is a
          significant amount of white in the fur and the red and black
          colors form a patchwork rather than a mottled aspect, the cat
          will be called a "calico". All calicos are tortoiseshell (as
          they carry both black and red), but not all tortoiseshells are
          calicos (which requires a significant amount of white in the fur
          and patching rather than mottling of the colors). The calico is
          also sometimes called a "tricolor cat". The Japanese refer to
          this pattern as mi-ke (meaning "triple fur"), while the Dutch
          call these cats lapjeskat (meaning "patches cat"). A true
          tricolor must consist of three colors: a reddish color, dark or
          light; white; and one other colour, typically a brown, black or
          blue, as described by American breeder Barbara French, writing
          for the Cat Fanciers community. Both tortoiseshell and calico
          cats are typically female because the coat pattern is the result
          of differential X chromosome inactivation in females (which, as
          with all normal female mammals, have two X chromosomes). Those
          male tortoiseshells that are created are usually sterile;
          conversely, cats where the overall colour is ginger (orange) are
          commonly male (roughly in a 3:1 ratio). In a litter sired by a
          ginger tom, the females will be tortoiseshell or ginger. See "
          Tortoiseshell and Tricolour Cats" for an extensive genetic
          explanation for tricolor cats, and detailing the possible
          combinations of coloring.

   Colorpoint
          A flame point Siamese mix.

          Enlarge
          A flame point Siamese mix.
          The colorpoint pattern is most commonly associated with Siamese
          cats, but may also appear in any domestic cat. A colorpoint cat
          has dark colors on the face, ears, feet, and tail, with a
          lighter version of the same color on the rest of the body, and
          possibly some white. The exact name of the colorpoint pattern
          depends on the actual colour, so there are seal points (dark
          brown), chocolate points (warm lighter brown), blue points (dark
          gray), lilac points (silvery gray-pink), flame points (orange),
          and tortie (tortoiseshell mottling) points, among others. It
          should also be noted that colorpoint cats tend to darken with
          age, and the fur over a significant injury may sometimes darken
          or lighten depending on circumstances because pigment synthesis
          in the fur is temperature-sensitive.

Body types

   Cats can also come in several body types, ranging between two extremes:

   Oriental
          Not a specific breed, but any cat with an elongated slender
          build, almond-shaped eyes, long nose, large ears (the Siamese
          and oriental shorthair breeds are examples of this).

   Cobby
          Any cat with a short, muscular, compact build, roundish eyes,
          short nose, and small ears. Persians and Exotics are two prime
          examples of such a body type.

History and mythology

   Egyptian sculpture at the Louvre
   Enlarge
   Egyptian sculpture at the Louvre

   Cats have been kept by humans since at least ancient Egypt. In ancient
   Egypt, the cat god, Bast, was a goddess of the home and of the domestic
   cat, although she sometimes took on the war-like aspect of a lioness.
   She was the daughter of the sun god Ra, although she was sometimes
   regarded as the daughter of Amun. She was the wife of Ptah and mother
   of the lion-god Mihos. Her cult was centered on her sanctuary at
   Bubastis in the Nile Delta, where a necropolis has been found
   containing mummified cats. Bast was also associated with the " eye of
   Ra," acting as the instrument of the sun god's vengeance. She was
   depicted as a cat or in human form with the head of a cat, often
   holding the sacred rattle known as the sistrum.

   It has been speculated that because of circumstantial evidence (which
   to date is unproved by DNA testing) cats resident in Kenya's Islands in
   the Lamu Archipelago may be the last living direct descendants of the
   sacred cats of ancient Egypt. The suggestive evidence is: similar body
   conformation, archeologically proven history of 1000 years habitation,
   ancient Red Sea trade between Lamu and Egypt, genetic insular
   isolation.

   According to Norse legend, Gleipnir (the fine ribbon used to bind
   Fenrir) was crafted by dwarfs from, among other items, the sound a cat
   makes when walking.

   Several ancient religions believe that cats are exalted souls,
   companions or guides for humans, that they are all-knowing but are mute
   so they cannot influence decisions made by humans.

   Muezza (Arabic: ﻣﻮﻴﺰا‎ ​) was the Prophet Muhammad's favorite cat. The
   most famous story about Muezza recounts how the call to prayer was
   given, and as Muhammad went to put on one of his robes, he found his
   cat sleeping on one of the sleeves, and instead of disturbing the cat
   he cut off the sleeve and let him sleep. When he returned, Muezza awoke
   and bowed down to Muhammad, and in return he stroked him three times. A
   similar story is told about an unnamed Emperor of China.

   It is common lore that cats have nine lives. It is a tribute to their
   perceived durability, their occasional apparent lack of instinct for
   self-preservation, and their seeming ability to survive falls that
   would be fatal to other animals.

   A medieval King of Wales, Hywel Dda (the Good) passed legislation
   making it illegal to kill or harm a cat. Other cultures of the time
   considered them evil, unlucky, or the consorts of witches.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cat"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
