   #copyright

Catherine Cranston

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: British History Post 1900

   The resolute Kate Cranston around 1903, dressed in the style of the
   1850s.
   Enlarge
   The resolute Kate Cranston around 1903, dressed in the style of the
   1850s.

   Catherine Cranston ( 27 May 1849 – 18 April 1934), widely known as Kate
   Cranston or Miss Cranston, was a leading figure in the development of
   the social phenomenon of tea rooms. She is nowadays chiefly remembered
   as a major patron of Charles Rennie Mackintosh and Margaret MacDonald
   in Glasgow, Scotland, but the name of Miss Cranston's Tea Rooms lives
   on in reminiscences of Glasgow in its heyday.

Background

   Her father George Cranston was a baker and pastry maker and in 1849,
   the year of her birth, he became proprietor of the Edinburgh and
   Glasgow Railway Chop House and Commercial Lodgings at No. 39 George
   Square in Glasgow city centre. The hotel was renamed the Royal Horse,
   then by May 1852 was Cranston's Hotel and Dining Rooms, offering:

          "Convenient Coffee room and detached Smoking Rooms on Ground
          Floor, commodious Commercial Room and Parlour, comfortable
          Bed-rooms and Baths, &c. Coffee always ready. Cigars, wines,
          spirits, ales, Newspapers, Time-Tables, Writing Materials.
          Superior and varied Bill of Fare at the usual moderate charges.

   Her slightly older brother Stuart (1848-1921) became a tea dealer and,
   according to Glasgow in 1901, was "a pioneer of the business" there of
   "tea shops pure and simple" who by 1901 had three such tearooms
   offering nothing more substantial to eat than a sandwich. Kate went on
   to create much more of a social facility.

   Like other cities in the United Kingdom, Glasgow was then a centre of
   the temperance movement which sought an alternative to male-centred
   pubs. Tea had previously been a luxury for the rich, but from the 1830s
   it was promoted as an alternative to alcoholic drinks, and many new
   cafés and coffee houses were opened, catering more for ordinary people.
   However it was not until the 1880s that tea rooms and tea shops became
   popular and fashionable.

Miss Cranston's Tea Rooms

   Poster design by Charles Rennie Mackintosh.
   Enlarge
   Poster design by Charles Rennie Mackintosh.

   In 1878 Miss Kate Cranston opened her first tearoom, the Crown Luncheon
   Room, on Argyle Street, Glasgow. She set high standards of service,
   food quality and cleanliness, and her innovation lay in seeing the
   social need for something more than a restaurant or a simple "tea
   shop", and in putting equal attention into providing amenities designed
   in the latest style. Her first tearoom was decorated in a contemporary
   baronial style. On 16 September 1886 she opened her Ingram Street
   tearoom and in 1888 commissioned George Walton to decorate a new
   smoking room in the Arts and Crafts style in one of her tea rooms.

   In 1892 she became happily married to John Cochrane, but continued to
   trade under the name of Miss Cranston's Tearooms. She opened new
   tearooms in Buchanan Street in 1897, expanded to take over the whole
   building in Argyle Street by 1898, then completed her chain of four
   establishments with the Willow Tearooms in Sauchiehall Street, opened
   in 1903.

   While other cities offered very expensive and very basic tea rooms by
   1901, Kate Cranston set the standard in Glasgow for more welcoming
   establishments. Rooms were provided for ladies only and for gentlemen
   only, as well as luncheon rooms where they could dine together and
   smoking rooms and billiards rooms for the gentlemen. Miss Cranston's
   Tea Rooms became social centres for all, for business men and
   apprentices, for ladies and ladies' maids. The Ladies Rooms were a
   particular success, newly allowing respectable women to get out and
   meet together without male company. Unlike cafes or tearooms in other
   cities, there was no intrusive supervision and those having tea had an
   assortment of Scones and cakes to hand, with a discreet notice
   reminding newcomers to remember the amount consumed. At "the
   accounting", Glasgow in 1901 reported, "One states the amount of ones
   indebtedness, and receives a check therefor from the attendant maiden.
   This, with the corresponding coin or coins, one hands in at the
   pay-desk, and so home. Nothing could be simpler or less irritating."

   The city was a centre of artistic innovation at the time, and the
   tearooms served as art galleries for paintings by the " Glasgow Boys".
   The architect Sir Edwin Lutyens visited the Buchanan Street tearoom in
   1898, finding it "just a little outré", and wrote from there to his
   wife that "Miss Cranston is now Mrs. Cochrane, a dark, fat wee body
   with black sparkling luminous eyes, wears a bonnet garnished with
   roses, and has made a fortune by supplying cheap clean goods in
   surroundings prompted by the New Art Glasgow School."

   Tea rooms opened around the city, and in the late 1880s fine hotels
   elsewhere in Britain and in America began to offer tea service in tea
   rooms and tea courts. Glasgow in 1901 reported that "Glasgow, in truth,
   is a very Tokio for tea-rooms. Nowhere can one have so much for so
   little, and nowhere are such places more popular and frequented." and
   that "It is not the accent of the people, nor the painted houses, nor
   yet the absence of Highland policemen that makes the Glasgow man in
   London feel that he is in a foreign town and far from home. It is a
   simpler matter. It is the lack of tea-shops."

Walton and Mackintosh

   Mackintosh's design for the frieze at the Buchanan Street tearoom.
   Enlarge
   Mackintosh's design for the frieze at the Buchanan Street tearoom.

   George Walton set up George Walton & Co, Ecclesiastical and House
   Decorators on the basis of his 1888 commission from Kate Cranston, and
   in 1896 was commissioned by her to design the interiors of new
   tearooms, designed and built by George Washington Brown of Edinburgh,
   at 91-93 Buchanan Street, which opened the following year. He was
   assisted in this by Charles Rennie Mackintosh who designed wall murals
   in the form of stencilled friezes depicting opposing pairs of elongated
   female figures surrounded by roses for the ladies’ tearoom, the
   luncheon room and the smokers’ gallery. "It is believed (and averred)
   that in no other town can you see in a place of refreshment such
   ingenious and beautiful decorations in the style of the new art as in
   Miss Cranston's shop in Buchanan Street. Indeed, so general in the city
   is this belief that it has caused the Glasgow man of the better sort to
   coin a new adjective denoting the height of beauty... 'It's quite Kate
   Cranston-ish !' "

   Kate Cranston expanded her first tearoom to take over the whole
   building at 114 Argyle Street and commissioned Walton to design a new
   more modern interior, which opened in 1898. Walton's work included
   fireplaces, stencilled wall murals and stained glass panels for the
   doors. In the luncheon room the murals and door panels had a rose
   pattern theme. The furniture was designed by Mackintosh, introducing
   for the first time his characteristic high-backed chairs.

   In 1900 Kate Cranston gave Mackintosh the opportunity to redesign an
   entire room, at the Ingram Street tearoom. He had just recently married
   the artist Margaret Macdonald, and together they created the White
   Dining Room, including a hallway opening onto the street and divided
   off by a wooden screen with leaded glass panels, giving those entering
   glimpses into the room itself. His fame was spreading, and in 1902 The
   Studio wrote of "Miss Cranston, whose tea-rooms, designed by Mr.
   Mackintosh, are reckoned by some of the pilgrims to Glasgow as one of
   the sights of the city."

The Willow Tearooms

   Miss Cranston's waitresses, seen in the Room de Luxe of the Willow Tea
   Rooms.
   Enlarge
   Miss Cranston's waitresses, seen in the Room de Luxe of the Willow Tea
   Rooms.

   Next Kate Cranston gave Mackintosh the major commission for an entire
   building in Sauchiehall Street, again in collaboration with his wife
   Margaret MacDonald on designs for the interiors. Behind a strikingly
   simple new façade this building provided three interlinked main
   tearooms at the ground floor and on a first floor gallery, with steps
   from that leading up a further half storey to the famous "Room de Luxe"
   stretching the width of the building above the main entrance and front
   tearoom.

   In a humorous review of the new tearoom for the Glasgow Evening News
   titled Erchie in an Art Tea Room, Neil Munro described the "Room de
   Looks": "The chairs is no like ony ither chairs ever I clapped eyes on,
   but ye could easy guess they were chairs, and a' roond the place
   there's a lump o' looking-gless wi' purple leeks pented on it every noo
   and then."

   In 1905 Dekorative Kunst featured a special issue about the Willow Tea
   Rooms written by Hermann Muthesius who advised that "Today any visitor
   to Glasgow can rest body and soul in Miss Cranston's Tea Rooms and for
   a few pence drink tea, have breakfast and dream that he is in fairy
   land."

Further projects

   Menu design by Margaret MacDonald Mackintosh.
   Enlarge
   Menu design by Margaret MacDonald Mackintosh.

   Although the Willow Tearooms completed her chain, and remains the most
   famous of her tea rooms, Kate Cranston carried out several more
   projects, and Mackintosh provided increasingly innovative designs. In
   1904 she commissioned him to carry out the redecoration and design of
   new furniture for the mansion of Hous'hill in Nitshill which was home
   to herself and her husband John Cochrane.

   Mackintosh carried out further work on the Argyle Street tearoom in
   1906 to design a basement conversion to form The Dutch kitchen. He did
   further redesigns for rooms in the Ingram Street tearooms, creating the
   Cloister Room and the Chinese Room in 1911. The latter provides an
   exotic fantasy, with bright blue finished timber screens incorporating
   a cashier's kiosk, elaborate door lintels and dark blue finished
   furniture, all in Mackintosh's version of an oriental style.

   In the same year Kate Cranston provided temporary "Exhibition Cafes" at
   the Scottish Interational Exhibition, apparently set up and designed by
   Charles Rennie Mackintosh, though nothing is now known of his scheme
   for this. The menu card designed by Margaret MacDonald Mackintosh shows
   the name for the tearooms, The White Cockade, but makes no visual
   connection with this reference to Jacobitism. It gives credit for
   supply of cakes to Miss Cranstons Bakery, 292 St Vincent St., Glasgow.
   Design for The Dug Out.
   Enlarge
   Design for The Dug Out.

   In 1916 Kate opened Cranston's Cinema De Luxe in an entertainment
   complex designed for her by the architect James Miller, occupying the
   third floor of a six storey building in Renfield Street, Glasgow.

   In 1917 Mackintosh carried out his last commission for Kate Cranston,
   and indeed one of his last architectural works to be constructed, with
   the design of an extension of the Willow Tea Rooms into the basement of
   the building next door to create The Dug Out in a style that
   anticipated Art Deco.

   Kate Cranston was greatly distressed when her husband died in 1917. She
   sold off her tea rooms and other businesses, and withdrew from public
   life. She had no children, and when she died in 1934 her will left two
   thirds of her estate to the poor of Glasgow.

Legacy

   The Room de Luxe of the Willow Tearooms today.
   Enlarge
   The Room de Luxe of the Willow Tearooms today.

   Even though Kate Cranston had sold her tea rooms off, the name Miss
   Cranston's Tea Rooms long remained a byword for quality and for
   memories of Glasgow's heyday at the turn of the century. By 1938 tea
   rooms at 43 Argyll Arcade, 28 Buchanan Street, Renfield Street and
   Queen Street were being run by Cranston's Tea Rooms Ltd. They went into
   liquidation in 1954 and their premises were sold on for other uses.

   The Willow Tearooms were renamed, then in 1928 they were sold on to
   Daly's department store who incorporated the premises into their shop,
   keeping the Room de Luxe in operation as the department store tea room.

   Miss Cranston's Tearooms on Ingram Street continued in use as catering
   facilities from 1930 for Cooper's & Co., then in 1950 the rooms came
   into the ownership of Glasgow City Council and were used for storage
   and a souvenir shop. In 1971 the furnishings were removed into storage
   when the building was demolished, and they are now the only original
   set of Mackintosh tearoom interiors to survive. Ownership was
   transferred to Glasgow Museums in 1978, and after a further period of
   storage restoration work began in 1993. The Ladies' Luncheon Room was
   exhibited three years later, and the Chinese Room and Cloister Room
   have since been restored. The Glasgow Museums website reports that they
   are "currently assessing what will be needed to research and preserve
   the Charles Rennie Mackintosh interiors of the Ingram Street Tearooms
   for future public display."
   The restored Willow Tearooms building.
   Enlarge
   The restored Willow Tearooms building.

   While Mackintosh's reputation was eclipsed by the 1920s, he was later
   recognised as a pioneer of modern architecture, particularly in terms
   of the exterior of the Willow Tea Rooms. In the 1960s a resurgence of
   interest in Art Nouveau brought him international fame, and the
   furniture and designs he and his wife created for Kate Cranston are now
   extremely valuable.

   When Daly's closed, the Willow Tea Rooms were restored to an
   approximation of their original appearance. Catering reopened in the
   Room de Luxe, later extending to the recreated Tea Gallery, and was so
   successful that the business opened a new tearoom on the first floor of
   a building in Buchanan Street, near the original Buchanan Street and
   Ingram Street tearooms, fitted out with replicas of the White Dining
   Room and the Chinese Room from the Ingram Street tearoom. Confusingly,
   it trades under the name of The Willow Tea Rooms, as this now appears
   to be more familiar to visitors than Miss Cranston's name.

   However, these new tearooms draw renewed attention to the contribution
   Kate's patronage made to Mackintosh's work, and the impact she had on
   the social life of Glasgow is still remembered in popular books such as
   Tea at Miss Cranston's.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catherine_Cranston"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
