   #copyright

Celeriac

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Food and agriculture;
Plants

                   iCeleriac
           Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Plantae
   Division: Magnoliophyta
   Class:    Magnoliopsida
   Order:    Apiales
   Family:   Apiaceae
   Genus:    Apium
   Species:  A. graveolens

                               Cultivar Group

   Apium graveolens Rapaceum Group

   Celeriac (Apium graveolens Rapaceum Group) (also known as
   'turnip-rooted celery' or 'knob celery') is a specially selected
   Cultivar Group of celery, grown as a root vegetable for its large and
   well-developed taproot rather than for its stem and leaves. The root is
   used when it is about 10-12 cm in diameter, or the size of a large
   potato. Celeriac may be used raw or fresh. It is best to peel celeriac
   before use, since the outer skin is tough and stringy. It has the
   celery flavor, so it is often used as a flavoring in soups and stews;
   it can also be mashed or used in casseroles and baked dishes. The
   hollow stalk of the upper plant can be cut into drinking straw lengths,
   rinsed out, and used for tomato drinks such as the Bloody Mary. The
   tomato juice moving through the stalk is lightly permeated with the
   celery flavor. Nutritionally, celeriac is low in carbohydrates.

   It is not as popular as other root vegetables, especially in the
   western hemisphere, very possibly because of its garish appearance
   before cleaning: it has been described as "a vegetable octopus" in
   reference to the tangle of rootlets that grow at the base.

   There are numerous cultivars available, especially in Europe, where
   root vegetables are popular. Among the types are 'Prinz', 'Diamant',
   'Ibis', and 'Kojak', which all received Royal Horticultural Society
   Award of Garden Merit designation in the year 2000 trials.

   Celeriac has good keeping properties and should last three to four
   months if stored between 0° and 5° C and not allowed to dry out.

Allergies from celery and celeriac

          see Celery

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Celeriac"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
