   #copyright

Celine Dion

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Performers and composers

   Céline Dion
   Dion singing "God Bless America" at a May 2, 2002 concert aboard the
   USS Harry S. Truman.
   Dion singing " God Bless America" at a May 2, 2002 concert aboard the
   USS Harry S. Truman.
   Background information
   Birth name Céline Marie Claudette Dion
   Born March 30, 1968
   Origin Charlemagne, Quebec, Canada
   Genre(s) Pop, Classical, Adult Contemporary
   Occupation(s) Vocalist
   Years active 1981- present
   Label(s) Epic Records/ 550 Music (1990 -present)
   Website celinedion.com

   Céline Marie Claudette Dion (OC, OQ) (born March 30, 1968) is a French
   Canadian Grammy and Juno award winning pop singer and occasional
   songwriter and actress. She began her career in the early 1980s as a
   French singer before breaking into the international music scene in the
   1990s.

   Dion was born to a large, impoverished family in Charlemagne, Quebec.
   As a teen, she achieved success in francophone Canada after her manager
   and future husband, René Angélil, mortgaged his home in order to
   finance her first record. She later gained recognition in parts of
   Europe and Asia after she won both the 1982 Yamaha World Popular Song
   Festival and the 1988 Eurovision Song Contest. In 1990 Dion established
   a foothold in the anglophone music market with the release of Unison,
   published by Epic Records. During the 1990s she achieved worldwide fame
   and success with several English and French records, of which her most
   successful were Falling into You (1996) and " My Heart Will Go On"
   (1998), the theme to the 1997 film Titanic. In 1999 she announced a
   temporary break from entertainment in order to focus on her husband,
   who was diagnosed with throat cancer.

   Following a three-year hiatus, Dion returned to the music scene with
   the release of the aptly titled A New Day Has Come. By 2004 she had
   accumulated record sales of 175 million, and was presented with the
   Chopard Diamond award from the World Music Awards show for becoming the
   Best-selling Female Artist in the World. As of 2003 Dion has performed
   nightly in her show A New Day... at Caesars Palace, Las Vegas, under a
   contract that extends through 2007. Dion's music has been influenced by
   various genres, which range from pop and rock to gospel and classical,
   and she is noted for her technically skilled and powerful vocals.

Childhood and early career

   The youngest of fourteen children born to Adhémar Dion and Thérèse
   Tanguay, Celine Dion was raised a Roman Catholic in a poverty-stricken
   but "happy home" in Charlemagne, a small town about thirty miles from
   Montreal. Dion grew up singing with her siblings in the small piano bar
   belonging to her parents called 'Le Vieux Baril,' and had always wanted
   to become a singer: in a 1994 interview with People magazine, she
   recalled, "I missed my family and my home, but I don't regret having
   lost my adolescence. I had one dream: I wanted to be a singer."

   At age twelve Dion collaborated with her mother and her brother
   Jacques, to compose her first song, " Ce N'Était Qu'un Rêve " ("It Was
   Only a Dream"). Her brother Michel sent the recording to music manager
   René Angélil, whose name he discovered on the back of a Ginette Reno
   album. Angélil was brought to tears by Dion's voice and decided to make
   her a star. He mortgaged his home to fund her first record, " La Voix
   du Bon Dieu" (a play on words "The Voice of God/The Road to God")
   (1981). It became a local number-one record and made Dion an instant
   star in Quebec. Her popularity also spread to other parts of the world
   when she competed in the 1982 Yamaha World Popular Song Festival in
   Tokyo, Japan, and won the musician's award for "Top Performer" as well
   as the gold medal for "Best Song" with " Tellement J'Ai d'Amour Pour
   Toi" ("I Have So Much Love For You"). By 1983, in addition to becoming
   the first Canadian artist to receive a gold record in France for the
   single " D'Amour Ou d'Amitié" ("Of Love or of Friendship"), Dion had
   also won several Félix awards, including "Best Female performer" and
   "Discovery of the year".

   At eighteen, Dion saw Michael Jackson performing on television and she
   told Angélil that she wanted to be a star like Jackson. Even though
   Angelil was confident in her talent, he realized that in order for her
   to be marketed worldwide, her image needed to be changed. Dion receded
   from the spotlight for a number of months, during which she underwent a
   physical makeover.

   Further success in Europe, Asia, and Australia came in 1987, when Dion
   represented Switzerland in the 1988 Eurovision Song Contest with the
   song " Ne Partez Pas Sans Moi" ("Don't Go Without Me") and won the
   contest in Dublin, Ireland. However, her American success was yet to
   come, partially due to her status as a francophone artist. Finally,
   Dion was sent to the École Berlitz School in 1989 to polish her English
   and interviewing skills. It marked the start of her anglophone career.

Music and recording career

1990–1992: Career breakthrough

   A year after she learned English, Dion made an attempt at breaking into
   the anglophone market with Unison (1990). She incorporated the help of
   many established musicians, including Canadian producer David Foster
   and Vito Luprano. The album was largely influenced by 1980s soft rock
   that was fit for the adult contemporary radio format. Unison hit the
   right notes with critics: Jim Faber of Entertainment Weekly wrote that
   Dion's vocals were "tastefully unadorned," and that she never attempted
   to "bring off styles that are beyond her." Stephen Erlewine of All
   Music Guide declared it as "a fine, sophisticated American debut."
   Singles from the album included " (If There Was) Any Other Way," " The
   Last to Know," " Unison," and " Where Does My Heart Beat Now," a
   mid-tempo soft-rock ballad which featured an electric guitar. The
   latter became her first single to chart on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100,
   peaking at number four and number two on the AC chart. The album
   established Dion as a rising music artist in the United States, and
   across Continental Europe and Asia. In 1991, Dion was also a soloist in
   " Voices That Care", a tribute to American troops fighting in Operation
   Desert Storm; the single went Top 10 in the U.S.

   While Dion was enjoying her rising success in the U.S., her French fans
   criticized her for neglecting them. After she won "Anglophone Artist of
   the Year" at the Felix Awards show, she attempted to reconnect with her
   French fans by openly refusing to accept the award. She stated she was
   — and will always be— a French, and not an English artist.

   Dion's real international breakthrough came when she paired up with
   Peabo Bryson to record the title track to Disney's animated film Beauty
   and the Beast (1991). The song captured a musical style that Dion would
   utilize in the future: sweeping, classically influenced ballads with
   soft instrumentation. Both a critical and commercial smash, the song
   became her second U.S. top ten hit, and also won the Academy Award for
   Best Song, and the Grammy Award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or
   Group with Vocal. " Beauty and the Beast" was featured on Dion's 1992
   eponymous album, which, like her debut, had a strong rock influence
   that was combined with elements of soul and classical music. Due to the
   success of the lead-off single and her collaboration with Foster and
   Diane Warren, the album was as well received as Unison. Other singles
   that achieved moderate success included " If You Asked Me To" (a cover
   of Patti LaBelle's song from the 1989 movie Licence to Kill) which
   peaked at number four on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100, the gospel-tinged
   " Love Can Move Mountains," and " Nothing Broken but My Heart." As with
   Dion's earlier releases, the album had an overtone of love.

   By 1992, Unison, Céline Dion and media appearances had propelled Dion
   to superstardom in the North America. She had achieved one of her main
   objectives: wedging her way into the anglophone market and establishing
   fame. Apart from her rising success, there were also changes in Dion's
   personal life, as Angélil would make the transition from manager to
   lover. However, the relationship was kept a secret as both feared that
   the public would find the twenty-six-year difference between their ages
   incongruous.

1993–1995: Popularity established

   In 1993, Dion publicly indicated her feelings for her manager by
   declaring him "the colour of [her] love" in the dedication section of
   her third anglophone album The Colour of My Love. However, instead of
   criticizing their relationship as Dion had feared, fans embraced the
   couple. Eventually, Angelil and Dion married in an extravagant wedding
   ceremony in December 1994.

   As it was dedicated to her manager, the album's motif focused on love
   and romance. The album spawned Dion's first U.S. number-one single "
   The Power of Love" (a remake of Jennifer Rush's 1985 hit). However,
   subsequent singles such as " When I Fall in Love" (a duet with Clive
   Griffin), " Misled", and " Think Twice" failed to reach the top twenty
   on the Billboard charts. The album proved more successful in Europe,
   and in particular the United Kingdom, where both the album and "Think
   Twice" simultaneously occupied the top of the respective British charts
   for five consecutive weeks. "Think Twice," which remained at number one
   for seven weeks, went on to become the fourth single by a female artist
   to sell in excess of one million copies in the UK.

   Dion kept to her French roots, and continued to release many
   francophone recordings between each English record. These included Dion
   Chante Plamondon (1991); À l'Olympia (1994), a live album that was
   recorded during one of Dion's concerts at the Olympia Theatre in Paris;
   and D'eux (1995 — also known as The French Album in the United States),
   which would go on to become the best-selling French album of all time.
   As these albums were in French, the worldwide commercial success was
   limited. However, Dion's francophone fans embraced each release, and
   generally, they achieved more credibility than her anglophone works.

   The mid-1990s was a transitional period for Dion's musical style, as
   she slowly moved away from strong rock influences and transitioned into
   a more pop and soul style (though the electric guitar remained a
   central part of her music.) Her songs began with more delicate melodies
   that used softer instrumentations, and built up to strong climaxes,
   over which her vocals could be displayed. This new sound received mixed
   reviews from critics, with Arion Berger of Entertainment Weekly
   accusing her of preferring vocal acrobatics over dynamics, and
   embarking on a trend of uninspiring, "crowd-pleasing ballads."
   Resultantly, she earned frequent comparisons to artists such as Whitney
   Houston and Mariah Carey. There were also signs that her work was
   becoming more clichéd: critically, The Colour of My Love was not
   consistent with earlier works. However, while critical praise declined,
   Dion's releases performed increasingly well on the international
   charts, and in 1996, she won the World Music Award for "World’s
   Best-Selling Canadian Female Recording Artist of the Year" — a title
   she had earned twice before. By the mid-1990s, she had established
   herself as one of the best-selling artists in the world, among female
   performers such as Carey and Houston.

1996–1999: Worldwide commercial success

   Falling into You ( 1996) presented Dion at the height of her
   popularity, and showed a further progression of her music. In an
   attempt to reach a wider audience, the album combined many elements:
   ornate orchestral frills and African chanting, and instruments like the
   violin, Spanish guitar, trombone, the cavaquinho, and saxophone created
   a new sound. The singles encompassed a variety of musical styles: the
   title track and " River Deep, Mountain High" (a Tina Turner cover) made
   prominent use of percussion instruments; " It's All Coming Back to Me
   Now" (a remake of Jim Steinman's song) and a remake of Eric Carmen's "
   All by Myself" kept their soft-rock atmosphere, but were combined with
   the classical sound of the piano; and the maudlin ballad, " Because You
   Loved Me", written by Diane Warren, served as the theme to the 1996
   film Up Close & Personal. The song spent two weeks at number one in
   Canada and six weeks at number one in the United States.

   Falling into You was met with generally favorable reviews. On the one
   hand, Dan Leroy wrote that Falling into You was not very different from
   her previous work, and Stephen Holden of The New York Times and Elysa
   Gardner of Los Angeles Times wrote that the album was formulaic, and
   there was a lack of emotional connection to the songs. However, other
   critics such as Chuck Eddy, Erlewine and Daniel Durchholz lavished the
   album as "compelling," "passionate," "stylish," "elegant," and
   "remarkably well-crafted." Falling Into You became Dion's most
   critically and commercially successful album: it topped the charts in
   eleven countries and became one of the best-selling albums of all time.
   It also won Grammy Awards for Best Pop Album and Album of the Year.
   Dion's status on the world stage was further solidified when she was
   asked to perform "The Power of the Dream" at the opening ceremonies of
   the 1996 Atlanta Olympic Games. In March 1996, Céline launched the
   Falling into You Tour in support of her new album, giving concerts
   around the world for over a year.

   Dion followed Falling into You with Let's Talk About Love ( 1997),
   which she publicized as its sequel. The recording process took place in
   London, New York City, and Los Angeles, and featured a host of special
   guests: Barbra Streisand on "Tell Him;" the Bee Gees on " Immortality;"
   and world-renowned tenor Luciano Pavarotti on "I Hate You Then I Love
   You." Other musicians included Carole King, Sir George Martin, and
   Jamaican singer Diana King, who added a reggae tinge to "Treat Her Like
   a Lady." As the name suggests, the album had the same theme as Dion's
   preceding albums: "love." However, emphasis was also placed on
   "brotherly love" with "Where Is the Love" and "Let's Talk About Love".
   The most successful single from the album became the classically
   influenced ballad " My Heart Will Go On," which was composed by James
   Horner, and produced by Horner and Walter Afanasieff. Serving as the
   love theme for the 1997 blockbuster film Titanic, the song topped the
   charts in many countries across the world, and has become Dion's
   signature song.

   Dion embarked on the Let's Talk About Love Tour between 1998 and 1999
   in support of her album. Comments were mostly favorable, but much focus
   was placed on her on-stage movements, which often consisted of
   chest-pounding, backward bending, and other flashy movements. While
   some people found these bombastic and even silly, others simply saw it
   as another extension of Dion's commanding stage presence.

   Dion ended the 1990s with two more successful albums: the Christmas
   album, These Are Special Times (1998), and All the Way... A Decade of
   Song (1999). On These Are Special Times, Dion had a hand in writing
   some of the material. The album was her most classically influenced
   yet, with orchestral arrangements found on all tracks. " I'm Your
   Angel," a duet with R. Kelly, became Dion's fourth and final U.S.
   number one single, and another hit single across the world. All the
   Way... A Decade of Song was a compilation of her most successful hits
   coupled with seven new songs, including the leadoff single "That's the
   Way It Is," a cover of Roberta Flack's " The First Time Ever I Saw Your
   Face," and " All the Way," a duet with Frank Sinatra.

   By the end of the 1990s Celine Dion had sold nearly 100 million albums
   worldwide, and had won a slew of industry awards. Her status as one of
   the biggest divas of contemporary music was further solidified when she
   was asked to perform on VH1's Divas Live special in 1998, with
   superstars Aretha Franklin, Gloria Estefan, Shania Twain, and Mariah
   Carey. That year she also received two of the highest honours from her
   home country: "Officer of the Order of Canada for Outstanding
   Contribution to the World of Contemporary Music" and "Officer of the
   National Order of Quebec." A year later she was inducted into the
   Canadian Broadcast Hall of Fame, and was honoured with a star on
   Canada's Walk of Fame. She also won the Grammy awards for " Best Female
   Pop Vocals" and the most coveted " Record of the Year" for " My Heart
   Will Go On" (the song won four awards, but two were presented to the
   songwriters).

   Compared to her debut, both the quality and sound of Dion's music had
   also changed significantly. The soft-rock influences on her earlier
   releases were no longer prominent; they were replaced by more
   soul/adult contemporary styles. However, the theme of "love" remained
   in all her releases, and this led to many critics dismissing her work
   as banal. In a scathing review of Let's Talk About Love, Rob O'Connor
   wrote:

     "What never ceases to amaze me is how the trite-est, most
     cliché-ridden music often takes an assembly-line of lauded music
     industry professionals to perfect... Sinking ships are what I
     imagine as this tune [" My Heart Will Go On"] plows onward of
     four-plus minutes, and this album feels as if were never to end. Is
     it no wonder why I have such fears of going to the dentist?"

   Dion was also criticized for some of her remakes and duets: "The First
   Time Ever I Saw Your Face" and "All the Way" were described as
   disastrous and "creepy" by Allison Stewart of The Chicago Tribune and
   Erlwine of All Music Guide. Even though she was still praised for her
   vocal abilities (Gardner of L.A Times called her voice a "technical
   marvel,") the much favored vocal restraint heard on her early releases
   had also waned, and Steve Dollar, in reviewing These Are Special Times
   wrote that Dion was a "vocal Olympian for whom there ain't no
   mountain—or scale—high enough."

2000–2002: Career break

   After releasing and promoting thirteen albums during the 1990s, Dion
   felt that she needed to settle down, and announced on her final album,
   All the Way... A Decade of Song, that she had experienced many things
   and needed to take a step back and enjoy life. Angélil's diagnosis with
   throat cancer also prompted her to retire. After undergoing fertility
   treatments, she gave birth to a son, René-Charles Dion Angélil, on
   January 25, 2001.

   While on break, Dion was unable to escape the spotlight. In late 2002,
   the National Enquirer published a false story about the singer.
   Brandishing a picture of Dion and her husband, the magazine misquoted
   Dion, printing the headline: "Celine — 'I'm Pregnant With Twins!'" Dion
   later sued the magazine for over twenty million dollars. The editors of
   the Enquirer printed an apology and a full retraction to Dion in the
   next issue, and donated money to the American Cancer Society in honour
   of Dion and her husband.

   Following the September 11, 2001 attacks, Dion returned to the music
   scene and in a televised performance sang " God Bless America" at the
   benefit concert America: A Tribute to Heroes. Chuck Taylor of Billboard
   wrote that "the performance... brings to mind what has made her one of
   the celebrated vocalists of our time: the ability to render emotion
   that shakes the soul. Affecting, meaningful, and filled with grace,
   this is a musical reflection to share with all of us still searching
   for ways to cope."

2002–2003: Return to music

   Dion's aptly titled A New Day Has Come, released in March 2002, ended
   her two-year break from the music industry. The theme of the album was
   "new beginnings," and even though it did not incorporate many genres, a
   few dance-pop tunes ("I'm Alive" and "Sorry for Love") could be found
   among a throng of adult contemporary tracks. Shania Twain and Chantal
   Kreviazuk also appeared on the album and sang backing vocals. The album
   established a more mature side of Dion with the songs " A New Day Has
   Come," " Nature Boy" and "Goodbye's (The Saddest Word)." This change
   was as a result of her new-found maternal responsibilities, because, in
   her own words, "becoming a mother makes you a grown-up." A New Day Has
   Come restarted her commercial success as it topped the charts in
   seventeen countries. The album featured the title track, "A New Day Has
   Come," and a cover of Etta James' " At Last." A CBS television concert
   helped to promote the album, during which Dion performed with Destiny's
   Child and Brian McKnight. While the album achieved success, critical
   comments suggested that it was "forgettable" and the lyrics were
   "lifeless." Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone magazine wrote that Dion's
   music had not matured, and that she still suffered from mediocre vocal
   talent. Sal Cinquemani of Slant magazine called the album "a lengthy
   collection of drippy, gooey pop fluffer-nutter."

   In drawing inspiration from personal experiences, Dion released One
   Heart (2003), an album that encapsulated her appreciation for the joys
   of life. The album was largely comprised of dance music—a deviation
   from the soaring, melodramatic ballads, for which she had once been
   given mixed reception. Although it achieved moderate success, One Heart
   gave indication that Dion was unable to surpass the creative wall that
   she had hit, and words such as "predictable" or "banal" appeared even
   in the most lenient reviews. A cover of Roy Orbison's " I Drove All
   Night," released to launch her new advertising campaign with Chrysler,
   incorporated dance-pop and rock and roll and was called reminiscent of
   Cher's 1980s work, but it was dismissed as Dion trying to please her
   sponsors.

   By the mid 2000s, Dion's music had changed to the point where her
   releases possessed maternal overtones: Miracle (2004), a multimedia
   project conceived by Dion and photographer Anne Geddes had a theme
   centering on babies and motherhood. The album was saturated with
   lullabies and other songs of maternal love and inspiration, the most
   popular being a cover of Louis Armstrong's " What a Wonderful World"
   and John Lennon's " Beautiful Boy." The reviews for Miracle were
   generally weak: while Chuck Taylor of Billboard magazine wrote that the
   single "Beautiful Boy" was "an unexpected gem" and called Dion "a
   timeless, enormously versatile artist," Nancy Miller of Entertainment
   Weekly wrote: "the whole earth-mama act is just opportunism."

   The francophone album 1 Fille & 4 Types (One Girl and Four Guys, 2003),
   fared better than her first two comebacks, and presented Dion
   attempting to distance herself from the "diva" image. She recruited the
   help of Jean-Jacques Goldman, Gildas Arzel, Eric Benzi, and Jacques
   Veneruso, with whom she had previously worked on S'il Suffisait d'Aimer
   and D'eux. The album's musical theme was one of fun and relaxation, and
   Dion herself has referred to it as "the album of pleasure." The cover
   showed Dion in a simple and relaxed manner, a contrast to the
   choreographed poses usually found on her album covers. The album
   achieved relative critical success: reviewer Stephen Erlwine of "All
   Music Guide" wrote that Dion was "getting back to pop basics and
   performing at a level unheard in a while."

   Though her albums were relatively successful, signs of a decline began
   to appear in the poorer critical reception of The Collector's Series
   Volume One (2000), A New Day Has Come (2002), and One Heart (2003). The
   mass appeal of Dion's later works had declined due to the nature of the
   themes. Her songs received less airplay as radio became less embracing
   of balladeers like Dion, Carey and Houston, and now focused on more
   up-tempo, R&B/Hip-hop songs. However, by 2005 Dion had accumulated
   sales of over 175 million records, and received the Chopard Diamond
   World Music award for becoming the best-selling female artist in the
   world.

2003–present: A New Day... Live in Las Vegas

   In early 2002, Dion announced a three-year, 600-show contract to appear
   five nights a week in an entertainment extravaganza, A New Day..., at
   Caesars Palace, Las Vegas. This move was seen as "one of the smartest
   business decisions in years by any major recording artist" given the
   poor performance of her current releases.

   She conceived the idea for the show after seeing O by Dragone early in
   her break from recording, and began on March 25, 2003, in a 4000-seat
   arena designed for her show. The show, put together by Franco Dragone,
   is a combination of dance, music, and visual effects. It includes Dion
   performing her biggest hits against an array of dancers and special
   effects.

   Reviewer Mike Weatherford felt that, at first, Dion was not as relaxed
   as she should be, and at times, it was hard to find the singer among
   the excessive stage ornamentations and dancers. However, he noted that
   the show has become more enjoyable, due to Dion's improved
   stage-presence and simpler costumes. The show has also been
   well-received by audiences, despite the complaints of expensive
   tickets; the show has sold out almost every night since its 2003
   opening. According to Pollstar, Dion had sold 322,000 tickets and
   grossed $43.9 million in the first half of 2005, and by July 2005, she
   had sold out 315 out of 384 shows. By the end of 2005, Dion grossed
   over $76 million, placing sixth on Billboard's Money Makers list for
   2005. Because of the show's success, Dion's contract was extended into
   2007 for an undisclosed sum.

   In 2005, Dion released her first comprehensive greatest hits album in
   French, On Ne Change Pas, which features three new songs, including a
   duet with Il Divo called " I Believe in You". Recently, Dion announced
   at a backstage interview that she was making plans for a new French
   album, a new English album, and another baby.

Band

     * Élise Duguay - backing singer
     * Julie LeBlanc - backing singer
     * Barnev Valsaint - backing singer
     * Claude "Mégo" Lemay - piano, music director
     * André Coutu - guitar
     * Paul Picard - percussion
     * Yves Frulla - keyboard
     * Marc Langis - bass guitar

Image

   Dion is often held in regard for her vocal talents, which has
   influenced the singing styles of others such as Jessica Simpson and
   Kelly Clarkson. In MTV's " 22 Greatest Voices in Music" countdown, she
   placed ninth (sixth for a female), and she was also placed fourth in
   Cove Magazine's list of "The 100 Outstanding Pop Vocalists." In
   MuchMoreMusic's " Top 20 Divine Divas" program, Dion ranked at number
   three, behind Whitney Houston and Mariah Carey. They also described her
   voice as "one of the most powerful vocal workouts ever to be recorded."

   While industry officials note her for her vocal talents, Dion is often
   the subject of media ridicule, and is frequently impersonated on shows
   like MADtv, Saturday Night Live and South Park for her quebecoise
   accent, as well as her conservative nature and on-stage movements.
   However, Dion seems unabashed by media ridicule: "I'm flattered when
   they take the time to impersonate you," she says. "I think it's a good
   sign." She even invited Ana Gasteyer, who parodied her on SNL to appear
   on stage during one of her performances.

   Dion is rarely the centre of media controversies. However, in 2005,
   following the Hurricane Katrina disaster, she appeared on Larry King
   Live and tearfully criticized U.S. President George W. Bush regarding
   the Iraq War and his slow response in aiding the victims of Hurricane
   Katrina: "How come it's so easy to send planes in another country, to
   kill everyone in a second, to destroy lives? We need to be there right
   now to rescue the rest of the people." She later claimed, "When I do
   interviews with Larry King or the big TV shows like that, they put you
   on the spot, which is very difficult. I do have an opinion, but I'm a
   singer. I'm not a politician."

Other activities

   Dion became an entrepreneur with the establishment of her franchise
   restaurant "Nickels" in 1990. She has since divested her interests in
   the chain and was no longer affiliated with Nickels as of 1997. She
   also has a range of eyewear and a line of perfume, manufactured by
   Coty, Inc.. In October 2004, Canada's national air carrier Air Canada
   hired Dion as part of the new promotional campaign as the airline
   unveiled new in-flight service products and new aircraft livery. " You
   and I," the theme song sung by Dion, was written by an advertising
   executive working for Air Canada.

   Dion has actively supported many charity organizations worldwide. She
   has promoted the Canadian Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CCFF) since 1982
   and became the foundation's National Celebrity Patron in 1993. She has
   an emotional attachment to the foundation; her niece Karine succumbed
   to the disease at the age of sixteen. In 2003, Dion joined a number of
   other celebrities, athletes and politicians to support "World
   Children's Day", a global fundraising effort sponsored by McDonald's.
   The effort raised money from over 100 countries and benefited many
   orphanages and children's health organizations. Dion has also been a
   major supporter of the T.J. Martell Foundation, the Diana Princess Of
   Wales Memorial Fund, and many health and education campaigns.

   Dion has donated proceeds from selected performances of her Las Vegas
   show to various charitable causes.

Selected discography

Anglophone albums

     * 1990: Unison
     * 1992: Celine Dion
     * 1993: The Colour of My Love
     * 1996: Falling into You
     * 1997: Let's Talk About Love
     * 2002: A New Day Has Come
     * 2003: One Heart
     * 2004: Miracle

Francophone albums

     * 1987: Incognito
     * 1991: Dion Chante Plamondon
     * 1995: D'eux
     * 1996: Live à Paris (live recording)
     * 1998: S'il Suffisait d'Aimer
     * 1999: Au Coeur Du Stade (live recording)
     * 2003: 1 Fille & 4 Types
     * 2005: On Ne Change Pas (best-of compilation)

Singles

          The following singles reached the top five in Canada, the United
          States, or the United Kingdom. For a full singles discography,
          see Celine Dion singles discography.

    Year                      Single                      Peak positions
                                                          CAN U.S. UK
    1990 " Where Does My Heart Beat Now"                   6   4   72
    1992 " If You Asked Me To"                             3   4   57
         " Beauty and the Beast" (duet with Peabo Bryson)  2   9   9
    1993 " The Power of Love"                              1   1   4
    1994 " Think Twice"                                   14   95  1
    1996 " Because You Loved Me"                           1   1   5
         " It's All Coming Back to Me Now"                 2   2   3
    1997 " All by Myself"                                  —   4   6
         "Tell Him" (duet with Barbra Streisand)          12   —   3
    1998 " My Heart Will Go On"                           14   1   1
         " Immortality"(duet with the Bee Gees)            —   —   5
         " I'm Your Angel" (duet with R. Kelly)           37   1   3
    2000 "I Want You to Need Me"                           1   —   —
    2002 " A New Day Has Come"                             2   22  7
    2003 " I Drove All Night"                              1   45  27
         "Tout l'Or des Hommes"                            2   —   —
                Number of number-one singles               5   4   2

The Tours

   Year       Title                      Format
   1985       Mélanie Tour               Vinyl Céline Dion en Concert
   1988       Incognito Tour             none
   1990- 1991 Unison Tour                VHS Unison
   1992- 1993 Celine Dion Tour           none
   1994- 1995 The Colour of My Love Tour DVD, VHS The Colour of My Love
                                         Concert; CD À l'Olympia
   1995       D'eux Tour                 DVD, VHS Live à Paris; CD Live à Paris
   1996- 1997 Falling into You Tour      VHS Live in Memphis
   1998- 1999 Let's Talk About Love Tour DVD, VHS Au Coeur Du Stade; CD Au
                                         Coeur Du Stade
   2003- 2007 A New Day...               CD A New Day... Live in Las Vegas

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Celine_Dion"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
