   #copyright

Celtic Park

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Sports

                     Celtic Park
   Parkhead
   Location Parkhead, Glasgow, Scotland
   Opened   1892 (renovated 1995)
   Owner    Celtic Football Club
   Surface  Grass (1892–present)
                       Tenants

                            Celtic Football Club
                         ( Scottish Premier League)

                        Seats

                              60,832 (Football)

   Celtic Park is a football stadium in the Parkhead area of Glasgow in
   Scotland. It is the home ground of Celtic Football Club. The all-seater
   stadium is also known as 'Parkhead' and nicknamed ' Paradise' by Celtic
   fans. It is the second-largest stadium in Scotland (after Murrayfield)
   and the second-largest club football stadium in the UK (after Old
   Trafford), with a capacity of 60,832.

   Celtic moved from the original Celtic Park to the present ground in
   1892. The main stand was designed by Archibald Leitch, the architect
   who also designed stadiums for the likes of Rangers, Hearts, Sunderland
   and Everton. The stadium has undergone numerous redevelopments; in
   1988, Celtic's centenary year, the red-bricked exterior to the main
   stand was added and in the mid 1990s, further development was
   undertaken to make the stadium comply with the Taylor report. Now the
   stands completely encircle the pitch and the stadium consists of a
   large double-tiered stand which extends around three-quarters of the
   pitch and a lower double-tier main stand, which contains the Celtic
   museum. There are two large screens inside the ground for showing
   highlights and replays on matchdays. In 2004, Celtic announced they
   were making improvements which were "part of the Club’s Five Year
   Stadium Refurbishment Plan and will ensure that we remain on track to
   achieve UEFA's five star stadium status."

   The Jock Stein Stand [capacity 13,006], at the west end of the stadium,
   is the traditional 'Celtic End'. Away fans are normally accommodated in
   part of the Lisbon Lions Stand [13,006], traditionally the 'Rangers
   End' at the east of the stadium. The North Stand, on the site of the
   old enclosure known as The Jungle, can house a further 26,970 fans, and
   the South or Main Stand holds 7,850. The North Stand alone has a
   greater capacity than 10 of the stadiums used in the Scottish
   Premierleague and, in 2006-2007, 5 of those in the FA Premiership. The
   full capacity of the stadium is rarely reached in club matches because
   of the need for some segregation of the fans.
   A detail on the outward facing wall of the Main Stand
   Enlarge
   A detail on the outward facing wall of the Main Stand

   In 1938 Celtic Park saw its largest attendance of 92,000 when Celtic
   played Rangers.

   During the 1990s, while the National Stadium at Hampden Park was
   undergoing redevelopment, Celtic Park hosted a number of cup finals,
   most recently hosting the Scottish Cup final of 1998, and Scotland
   internationals.

   In 2002 Celtic Park took 59.9% of the votes in a BBC Radio Five Live
   poll to find the UK's favourite sporting venue, out-polling the
   Millennium Stadium in Cardiff and Lord's Cricket Ground in London.

   The stadium is located about 3km east of the city centre.
                         Football in Scotland

   National association National team List of venues List of clubs
   League system        Seasons       Champions      History
                   Competitions in Scottish football

   Premier League First Division Second Division Third Division
   Scottish Cup   League Cup     Challenge Cup   Junior Cup
               Scottish Premier League venues 2006-2007

   Caledonian Stadium | Celtic Park | East End Park | Easter Road |
   Falkirk Stadium | Fir Park |
   Ibrox Stadium | Pittodrie Stadium | Rugby Park | St Mirren Park |
   Tannadice Park | Tynecastle Stadium

   Coordinates: 55°50′59″N, 4°12′20″W
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Celtic_Park"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
