   #copyright

Channel Islands

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

          Alternative meaning: Channel Islands of California

   The Channel Islands are a group of British-dependent islands off the
   coast of Normandy, France, in the English Channel. They comprise two
   separate countries: the bailiwick of Guernsey and the bailiwick of
   Jersey, and have a total population of about 160,000.

Geography

   Viewed from Jersey's north coast, Jethou, Herm and Sark are hazy
   outlines on the horizon
   Enlarge
   Viewed from Jersey's north coast, Jethou, Herm and Sark are hazy
   outlines on the horizon

   The inhabited islands of the Channel Isles are Jersey, Guernsey,
   Alderney, Sark, Herm (the main islands); Jethou, Brecqhou (Brechou),
   and Lihou. All of these except Jersey are in the Bailiwick of Guernsey,
   but the Minquiers and Ecréhous as well as the Les Dirouilles and Les
   Pierres de Lecq (the Paternosters), uninhabited groups of islets, are
   part of the Bailiwick of Jersey. Burhou and the Casquets lie off
   Alderney. As a general rule, the larger islands have the -ey suffix,
   and the smaller ones have the -hou suffix; this is believed to be from
   the Old Norse ey and holmr respectively.

   The Chausey islands south of Jersey are not generally included in the
   geographical definition of the Channel Islands but occasionally
   described as 'French Channel Islands' in English in view of their
   French jurisdiction. They were historically linked to the Duchy of
   Normandy, but they are part of the French territory along with
   continental Normandy, and not part of the British Isles or of the
   Channel Islands in a political sense. They are an incorporated part of
   the commune of Granville ( Manche), and although popular with visitors
   from France, they are rarely visited by Channel Islanders, as there are
   no direct transport links from the other islands.

   In official Channel Island French (see Jersey Legal French), the
   Islands are called 'Îles de la Manche', while in France, the term 'Îles
   anglo-normandes' (Anglo-Norman isles) is used to refer to the British
   'Channel Islands' in contrast to other islands in the channel. Chausey
   is referred to as an 'Île normande' (as opposed to anglo-normande).
   'Îles Normandes' and 'Archipel Normand' have also, historically, been
   used in Channel Island French to refer to the islands as a whole.

   The very large tidal variation provides an environmentally rich
   inter-tidal zone around the islands.

History

   The Islands were annexed to the Duchy of Normandy in 933. In 1066 the
   Duke William the Conqueror invaded and conquered England, becoming the
   English monarch. Since 1204, the loss of the rest of the monarch's
   lands in mainland Normandy has meant that the Channel Islands have been
   governed as separate possessions of the Crown.

   The Bailiwicks have been administered separately from each other since
   the late 13th century, and although those unacquainted with the Islands
   often assume they form one political unit, common institutions are the
   exception rather than the rule. The two Bailiwicks have no common laws,
   no common elections, and no common representative body (although their
   politicians consult regularly). There is no common newspaper or radio
   station, but a common television station, ITV Channel Television.

   The Islands acquired commercial and political interests in the North
   American colonies. Islanders became involved with the Newfoundland
   fisheries in the 17th century. In recognition for all the help given to
   him during his exile in Jersey in the 1640s, Charles II gave George
   Carteret, Bailiff and governor, a large grant of land in the American
   colonies, which he promptly named New Jersey, now part of the United
   States of America. Edmund Andros of Guernsey was an early colonial
   governor in North America, and head of the short-lived Dominion of New
   England.

   During the Second World War, the Islands were the only part of the
   British Empire occupied by Germany (excepting that part of Egypt
   occupied by the Afrika Korps at the time of the Second Battle of El
   Alamein). The Nazi occupation 1940–1945 was harsh, with some island
   residents being taken for slave labour on the Continent; native Jews
   sent to concentration camps; partisan resistance and retribution;
   accusations of collaboration; and slave labour (primarily Russians and
   eastern Europeans) being brought to the islands to build
   fortifications. The Royal Navy blockaded the islands from time to time,
   particularly following the liberation of mainland Normandy in 1944.
   Intense negotiations resulted in some Red Cross humanitarian aid, but
   there was considerable hunger and privation during the five years of
   German occupation.

Politics

   The Channel Islands fall into two separate self-governing Bailiwicks.
   Both the Bailiwick of Guernsey and the Bailiwick of Jersey are British
   crown dependencies, but neither is part of the United Kingdom. They
   have been part of the Duchy of Normandy since the 10th century and
   Queen Elizabeth II is often referred to by her traditional and
   conventional title of Duke of Normandy. However, pursuant to the Treaty
   of Paris (1259) she is not the Duke in a constitutional capacity and
   instead governs in her right as Queen. This notwithstanding, it is a
   matter of local pride by monarchists to treat the situation otherwise;
   the Loyal Toast at formal dinners is to 'The Queen, our Duke', rather
   than 'Her Majesty, the Queen' as in the UK.
   Entrance to the public gallery of the States Chamber in Jersey
   Enlarge
   Entrance to the public gallery of the States Chamber in Jersey

   The Channel Islands are not represented in the UK Parliament and each
   Island has its own primary legislature, known as the States of Guernsey
   and the States of Jersey, with Chief Pleas in Sark and the States of
   Alderney. Laws passed by the States are given Royal Sanction by the
   Queen in Council, to which the Islands' governments are responsible.

   The systems of government date from Norman times, which accounts for
   the names of the legislatures, the States, derived from the Norman
   'États' or ' estates' (i.e. the Crown, the Church, and the people). The
   States have evolved over the centuries into democratic parliaments.

   A bailiwick is a territory administered by a bailiff. The Bailiff in
   each bailiwick is the civil head, presiding officer of the States, and
   also head of the judiciary.

   In 2001, responsibility for links between the Channel Islands (together
   with the Isle of Man) and the Crown passed from the Home Secretary to
   the Lord Chancellor's Department, replaced in 2003 by the Department of
   Constitutional Affairs.

   In addition, Acts of the UK Parliament may be extended to any of the
   Channel Islands by Order-in-Council (thus giving the UK Government the
   ultimate responsibility for good government in the Islands). By
   constitutional convention this is only done at the request of the
   Insular Authorities, and has become a rare option, the Islands usually
   preferring nowadays to pass localised versions of laws giving effect to
   international treaties.

   Matters reserved to the Crown (i.e. the United Kingdom government) are
   limited to defence, citizenship, and diplomatic representation. The
   Islands are not bound by treaties concluded by the United Kingdom
   (unless they so request) and may separately conclude treaties with
   foreign governments (except concerning matters reserved to the Crown).
   The United Kingdom conceded at the end of the 20th century that the
   Islands may establish direct political (non-diplomatic) contacts with
   foreign governments to avoid the situation whereby British Embassies
   were obliged to pass on communications from the governments of the
   Bailiwicks that were in conflict with United Kingdom government policy.

   The Islands are not part of the European Union, but are part of the
   Customs Territory of the European Community, by virtue of Protocol 3 to
   the Treaty on European Union.

   Islanders are full British Citizens, but not all are European Citizens.
   Any British citizen who applies for a passport in Jersey or Guernsey
   receives a passport bearing the words ' British Islands, Bailiwick of
   Jersey' or ' British Islands, Bailiwick of Guernsey'. Under the
   provisions of Protocol 3, Channel Islanders who do not have a close
   connection with the UK (no parent or grandparent from the UK, and have
   never been resident in Great Britain or Northern Ireland for any 5 year
   period) do not automatically benefit from the EU provisions on free
   movement within the EU and consequently their passports receive an
   endorsement to that effect. This only affects a minority of Islanders.

   Under the Interpretation Act 1978, the Channel Islands are deemed to be
   part of the British Islands, not to be confused with the British Isles.

   Both Bailiwicks are members of the British-Irish Council, and Jèrriais
   and Dgèrnésiais are recognised regional languages of the Isles.

   The legal courts are separate (separate courts of appeal have been in
   place since 1961). Among the legal heritage from Norman law is the
   Clameur de Haro.

Economy

   Tourism is the major industry in the smaller islands (with some
   agriculture). Jersey and Guernsey have, since the 1960s, relied on
   financial services. Guernsey's horticultural and glasshouse activities
   have been more significant than in Jersey, and Guernsey has maintained
   light industry as a higher proportion of its economy than Jersey.
   Jersey's economy since the 1980s has been substantially more reliant on
   finance.

   Both Bailiwicks issue their own banknotes and coins, which circulate
   freely in all the islands alongside UK coinage and Bank of England and
   Scottish banknotes. See: Guernsey pound and Jersey pound

Transport and communications

   Since 1969, Jersey and Guernsey have operated postal administrations
   independently of the UK's Royal Mail, with their own postage stamps,
   which can only be used for postage in their respective Bailiwicks. UK
   stamps are no longer valid, but mail to the Islands, and to the Isle of
   Man, is still treated as UK inland. However, it was not until the early
   1990s that the Islands joined the UK's postcode system, Jersey
   postcodes using the initials JE and Guernsey using GY.

   Jersey always operated its own telephone services independently of the
   UK's General Post Office, but Guernsey did not establish its own
   telephone services until 1969. Both Islands still form part of the UK
   telephone numbering plan, but Ofcom in the UK does not have
   responsibility for regulatory and licensing issues on the Islands.

   The Channel Islands have their own country-code top-level-domains (
   ccTLDs) on the internet, managed by a single registry based in
   Alderney. The ccTLDs are .gg for the Bailiwick of Guernsey (including
   Alderney and Sark) and .je for the Bailiwick of Jersey. There was a
   stated intention by this registry to introduce a domain for Alderney
   (.ay), but this has not happened.

   Alderney has a large and growing internet gambling industry.

   Each of the three largest islands has a distinct vehicle registration
   scheme:
     * Guernsey (GBG)- simply a number, up to five digits;
     * Jersey (GBJ) - J followed by up to seven digits (JSY vanity plates
       are also issued);
     * Alderney (GBA) - AY followed by up to five digits (four digits are
       the most that have been used, as redundant numbers are re-issued).

   In Sark - where most motor traffic is prohibited - the few vehicles
   (nearly all tractors) on the island do not display plates.

   Names used for the cross-channel ferries plying the mail route between
   the islands and Weymouth, southern England, in the 1960s were taken
   from the popular Latin names for the islands 'Caesarea' for Jersey,
   'Sarnia' for Guernsey, 'Riduna' for Alderney.

Culture

   Culturally, the Norman language predominated in the Islands until the
   19th century, when increasing influence from English-speaking settlers
   and easier transport links led to anglicisation.

   Victor Hugo spent many years in exile, first in Jersey and then in
   Guernsey where he wrote Les Misérables. Guernsey is also the setting of
   Hugo's later novel, Les Travailleurs De La Mer ( The Toilers of the
   Sea). A 'Guernsey-man' also makes an appearance in Herman Melville's
   Moby Dick.

   The annual ' Muratti', the inter-Island football match, is considered
   the sporting event of the year - although, thanks to broadcast
   coverage, it no longer attracts the crowds of spectators, travelling
   between the islands, that occurred during the 20th century.

   Channel Island sportsmen and women compete in the Commonwealth Games
   for their respective Islands, and the Islands have been enthusiastic
   supporters of the Island Games. Shooting is a popular sport - islanders
   have won Commonwealth medals in this discipline.

   Guernsey's traditional colour for sporting and other purposes is green,
   and Jersey's is red.
   This statue of a crapaud in St. Helier represents the traditional
   nickname for Jersey people
   Enlarge
   This statue of a crapaud in St. Helier represents the traditional
   nickname for Jersey people

   The main islanders have traditional animal nicknames:
     * Guernsey: les ânes ('donkeys' in French and Jèrriais) - the
       steepness of St. Peter Port streets required beasts of burden, but
       Guernsey people also claim it is a symbol of their strength of
       character - which Jersey people traditionally interpret as
       stubborness.
     * Jersey: crapauds ('toads' in French and Jèrriais) - Jersey has
       toads and snakes that Guernsey lacks.
     * Sark: corbins ('crows' in Sercquiais, Dgèrnésiais and Jèrriais) -
       crows could be seen from sea on the island's coasts.
     * Alderney: lapins ('rabbits') - The island is noted for its warrens.

   Christianity was brought to the islands around the 6th century;
   according to tradition, Jersey was evangelized by Saint Helier,
   Guernsey by Saint Samson of Dol and other smaller islands were occupied
   at various times by monastic communities representing strands of Celtic
   Christianity. At the Reformation, the islands turned Calvinist under
   the influence of an influx of French-language pamphlets published in
   Geneva. Anglicanism was imposed in the 17th century, but the
   non-conformist tendency re-emerged with a strong adoption of Methodism.
   The presence of long-term Catholic communities from France and seasonal
   workers from Brittany and Normandy added to the mix of denominations
   among the population.

Other islands in the English channel

   There are other islands in other stretches of the English Channel that
   are not traditionally included within the grouping of Channel Islands.
   Among these are Ouessant/Ushant, Bréhat, Île de Batz, and Îles
   Saint-Marcouf (under French jurisdiction), and the Isle of Wight, and
   Isles of Scilly (under UK jurisdiction).

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Channel_Islands"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
