   #copyright

Charles Étienne Brasseur de Bourbourg

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Writers and critics

   Abbé Charles Étienne Brasseur de Bourbourg. Sketch from J. Windsor's
   19th C. publication, Aboriginal America.
   Enlarge
   Abbé Charles Étienne Brasseur de Bourbourg. Sketch from J. Windsor's
   19th C. publication, Aboriginal America.

   Abbé Charles-Étienne Brasseur de Bourbourg ( 8 September 1814 – 8
   January 1874) was a noted French writer, ethnographer, historian and
   archaeologist. He became a specialist in Mesoamerican studies,
   travelling extensively in the region. His writings, publications, and
   recovery of historical documents contributed much to the later
   understanding of the region's languages, writing, history and culture,
   particularly those of the Maya and Aztec.

Early life and writings

   He was born at Bourbourg, a small town with many Flemish influences
   near Dunkirk, France, just as the First French Empire was drawing to a
   close.

   As a youth he went to Ghent in the newly independent Belgian state to
   study theology and philosophy. He became interested in writing during
   his studies there, and in 1837 aged 23 he began contributing essays to
   a Parisian journal. He wrote several historical accounts (using a
   pseudonym), including one on Jerusalem. He published several novels in
   a Romantic vein which was then very much in vogue. One of these, Le
   Sérapéon, received reviews which implied it bore a very close
   resemblance to François-René de Chateaubriand's 1809 novel Les Martyrs.
   Such near-allegations of plagiarism and inaccuracies in his works were
   to be made several times throughout his career.

   Despite such criticisms, his reputation as a notable young writer and
   intellectual continued to develop. He transferred his studies and
   residence to Rome, where in 1845 he was ordained into the Roman
   Catholic priesthood, at the age of 30.

Dispatched to Quebec

   A year previously he had come to the attention of the Canadian Abbé,
   Léon Gingras, whom he had met (and apparently impressed) in Rome. Abbé
   Gingras entreated his friend and colleague the vicar-general of Quebec,
   Abbé Charles-Félix Cazeau, to have Brasseur de Bourbourg assigned to a
   position in the seminary there. Correspondence began in late 1844, with
   Abbé Gingras pressing his claims that the seminary should "...move
   heaven and earth to ensure that such a splendid bird does not escape us
   and fly to Montreal, where it would be so highly thought of".

   A year later after having obtained his ordination, Brasseur de
   Bourbourg's post came through with approval from the Archbishop, Joseph
   Signay, and in the autumn of 1845 he left Europe bound for the British
   colony of the Province of Canada, stopping over briefly in Boston on
   the way.

   Upon his arrival in Quebec City he took up a position as a professor of
   ecclesiastical history at the seminary (the Séminaire de Québec,
   founded in 1663). After only a short time however, his series of
   lectures was discontinued, for some unspecified reason.

   Perhaps finding himself with time on his hands, Brasseur de Bourbourg
   embarked upon a programme of research into the history of the Quebec
   archdiocese, and in particular of its 17th Century founder, François de
   Laval, the first Roman Catholic Bishop of Quebec (after whom the
   seminary's later incarnation as a University, the Université Laval, is
   named). The results of his archival investigations were published in
   early 1846 as a biography of Laval. The contents or approach of this
   pamphlet seemed to displease his Canadian colleagues somewhat, for a
   dispute arose which made his position there uncertain, or at least
   uncomfortable. Also, the harsh winter climate did not seem to agree
   with him (to judge by some comments he made in the dedication of his
   later History of Canada), and may also have been a factor in his
   departure which was soon to follow.

   He left the seminary later in that year, returning to Boston where he
   found a position within the diocese of Boston. The then current Bishop,
   John Bernard Fitzpatrick, with whom he evidently came to be on better
   terms than with his previous superiors, made him vicar-general of the
   diocese.

   Towards the end of the year Brasseur de Bourbourg returned to Europe,
   to spend some time conducting research in the archives of Rome and
   Madrid, in preparation for a new project he was about to embark
   on—travels to Central America.

Travels and expeditions to Central America

   Coverpage of Brasseur de Bourbourg's original 1857 work, "Histoire du
   Mexique"
   Enlarge
   Coverpage of Brasseur de Bourbourg's original 1857 work, "Histoire du
   Mexique"

   From 1848 to 1863 he travelled extensively as a missionary in many
   parts of Mexico and Central America.

   On these journeys he gave great attention to Mesoamerican antiquities
   and became well-versed in the then-current theories and knowledge about
   the history of the region and the Pre-Columbian civilisations whose
   sites and monuments remained, yet were little understood.

   Using information he had collected during his time spent travelling
   there, as well as that compiled by other scholars of his time, he
   published in 1857– 1859 a history of the Aztec civilization, containing
   what was then known or speculated about the former empire, which had
   been overrun and defeated some three hundred years previously by the
   Spanish conquistadores in alliance with local enemies of the Aztecs.

   He also conducted research into the local languages and their
   transliteration into the Latin alphabet. Between 1861 and 1864 he
   edited and published a collection of documents in the indigenous
   languages.

   In 1864 he was archaeologist to the French military expedition in
   Mexico, and his resulting work Monuments anciens du Mexique was
   published by the French Government in 1866.
   Page from Brasseur de Bourbourg's edition of de Landa's Relación de las
   Cosas de Yucatán, with the famous de Landa alphabet.
   Enlarge
   Page from Brasseur de Bourbourg's edition of de Landa's Relación de las
   Cosas de Yucatán, with the famous de Landa alphabet.

Discovery of de Landa's work

   In 1862 whilst searching through archives at the Royal Academy of
   History in Madrid for New World materials, he came across an abridged
   copy of a manuscript which had originally been written by the Spanish
   cleric Diego de Landa sometime around 1566. De Landa had been one of
   those charged with disseminating the Roman Catholic faith amongst the
   Maya peoples in Spain's new Central American possessions in the period
   following the Spanish conquest of Yucatán, and had lived there for
   several years. His manuscript (Relación de las Cosas de Yucatán) had
   been written upon his enforced return to Spain, where he faced trial
   for illegally or improperly conducting an Inquisition (he was later
   absolved, returning to the New World as the appointed Bishop of
   Yucatán). In the manuscript de Landa had recorded much information
   about the Maya peoples and customs, based on his own observations and
   discussions with Mayan informants. Brasseur de Bourbourg's main
   interest in the document, however, was a section in which de Landa
   reproduced what he called "an alphabet" of the as-yet undeciphered Maya
   hieroglyphics, the writing system of the ancient Maya civilization. In
   this passage de Landa had annotated the Mayan symbols (or glyphs) which
   supposedly corresponded to the letters of the Spanish alphabet, as
   given to him by a Maya informant who he had quizzed. Brasseur de
   Bourbourg realised that this could prove to be the key to unlocking the
   secrets of the Maya script, and he announced this discovery when
   republishing the manuscript (in a bilingual Spanish-French edition) in
   late 1863 under the title, Relation des choses de Yucatán de Diego de
   Landa.

   However, upon initial analysis by Brasseur de Bourbourg and others, the
   so-called " de Landa alphabet" proved to be problematic and
   inconsistent, and these immediate attempts to use this alphabet as a
   kind of "Rosetta Stone" to read the glyphs failed. Nevertheless,
   Brasseur de Bourbourg's uncovering of this document and de Landa's
   alphabet would much later prove to be vital in the eventual
   decipherment of the Maya glyphs. Brasseur de Bourbourg's attempts, and
   those of others which followed, were misled insofar as they interpreted
   the signs alphabetically. When the signs were recognised to be mainly
   syllabic, significant progress was made.

Publication of the Popol Vuh

   In 1861 he published another significant work: a French translation of
   the Popol Vuh, a sacred book of the Quiché Maya people. He included a
   grammar of the Quiché language and an essay on Central American
   mythology.

Identification of a Maya codex

   In 1866, Brasseur de Bourbourg had an opportunity to examine an
   artefact in Madrid which was in the possession of a Spanish paleography
   professor named Juan de Tro y Ortolano, who had purchased it some six
   years earlier. This artefact was an old codex, a book made from
   paper-bark in the form of a folded screen of continuous pages, several
   metres in length when extended. The codex contained numerous signs and
   drawings, which Brasseur de Bourbourg was readily able to identify as
   being Mayan in origin, having seen and studied many similar markings
   and glyphs whilst in Central America.

   Tro y Ortolano gave him permission to publish the codex in a
   reproduction, and Brasseur de Bourbourg gave it the name Troano Codex
   in his honour. His identification of the codex was significant, as it
   was the only third such Maya codex to have been uncovered (the second,
   the Paris codex, had been discovered by the French scholar Léon de
   Rosny only a few years before). In particular, Brasseur de Bourbourg
   recognised its exceeding rarity, since de Landa's Relación, which he
   had earlier rediscovered, gave an account of how he had ordered the
   destruction of all such Maya codices he could find, and many volumes
   had been consigned to the flames.

   In 1869– 1870 Brasseur de Bourbourg published his analyses and
   interpretations of the content of the Troano codex in his work
   Manuscrit Troano, études sur le système graphique et la langue des
   Mayas. He proposed some translations for the glyphs recorded in the
   codex, in part based on the associated pictures and in part on de
   Landa's alphabet, but his efforts were tentative and largely
   unsuccessful.

   A few years later, another Maya codex came to light in the hands of
   another collector, which became known as the Cortesianus codex (in the
   belief that it had been in the possession of Hernán Cortés). When Léon
   de Rosny examined it later, he determined that it was actually a part
   of the Troano cortex, the two parts having been separated at some
   indeterminate point in the past. The two parts were later rejoined and
   collectively are known as the Madrid or Tro-Cortesianus codex; they
   remain on display in Madrid.

   In 1871 Brasseur de Bourbourg published his Bibliothèque
   Mexico-Guatémalienne, a compendium of literature and sources associated
   with Mesoamerican studies.

Death, assessment of accomplishments

   He died at Nice at the beginning of 1874, at the age of 59.

   His linguistic and archaeological fieldwork, as well as his diligent
   collection, discovery and republication of source materials, proved to
   be highly useful for subsequent Mesoamerican researchers and scholars.
   The interpretations and theories he advanced mostly proved to be
   inaccurate.

List of publications

   A listing of his publications (either original works or reproductions
   of historical documents), by original publication date. The place of
   publication is annotated (in brackets), and the shorter or common name
   of the publication is bolded. The list is not necessarily complete.
     * 1837 - Le Monde Journal (Paris), various articles and essays;
     * 1839 - Le Sérapéon, épisode de l'histoire du IVe siècle (Paris), a
       novel;
     * 1839 - La dernière vestale (Paris), a novel;
     * 1843 - Jérusalem, tableau de l'histoire et des vicissitudes de
       cette ville célèbre depuis son origine la plus reculée jusqu'à nos
       jours (Lille, France. Published under the pseudonym Étienne de
       Ravensberg);
     * 1846 - Esquisse biographique sur Mgr de Laval, premier évêque de
       Québec (Québec);
     * 1851 - (las) Cartas para servir de Introducción á la Historia
       primitiva de las Naciones civilizadas de la América setentrional…
       (Mexico), Spanish & French translations;
     * 1852 - Histoire du Canada, de son Église et de ses missions depuis
       la découverte de l'Amérique jusqu'à nos jours, écrite sur des
       documents inédits compulsés dans les archives de l'archevêché et de
       la ville de Québec, etc. (2 vols., Paris);
     * 1853 - Le khalife de Bagdad (Paris), a novel;
     * 1857— 59 - Histoire des nations civilisées du Mexique et de
       l'Amérique Centrale, durant les siècles antérieurs à Christophe
       Colomb … (4 vols., Paris);
     * 1861 - Voyage sur l'Isthme de Tehuantepec dans l'état de Chiapas et
       la République de Guatémala, 1859 et 1860 (Paris);
     * 1861 - Popol Vuh, le Livre sacré des Quichés, &c. (Paris);
     * 1862 - Grammaire Quichée et le drame de Rabinal Achí (Paris);
     * 1862 - Sommaire des voyages scientifiques et des travaux de
       géographie, d'histoire, d’archéologie et de philologie américaines
       (Saint-Cloud, France);
     * 1864 - Relation des choses du Yucatan de Diego de Landa (Paris),
       reproduction and translation of de Landa's work;
     * 1866 - Monuments anciens du Mexique (Palenque, et autres ruines de
       l'ancienne civilisation du Mexique) (Paris);
     * 1868 - Quatre Lettres sur le Mexique (Paris)
     * 1869— 70 - Manuscrit Troano, étude sur le système graphique et la
       langue des Mayas (2 vols., Paris);
     * 1871 - Bibliothèque mexico-guatémalienne (Paris)

   A collection of travel accounts and reports which Brasseur de Bourbourg
   sent to the French Minister for Education and Religion from Mexico,
   Guatemala and Spain is stored at the Archives Nationales (Paris), F17,
   2942.
   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_%C3%89tienne_Brasseur_de_Bourbourg
   "
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
