   #copyright

Charles Babbage

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Computing People

                           Charles Babbage
   Sketch based on photograph NPG Ax18347 by Henri Claudet, 1860s.
         Born 26 December 1791
              England
      Died    18 October 1871
              England
   Occupation Mathematician
              analytical philosopher
              mechanical engineer and
              (proto-) computer scientist
     Spouse   Georgiana Whitmore

   Charles Babbage ( 26 December 1791 – 18 October 1871) was an English
   mathematician, analytical philosopher, mechanical engineer and (proto-)
   computer scientist who originated the idea of a programmable computer.
   Parts of his uncompleted mechanisms are on display in the London
   Science Museum. In 1991, working from Babbage's original plans, a
   difference engine was completed, and functioned perfectly. It was built
   to tolerances achievable in the 19th century, indicating that Babbage's
   machine would have worked. Nine years later, the Science Museum
   completed the printer Babbage had designed for the difference engine;
   it featured astonishing complexity for a 19th century device.

Birth

   Charles Babbage was born in England, most likely at 44 Crosby Row,
   Walworth Road, London. A blue plaque on the junction of Larcom Street
   and Walworth Road commemorates the event. There was a discrepancy
   regarding the date of Babbage's birth, which was published in The Times
   obituary as 26 December 1792. However, days later a nephew of Babbage
   wrote to say that Babbage was born precisely one year earlier, in 1791.
   The parish register of St. Mary's Newington, London, shows that Babbage
   was baptised on 6 January 1792 .

   Charles's father, Benjamin Babbage, was a banking partner of the Praeds
   who owned the Bitton Estate in Teignmouth. His mother was Betsy
   Plumleigh Babbage née Teape. In 1808, the Babbage family moved into the
   old Rowdens house in East Teignmouth, and Benjamin Babbage became a
   warden of the nearby St. Michael’s Church.

Education

   His father's money allowed Charles to receive instruction from several
   schools and tutors during the course of his elementary education.
   Around age eight he was sent to a country school in Alphington near
   Exeter to recover from a life-threatening fever. His parents ordered
   that his "brain was not to be taxed too much" and Babbage felt that
   "this great idleness may have led to some of my childish reasonings."
   For a short time he attended King Edward VI Grammar School in Totnes,
   South Devon, but his health forced him back to private tutors for a
   time. He then joined a 30-student Holmwood academy, in Baker Street,
   Enfield, Middlesex under Reverend Stephen Freeman. The academy had a
   well-stocked library that prompted Babbage's love of mathematics. He
   studied with two more private tutors after leaving the academy. Of the
   first, a clergyman near Cambridge, Babbage said, "I fear I did not
   derive from it all the advantages that I might have done." The second
   was an Oxford tutor from whom Babbage learned enough of the Classics to
   be accepted to Cambridge.

   Babbage arrived at Trinity College, Cambridge in October 1810. He had
   read extensively in Leibniz, Lagrange, Simpson, and Lacroix and was
   seriously disappointed in the mathematical instruction available at
   Cambridge. In response, he, John Herschel, George Peacock, and several
   other friends formed the Analytical Society.

   In 1812 Babbage transferred to Peterhouse, Cambridge. He was the top
   mathematician at Peterhouse, but failed to graduate with honours. He
   instead received an honorary degree without examination in 1814.

Marriage

   On 25 July 1814 , Babbage married Georgiana Whitmore at St. Michael's
   Church in Teignmouth, Devon. His father did not approve of the marriage
   . The couple lived at 5 Devonshire Street, Portland Place, London.

Children

   Charles and Georgiana had eight children , but only three lived to
   adulthood. Georgiana died in Worcester, 1 September 1827 - moreover,
   Charles' father, wife, and at least two sons all died in 1827.
    1. Benjamin Herschel Babbage (born 6 August 1815; died Australia, 20
       October 1878)
    2. Charles Whitmore Babbage (born 22 January 1817 died 1827)
    3. Georgiana Whitmore Babbage (born 17 July 1818 died young)
    4. Edward Stewart Babbage (born 15 December 1819 died 26 November
       1821)
    5. Francis Moore Babbage (born 1 May 1821 died young)
    6. Dugald Bromheald Babbage (born 13 March 1823 died Southampton 23
       August 1901)
    7. Henry Prevost Babbage (born 16 September 1824 died Cheltenham 29
       January 1918)
    8. Alexander Forbes Babbage (born 1827 died 1827)

Design of computers

   In recognition of the high error rate in the calculation of
   mathematical tables, Babbage wanted to find a method by which they
   could be calculated mechanically, removing human sources of error.
   Three different factors seem to have influenced him: a dislike of
   untidiness; his experience working on logarithmic tables; and existing
   work on calculating machines carried out by Wilhelm Schickard, Blaise
   Pascal, and Gottfried Leibniz. He first discussed the principles of a
   calculating engine in a letter to Sir Humphry Davy in 1822.
   Part of Babbage's difference engine, assembled after his death by
   Babbage's son, using parts found in his laboratory.
   Enlarge
   Part of Babbage's difference engine, assembled after his death by
   Babbage's son, using parts found in his laboratory.

   Babbage's engines were among the first mechanical computers. His
   engines were not actually completed, largely because of funding
   problems and personality issues. Babbage realized that a machine could
   do the work better and more reliably than a human being. Babbage
   controlled building of some steam-powered machines that more or less
   did their job; calculations could be mechanized to an extent. Although
   Babbage's machines were mechanical monsters their basic architecture
   was astonishingly similar to a modern computer. The data and program
   memory were separated, operation was instruction based, control unit
   could make conditional jumps and the machine had a separate I/O unit.
   Other inventions by Babbage not discussed at length here but worth
   mentioning are: The cowcatcher, dynamometer car, standard railroad
   gauge, uniform postal rates, occulting lights for lighthouses, the
   heliograph, and the ophthalmoscope.

Difference engine

   In Babbage’s time numerical tables were calculated by humans called
   ‘computers’. At Cambridge he saw the high error rate of the people
   computing the tables and thus started his life’s work in trying to
   calculate the tables mechanically, removing all human error. He began
   in 1822 with what he called the difference engine, made to compute
   values of polynomial functions.

   Unlike similar efforts of the time, Babbage's difference engine was
   created to calculate a series of values automatically. By using the
   method of finite differences, it was possible to avoid the need for
   multiplication and division.
   The London Science Museum's replica Difference Engine, built from
   Babbage's design.
   Enlarge
   The London Science Museum's replica Difference Engine, built from
   Babbage's design.

   The first difference engine needed around 25,000 parts of a combined
   weight of fifteen tons standing eight feet high. Although he received
   much funding for the project, he did not complete it. He later designed
   an improved version, "Difference Engine No. 2". This was not
   constructed at the time, but was built using his plans in 1989-1991, to
   19th century tolerances, and performed its first calculation at the
   London Science Museum bringing back results to 31 digits, far more than
   the average modern pocket calculator.

Printer

   Babbage designed a printer for the second difference engine which had
   some remarkable features; it supported line-wrapping, variable column
   and row width, and programmable output formatting.

Analytical engine

   Soon after the attempt at making the difference engine crumbled,
   Babbage started designing a different, more complex machine called the
   Analytical Engine. The engine is not a single physical machine but a
   succession of designs that he tinkered with until his death in 1871.
   The main difference between the two engines is that the Analytical
   Engine could be programmed using punch cards, an idea unheard of in his
   time. He realized that programs could be put on similar cards so the
   person had to only create the program initially, and then put the cards
   in the machine and let it run. The analytical engine was also proposed
   to use loops of Jacquard's punched cards to control a mechanical
   calculator, which could formulate results based on the results of
   preceding computations. This machine was also intended to employ
   several features subsequently used in modern computers, including
   sequential control, branching, and looping, and would have been the
   first mechanical device to be Turing-complete.

   Ada Lovelace, an impressive mathematician and one of the few people who
   totally understood Babbage's vision, created a program for the
   Analytical Engine. Had the Analytical Engine ever actually been built,
   her program would have been able to calculate a numerical sequence
   known as the Bernoulli numbers. Based on this work, Ada is now credited
   as being the first computer programmer and, in 1979, a contemporary
   programming language was named Ada in her honour. Shortly afterward, in
   1981, a satirical article by Tony Karp in Datamation magazine described
   the Babbage programming language, the "language of the future".

Other accomplishments

   In 1824, Babbage won the Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society
   "for his invention of an engine for calculating mathematical and
   astronomical tables".

   From 1828 to 1839 Babbage was Lucasian professor of mathematics at
   Cambridge. He contributed largely to several scientific periodicals,
   and was instrumental in founding the Astronomical Society in 1820 and
   the Statistical Society in 1834. However, he dreamt of designing
   mechanical calculating machines.

     “... I was sitting in the rooms of the Analytical Society, at
     Cambridge, my head leaning forward on the table in a kind of dreamy
     mood, with a table of logarithms lying open before me. Another
     member, coming into the room, and seeing me half asleep, called out,
     "Well, Babbage, what are you dreaming about?" to which I replied "I
     am thinking that all these tables" (pointing to the logarithms)
     "might be calculated by machinery. "

   In 1837, responding to the official eight Bridgewater Treatises "On the
   Power, Wisdom and Goodness of God, as manifested in the Creation", he
   published his Ninth Bridgewater Treatise putting forward the thesis
   that God had the omnipotence and foresight to create as a divine
   legislator, making laws (or programs) which then produced species at
   the appropriate times, rather than continually interfering with ad hoc
   miracles each time a new species was required. The book is a work of
   natural theology. The book incorporated extracts from correspondence he
   had been having with John Herschel on the subject.

   Charles Babbage also achieved notable results in cryptography. He broke
   Vigenère's autokey cipher as well as the much weaker cipher that is
   called Vigenère cipher today. The autokey cipher was generally called
   "the undecipherable cipher", though owing to popular confusion, many
   thought that the weaker polyalphabetic cipher was the "undecipherable"
   one. Babbage's discovery was used to aid English military campaigns,
   and was not published until several years later; as a result credit for
   the development was instead given to Friedrich Kasiski, a Prussian
   infantry officer, who made the same discovery some years after Babbage.

   Babbage also invented the pilot (also called a cow-catcher), the metal
   frame attached to the front of locomotives that clears the tracks of
   obstacles in 1838. He also constructed a dynamometer car and performed
   several studies on Isambard Kingdom Brunel's Great Western Railway in
   about 1838. Charles' eldest son, Benjamin Herschel Babbage, worked as
   an engineer for Brunel on the railways before emigrating to Australia
   in the 1850s. Coincidentally, Charles Babbage and Brunel are both
   buried in London's Kensal Green Cemetery.

   Babbage only once endeavoured to enter public life, when, in 1832, he
   stood unsuccessfully for the borough of Finsbury. He came in last in
   the polls.

Eccentricities

   Babbage once counted all the broken panes of glass of a factory,
   publishing in 1857 a "Table of the Relative Frequency of the Causes of
   Breakage of Plate Glass Windows": 14 of 464 were caused by "drunken
   men, women or boys". His distaste for commoners ("the Mob") included
   writing "Observations of Street Nuisances" in 1864, as well as tallying
   up 165 "nuisances" over a period of 80 days; he especially hated street
   music. He was also obsessed with fire, once baking himself in an oven
   at 265°F (130°C) for four minutes "without any great discomfort" to
   "see what would happen." Later, he arranged to be lowered into Mount
   Vesuvius in order to view molten lava for himself.

Quotes

   On two occasions I have been asked,--"Pray, Mr. Babbage, if you put
   into the machine wrong figures, will the right answers come out?" In
   one case a member of the Upper, and in the other a member of the Lower,
   House put this question. I am not able rightly to apprehend the kind of
   confusion of ideas that could provoke such a question.

          Chapter 5, Passages from the Life of a Philosopher, Charles
          Babbage, 1864. ISBN 1-85196-040-6, illustrating that even
          Babbage had to deal with people who displayed illogical levels
          of what would now be called "computer illiteracy".

Named after Babbage

     * Babbage crater, on the Moon, is named in his honour.
     * Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota, United States.
     * The former chain retail computer and video-games store "Babbage's"
       was named after him.
     * Mr Babbage, the computer in game show Family Fortunes
     * Babbage Building, University of Plymouth, Devon, UK.
     * Babbage Lecture Theatre, University of Cambridge, UK.
     * Babbage Computer Suite, Exmouth Community College, UK.
     * Babbage is a giant mechanical monster in the online computer game,
       City of Heroes.
     * Babbage is a character in the video game Suikoden V who is known
       for his amazing mechanical inventions.
     * The science fiction novel The Difference Engine refers to Babbage
       extensively.
     * In the movie "Hackers" the main bad guy attempts to flee being
       captured, after he has been exposed, by airplane flying under the
       name of a Mr. Babbage.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Babbage"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
