   #copyright

Charlotte's Web

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Novels

   CAPTION: Charlotte's Web

     Author    E. B. White
   Illustrator Garth Williams
     Country   United States
    Language   English
    Genre(s)   Children's literature
    Publisher  HarperCollins
    Released   1952
   Media Type  Print
      Pages    192 pp
      ISBN     ISBN 0-06-028298-3

   Charlotte's Web is a children's book by acclaimed American author E. B.
   White, First published in 1952, it tells the story of a spider named
   Charlotte and her friendship with a pig named Wilbur. It was
   illustrated by Garth Williams.

   Publishers Weekly lists the book as the best-selling children's
   paperback of all time (cited at ).

Plot

   Eight-year-old Fern Arable saves a pig from being slaughtered by her
   father. She names him Wilbur and tends to him as if she was his mother
   until he becomes too big and moves to Mr. Zuckerman’s barn.

   Charlotte, a spider, lives over the door near Wilbur’s pen. She
   befriends him and, by weaving words such as “Terrific“ and “Some Pig”
   in her web, tries to convince the Zuckerman family that Wilbur is so
   unique that he cannot ever be killed for food.

Characters

   Wilbur
   Charlotte
   Fern Arable
   Templeton
   Mr. Arable
   Mrs. Arable

Sales

   Aside from its paperback sales, Charlotte's Web is 78th on the all-time
   hardback list. According to publicity for the 2006 film adaptation (see
   below), the book has sold more than 45 million copies and been
   translated into 23 languages. It is a Newbery Honours book for 1953,
   losing out to Secret of the Andes by Ann Nolan Clark for the medal.

Film adaptations

1973 version

   The book was adapted into an animated feature by Hanna-Barbera
   Productions and Sagittarius Productions in 1973. The film, distributed
   to theatres by Paramount Pictures on February 22, 1973, is one of only
   two Hanna-Barbera features not based upon one of their television
   cartoons— Heidi's Song ( 1982) being the other—and was a moderate
   critical and commercial success. It is very true to the book.

2006 version

   Paramount Pictures, with Walden Media, Kerner Entertainment Company,
   and Nickelodeon Movies, is producing a live-action/animated film,
   starring Dakota Fanning as Fern. It is scheduled for release on 20
   December 2006. Special effects will be by Fuel International, Digital
   Pictures Iloura, Proof (studio), Rhythm and Hues Studios, Rising Sun
   Pictures, and Tippett Studio .

Video games

   Sega has announced a video game based on the 2006 film, scheduled for
   release in Fall 2006 on PC, Game Boy Advance, and Nintendo DS.
   According to the press release, the game is being developed by
   "Backbone Entertainment, a division of Foundation 9 Entertainment."

   The PC version of the game will be called "Charlotte's Web: Wilbur and
   Friends", and will feature nine mini-games based around the characters
   from the film. It is a title designed for young children, ages 4-7.

   The DS and GBA games, both simply titled "Charlotte's Web", are
   action-platform titles. There are several mini-games in each; the DS
   version supports a 'Nintendogs' style pet simulator, which kicks in
   during every mid-level save point.

   Both titles feature the voice of Dominic Scott Kay, the actor playing
   Wilbur in the motion picture.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charlotte%27s_Web"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
