   #copyright

Chennai

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Asia

   Chennai
   Chennai
   State
    -  District(s)           Tamil Nadu
                              -  Chennai
                              •  Kanchipuram
                              •  Tiruvallur
   Coordinates               13.09° N 80.27° E
   Area
    -  Elevation             1,180  km²
                              - 6 m
   Time zone                 IST ( UTC+5:30)
   Population ( 2006)
    -  Density
    -  Agglomeration ( 2006) 4,352,932
                              - 5,847/km²
                              - 6,957,669 ( 4th)
   Mayor                     M. Subramanian
   Codes
    -  Postal
    - Telephone
    -  Vehicle
                              - 600 xxx
                              - +91 44
                              - TN-01 to TN-22
       Website: www.chennaicorporation.com

   Chennai pronunciation  (Tamil: சென்னை), formerly known as Madras
   pronunciation , is the capital of the state of Tamil Nadu and is
   India's fourth largest metropolitan city. It is located on the
   Coromandel Coast of the Bay of Bengal. With an estimated population of
   6.96 million (2006), the 368-year-old city is the 34th largest
   metropolitan area in the world.

   Chennai is a large commercial and industrial centre, and is known for
   its cultural heritage and temple architecture. It is also a hub for
   south Indian classical music and dance performances. Chennai is
   considered the automobile capital of India, with a major percentage of
   the automobile industry having a base here and a major portion of the
   nation's vehicles being produced here. This has led to Chennai being
   referred to as the Detroit of South Asia. It has also become a major
   centre for outsourced jobs from the West. The 12-kilometre long Marina
   Beach forms the city's east coast and is one of the longest beaches in
   the world . The city is known for its sport venues and hosts an ATP
   tennis event, the Chennai Open. Chennai is also one of the rare cities
   to accommodate a national park, the Guindy National Park, within its
   city limits.

Name

   The name Madras is derived from Madraspatnam, the site chosen by the
   British East India Company for a permanent settlement in 1639. Another
   small town, Chennapatnam, lay to the south of it. In due course the two
   towns were merged, and the term Madras was favoured by the British.
   However locals used to refer to it as Chennapatnam or Chennapuri. The
   city was renamed Chennai in August 1996 as the name Madras was
   perceived to be of Portuguese origin. (A number of other Indian cities
   have enacted similar name changes.) It is believed that the original
   Portuguese name is Madre de Sois, named after a Portuguese high
   authority who was one among the early settlers in 1500. There have been
   however been suggestions that Chennai may not be a Tamil name while
   Madras may be of Tamil origin.

History

   The Kapaleeshwarar temple in Mylapore is the oldest temple in Chennai.
   Enlarge
   The Kapaleeshwarar temple in Mylapore is the oldest temple in Chennai.

   The region around Chennai has served as an important administrative,
   military, and economic centre dating back to the 1st century. It has
   been ruled by South Indian kingdoms, notably the Pallava, the Chola,
   the Pandya, and Vijaynagar empires. The town of Mylapore, now part of
   the metropolis, was once a major port of the Pallava kingdom.

   When the Portuguese arrived in 1522, they built a port and named it São
   Tomé, after the Christian apostle St. Thomas, who is believed to have
   preached there between the years 52 and 70. The region then passed into
   the hands of the Dutch, who established themselves near Pulicat just
   north of the city in 1612.

   On 22 August 1639, the British East India Company was granted land by
   the Damerla Venkatadri, Nayak of Vandavasi, as a base for a permanent
   settlement, believed to be called Madrasemen. A year later, Fort St
   George was built, which subsequently became the nucleus around which
   the colonial city grew. In 1746, Fort St George and Madras were
   captured by the French under General La Bourdonnais, the Governor of
   Mauritius, who plundered the town and its outlying villages.

   The British regained control of the town in 1749 through the Treaty of
   Aix-la-Chapelle and subsequently fortified the base to withstand
   further attacks from the French and Hyder Ali, the Sultan of Mysore. By
   the late 18th century, the British had conquered most of the region
   around Tamil Nadu and the northern modern-day states of Andhra Pradesh
   and Karnataka to establish the Madras Presidency, whose capital was
   Madras.

   Under British rule the city grew into a major urban centre and naval
   base. With the advent of railways in India in the late 19th century, it
   was connected to other important cities such as Mumbai (formerly known
   as Bombay) and Kolkata (formerly Calcutta), facilitating communication
   and trade with the hinterland. It was the only Indian city to be
   attacked by the Central Powers during World War I, when an oil depot
   was shelled by the German light cruiser SMS Emden. After independence
   in 1947, the city became the capital of Madras State, which was renamed
   Tamil Nadu in 1969.

   From 1965 to 1967, Chennai was an important base for the Tamil
   agitation against the imposition of Hindi. Chennai had witnessed some
   political violence due to the ethnic conflict in Sri Lanka, after 33
   people were killed by a bomb planted by the Tamil Eelam Army at the
   airport in 1984 and following the assassination of thirteen members of
   the Sri Lankan separatist group EPRLF, and two Indian civilians by the
   rival LTTE in 1991. Strong measures were taken and the city has not
   faced any major terrorist activity since then. The city was renamed
   Chennai in August 1996 as the name Madras was perceived to be of
   Portuguese origin.

   In 2004 the Indian Ocean tsunami lashed the shores of Chennai, killing
   many and permanently altering the coastline.

Geography

   Chennai is situated on a flat coastal plain, as can be seen in this
   Landsat 7 map.
   Enlarge
   Chennai is situated on a flat coastal plain, as can be seen in this
   Landsat 7 map.
   Chennai and surrounding towns
   Enlarge
   Chennai and surrounding towns

   Chennai is located at 13.04° N 80.17° E on the southeast coast of India
   and in the northeast corner of Tamil Nadu. It is located on a flat
   coastal plain known as the Eastern Coastal Plains. The city has an
   average elevation of 6  metres (20  feet), its highest point being 60 m
   (200 ft). Two rivers meander through Chennai, the Cooum River (or
   Koovam) in the central region and the Adyar River in the southern
   region. Both rivers are heavily polluted with effluents and trash from
   domestic and commercial sources. The Adyar, which is much less polluted
   than the Cooum, is de-silted and cleaned periodically by the state
   government. A protected estuary of the Adyar forms the natural habitat
   of several species of birds and animals. The Buckingham Canal, 4  km
   (3 miles) inland, travels parallel to the coast, linking the two
   rivers. The Otteri Nullah, an east-west stream runs through north
   Chennai and meets the Buckingham Canal at Basin Bridge.

   Several lakes of varying size are located on the western fringes of the
   city. Red Hills, Sholavaram and Chembarambakkam Lake supply Chennai
   with potable water. Groundwater sources are mostly brackish. The city's
   water supply has proved inadequate for its population, and an
   over-reliance on annual monsoon rains to replenish water reservoirs has
   compounded problems. There had been some attempts to pipe in water from
   other sources, such as the Veeranam, a water-rich place in Tamil Nadu
   or from the Krishna River in Andhra Pradesh. Water is a precious
   commodity in Chennai and this has given rise to private water tankers
   supplying many areas. Alternative measures such as reverse osmosis and
   rainwater harvesting have been taken up. Chennai Metrowater has
   currently finalised a bid to construct a reverse osmosis plant with a
   capacity of 100 million litres per day (about 15 litres per person per
   day).

   The geology of Chennai comprises of mostly clay, shale and sandstone.
   The city is classified into three regions based on geology, sandy
   areas, clayey areas and hard-rock areas. Sandy areas are found along
   the river banks and the coasts. Clayey regions cover most of the city.
   Hard rock areas are Guindy, Velachery, Adambakkam and a part of
   Saidapet. In sandy areas such as Tiruvanmiyur, Adyar, Kottivakkam,
   Santhome, George Town and the rest of coastal Chennai, rainwater
   run-off percolates very quickly. In clayey and hard rock areas,
   rainwater percolates slowly, but it is held by the soil for a longer
   time. The city's clayey areas include T.Nagar, West Mambalam, Anna
   Nagar, Kolathur and Virugambakkam.

Climate

   Chennai lies on the thermal equator, and thus sees little variation in
   seasonal temperature. Its proximity to the sea gives it a hot and humid
   climate for most of the year. The highest temperatures are experienced
   in late May and early June and usually vary between 38 ° C (100.4 ° F)
   and 42 ° C (107.6 ° F) though it sometimes nearly touches 45 °C
   (113 °F) for a few days. Average daily temperature in Chennai during
   January is around 24 °C (75 °F), though the temperature rarely falls
   below 18 °C (64 °F). The lowest temperature recorded is 15.8 °C
   (60.4 °F) and highest 47.1 °C (116.8 °F).

   The average annual rainfall is about 1,300  mm (47.2  inches). The city
   gets most of its seasonal rainfall from the north-east monsoon winds,
   from Mid October to Mid December. Cyclones in the Bay of Bengal
   sometimes hit the city.

Layout

   Divisions of Chennai city. 1. Egmore-Nungambakam 2. Fort Tondiarpet 3.
   Mambalam-Guindy 4. Mylapore-Triplicane 5. Perambur-Purasawalkkam.
   Enlarge
   Divisions of Chennai city.
   1. Egmore-Nungambakam
   2. Fort Tondiarpet
   3. Mambalam-Guindy
   4. Mylapore-Triplicane
   5. Perambur-Purasawalkkam.

   For administrative purposes Chennai is divided into five talukas. 1.
   Egmore-Nungambakam, 2. Fort Tondiarpet 3. Mambalam-Guindy 4.
   Mylapore-Triplicane 5. Perambur-Purasawalkkam.

   The Chennai Metropolitan area consists of three districts namely
   Chennai city and the districts of Kanchipuram and Thiruvallur. The city
   area covers an area of 174  km² (67  mi²). The metropolitan area covers
   1,177 km² (455  mi²). The city is divided on the basis of composition
   into four major parts: North, Central, South and West.

   North Chennai is primarily an industrial area. Central Chennai is the
   commercial heart of the city and the downtown area. South Chennai and
   West Chennai, previously predominantly residential areas are fast
   turning into commercial areas, hosting a large number of IT and
   financial companies.

   Contiguous satellite towns include Mahabalipuram to the south,
   Chengalpattu to the south west, Kanchipuram town, Sriperumpudur,
   Tiruvallur and Arakkonam to the west.

Administration

   Ripon Building, which houses the Chennai Corporation, was completed
   1913. It is named after former viceroy Lord Ripon.
   Enlarge
   Ripon Building, which houses the Chennai Corporation, was completed
   1913. It is named after former viceroy Lord Ripon.

   Chennai city is governed by the Corporation of Chennai, which consists
   of a Mayor and 155 Councillors representing the 155 Wards (all directly
   elected by the city residents), one of whom is elected by the other
   Councillors as a Mayor and Deputy Mayor. The Mayor and Deputy Mayor
   preside over about 10 Standing Committees. The Corporation takes care
   of the civic functions of the metropolis.

   The metropolitan region of Chennai covers many suburbs that are part of
   Kanchipuram and Thiruvallur districts. The larger suburbs are goverened
   by town municipalities while the smaller ones are governed by town
   councils called panchayats.

   Chennai being the capital of Tamil Nadu houses the executive and
   legislative headquarters of the government of Tamil Nadu. They are
   primarily housed in the Secretariat Buildings, part of the Fort St
   George campus as well as many other buildings scattered around the
   city. The Madras High Court, whose jurisdiction extends across Tamil
   Nadu and Pondicherry, is the highest judicial authority in the state
   and is located in the city.

   Chennai has three Parliamentary constituencies – Chennai North, Chennai
   Central and Chennai South. The current MPs are C Kuppusami, Dayanidhi
   Maran and T R Baalu respectively. Chennai elects 18 MLAs to the state
   legislature.

   Greater Chennai Police department, a division of the Tamil Nadu Police
   is the law enforcement agency in the city. The city police force is
   headed by a Commissioner of Police and the administrative control vests
   with the Tamil Nadu Home ministry. There are thirty six sub-divisions
   of the Greater Chennai Police, and 121 police stations. Fifteen of
   these police stations are now ISO 9001:2000 certified. The city's
   traffic is managed by the Chennai City Traffic Police (CCTP).
   Metropolitan suburbs are policed by the Kanchipuram and Thiruvallur
   police departments.

Utility Services

   The Corporation of Chennai and various Municipalities of the suburbs
   look after civic services. Garbage handling is handled by Onyx, a
   private company. Water supply and sewage treatment is handled by the
   Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewage Board popularly referred to as
   Metro Water. Electricity is supplied by the Tamil Nadu Electricity
   Board. The city's telephone service is serviced by four landline
   companies: BSNL, Tata Indicom, Reliance Infocomm and Airtel. There are
   six mobile phone companies: BSNL, Hutch, Airtel and Aircel which offer
   GSM services and Tata Indicom and Reliance Infocomm which offer CDMA
   services. The phone companies also offer broadband internet access. SCV
   and Hathway are the major cable TV service providers.Direct To Home (
   DTH) is available via DD Direct Plus, Dish TV, and Tata Sky. Chennai is
   the only city in India to have implemented the Conditional Access
   System for cable television.

Economy

   Tidel Park, the largest software park in Chennai
   Enlarge
   Tidel Park, the largest software park in Chennai

   Chennai has a diversified economic base. The main industries are
   automobile, software services, hardware manufacturing and financial
   services. Other important industries include petrochemicals, textiles
   and apparels. The Chennai Port and Ennore Port contribute greatly to
   its importance. The city has a fully computerised stock exchange called
   the Madras Stock Exchange. Chennai has the fourth largest GMP( Gross
   Metropolitan Product)in India.

   Since the late 1990s, software development and business process
   outsourcing and more recently manufacturing have emerged as major areas
   in the city's economy. Chennai has been rated as the most attractive
   Indian city for offshoring services according to A T Kearney's Indian
   City Services Attractiveness Index 2005. Software services giants like
   Infosys, TCS, Wipro, Cognizant Technology Solutions, Satyam, HCL, EDS,
   CSC, IBM, Verizon, Accenture, Sun Microsystems and HP have development
   centres in the city. The IT Corridor, on Old Mahabalipuram Road in the
   southeast of the city houses several technology parks. The Mahindra
   World City, a Special Economic Zone (SEZ) with one of the world's
   largest information technology parks, is currently under construction
   in the outskirts of Chennai.
   Image:Chennai Collage.jpg
   A Collage of modern buildings in Chennai

   Multinational corporations like Dell, Nokia, Motorola, Samsung,
   Siemens, Flextronics and Foxconn have or are in the process of setting
   up Electronics / Hardware manufacturing plants in the Sriperumbudur
   electronics SEZ . Ericsson and Alcatel have research and development
   facilities in the city while Texas Instruments' R&D facility is in the
   pipeline. Semiconductor companies like SPEL and Tessolve have announced
   plans to set up or expand manufacturing and R&D centers in the city.
   The city has two main biotechnology parks, TICEL bio-tech park and
   Golden Jubilee bio-tech park at Siruseri that house bio technology
   companies and laboratories.

   Chennai is the base for around 48 per cent of India's auto components
   industry and 29 per cent of the vehicle industry. A large number of the
   automotive companies in India are based in Chennai. Several global
   automotive companies such as Hyundai, Ford, Mitsubishi, TVS, Ashok
   Leyland, Caterpillar, Royal Enfield, TI Cycles, TAFE, Dunlop, MRF have
   manufacturing plants in and around Chennai while BMW , Mahindra &
   Mahindra, and Apollo Tyres have plants under construction around
   chennai. The city is a major centre for the auto ancillary industry.
   Hyundai is in the process of setting up engine plant in the city. Naza
   Auto has firmed up plans to invest $259 million in its proposed chennai
   plant. Several Petrochemical companies like Chennai Petro Chemicals
   Limited ( CPCL), Manali Petro Chemicals Limited, Madras Refineries
   Limited ( MRL), Petro Araldite and Orchid Pharmaceuticals are situated
   in the outskirts of Chennai.

   The Heavy Vehicles Factory, Avadi produces military vehicles, including
   India's main battle tank: Arjun. The Railway Coach building factory of
   the Indian Railways, the Integral Coach Factory manufactures railway
   coaches and locomotives.

   Chennai is an important centre for banking and finance. At present it
   is home to three large national banks commercial banks and many state
   level co-operative banks. Several large financial companies and
   insurance companies are headquartered in Chennai. Many Indian banks,
   multi-national banks and the World Bank have located their back office
   operations in the city. The city serves as a major back up centre for
   operations of many banks and financial companies in India.

   Other major manufacturing facilities range from small scale
   manufacturing to large scale heavy industrial manufacturing,
   pertochemicals and auto ancillary plants. Chennai is a textile industry
   hub with a large number of apparel industries located in the
   Ambattur-Padi industrial zone in the northern suburbs of the city. The
   city also has a large leather apparel and accessory industry. SEZ's for
   apparel manufacture and footwear are under construction in the southern
   suburbs of the city.

   The city is home to the Tamil entertainment (motion pictures,
   television, and recorded music) industry which is the second largest in
   Indian entertainment industries.

Demographics

   Residents of Chennai are called Chennaiites. As of 2001, Chennai city
   had a population of 4.2 million, while the total metropolitan
   population was 6.4 million. The estimated metropolitan population in
   2006 is 7.0 million.
   Ranganathan Street in T.Nagar is usually packed with pedestrian
   shoppers.
   Enlarge
   Ranganathan Street in T.Nagar is usually packed with pedestrian
   shoppers.

   The population density in the city is 24,418 per km² while the overall
   population density is 5,847 per km². The sex ratio is 948 females for
   every 1000 males, slightly higher than the national average of 934. The
   average literacy rate is 80.14%, much higher than the national average
   of 59.5%. 18% percent of the city's population is classified as living
   in slum conditions.

   The main problem Chennai faces is overpopulation and resulting water
   scarcity. Residential skyscrapers are generally not favoured, leading
   to urban sprawl, with consequent increase in commuting time and
   ownership of private vehicles. High land prices and the lack of space
   has pushed many members of the lower strata of society into residing in
   slums, which tend to have poor sanitation and lack of access to clean
   water.

   The majority of residents in Chennai are Tamilians and speak Tamil.
   English is widely spoken, especially in business, education and other
   white collar professions. Tamil spoken in Chennai uses English words
   liberally, so much so that it is often called Madras bhashai (Tamil for
   "Madras language"). There are also sizeable Malayalee, Telugu and Urdu
   speaking communities. A regional hub since British times, other
   prominent communities include Marwari, Anglo Indian, Bengali, Punjabi,
   Gujarati communities and people from Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. Chennai
   also has a growing expatriate population who work in the industries and
   IT centres.

Culture

   A Carnatic music concert during the annual Music Season.
   Enlarge
   A Carnatic music concert during the annual Music Season.

   Chennai's culture reflects its diverse population. The city is known
   for its classical dance shows and Hindu temples. Every December,
   Chennai holds a five week-long Music Season, which has been described
   as one of the world's largest cultural events. The Music Season
   encompasses performances (kutcheries) of traditional Carnatic music by
   hundreds of artists in and around the city.

   Chennai is also known for the classical Indian dance, Bharatanatyam,
   which is also the official dance of Tamil Nadu. An important cultural
   centre for Bharatanatyam is Kalakshetra (Sanskrit for "place of the
   arts"), located on the beach in the south of the city.
   A traditional Bharata natyam performance
   Enlarge
   A traditional Bharata natyam performance

   Chennai has a vibrant theatre scene, with a large number of Tamil plays
   being performed. In general, Tamil theatre is divided into the
   sabha-oriented theatre which are parodies on political issues or trends
   supported by slapstick comedy and the non-sabha oriented theatre which
   include serious plays and historical plays. English theatre is also
   popular. School and college cultural festivals (locally called
   culfests) play an important role by providing platforms for the city's
   youth to indulge in art and culture. Also present is an established and
   growing culture of bands in western and other styles.

   Chennai is the base for the large Tamil movie industry, dubbed
   Kollywood after the locality of Kodambakkam where most of the movie
   studios are located. The industry makes about 300 Tamil movies a year,
   and its film soundtracks dominate the music scene in the city.

   Chennai celebrates a number of festivals. Pongal, celebrated in the
   month of January, is the most important festival of and is celebrated
   over a period of five days. Tamil New Year's day signifying the
   beginning of the Tamil Calendar usually falls on April 14 and is
   celebrated widely. Being a cosmopolitan city, almost all major
   religious festivals like Deepavali, Eid and Christmas are celebrated
   here.

   Chennai is famous for its numerous restaurants that offer light meals
   or tiffin which usually include rice-based dishes like pongal, dosa,
   idli or vada, served with steaming hot filter coffee, a very popular
   beverage consumed in Chennai. This unique cuisine is replicated in many
   a Madras Cafe in other parts of India and the world.

Transport

   Map of the road and rail network in the Chennai metropolitan area
   Enlarge
   Map of the road and rail network in the Chennai metropolitan area

   Popularly known as "Gateway to South India", Chennai is well connected
   internationally and to other parts of India. Five major national
   highways radiate outward towards Kolkata (Calcutta), Bangalore, Trichy,
   Tiruvallur, and Pondicherry. The Chennai Mofussil Bus Terminus (CMBT),
   which serves as the terminus for all intercity buses from Chennai, is
   the largest bus station in South Asia. Seven government owned transport
   corporations operate inter city and inter state bus services. There are
   also many private inter city and inter state bus companies that operate
   services to and from Chennai.

   The Chennai International Airport serves as the city's airport for both
   domestic and international flights and is the third busiest in India
   and is the premier international gateway in South India. The city is
   connected to major hubs in South Asia, South East Asia, the Middle
   East, Europe and North America through over thirty national and
   international carriers. The airport is also the second busiest cargo
   terminus in the country.

   The city is served by two major ports namely the Chennai Port which is
   one of the largest artificial ports and the Ennore Port. The Chennai
   port is India's second busiest container hub handling general
   industrial cargo, automobiles etc. The Ennore port handles cargo such
   as coal, ore and other bulk products. A smaller harbour at Royapuram is
   used by local fishing boats and trawlers.
   Chennai Central, built 1873 and remodeled in 1900, has been the city's
   main railway station since 1907, taking over from Royapuram.
   Enlarge
   Chennai Central, built 1873 and remodeled in 1900, has been the city's
   main railway station since 1907, taking over from Royapuram.

   There are two main railway terminals, the Chennai Central station,
   which is the city's largest railway station with trains to all the
   major cities like Mumbai, Kolkata, Bangalore, Delhi, Hyderabad,
   Coimbatore and towns in India, and Chennai Egmore, with trains for
   destinations within Tamil Nadu.

   Buses and trains are the most popular form of public transport. The
   Chennai suburban railway network consists of four rail sectors, namely
   Chennai Central— Arakkonam, Chennai Central— Sullurpeta, and Chennai
   Beach— Chengalpattu. The fourth sector is an elevated MRTS suburban
   train system, which is interlinked with the remaining rail network. The
   rail network is broad gauge. There are plans to construct an
   underground Metro in the City.

   The Metropolitan Transport Corporation (MTC) runs an extensive city bus
   system. The bus service consists of 2,773 buses on 375 routes, and
   transports an estimated 4.2 million passengers daily. Besides MTC
   services, mini-bus services are present in the suburbs of the Chennai
   metropolitan area. Vans which are run like bus services and popularly
   called "Maxi Cabs" also ply on many routes in the city. Hired transport
   facilities include metered call taxis, fixed rate tourist taxis and
   auto rickshaws.

Education

   Schools in Chennai are either run publicly by the Tamil Nadu
   government, or run privately, some with financial aid from the
   government. The medium of education in private schools is English.
   Government run schools offer both English and Tamil medium education,
   English being preferred by a majority. Private schools are usually
   affiliated to the national CBSE board or to the Tamil Nadu State Board.
   A few schools are affiliated to the ICSE board and the Montessori
   system. A few schools also offer the International Baccalaureate and
   the American systems. Schooling begins at the age of three. After two
   years of kindergarten and twelve years of schooling, students take up
   non professional or professional university courses.
   The main entrance to the Anna University.
   Enlarge
   The main entrance to the Anna University.

   The University of Madras (1857), which has three campuses in the city,
   offers a range of programs in liberal arts, science and commerce. A
   large majority of city colleges are affiliated to the university and
   offer programs in medicine, law, science, Arts and commerce. Some such
   older institutions are the Madras Christian College (1837), Presidency
   College (1840), Pachaiyappa's College (1842), the Madras Medical
   College (1835), Stanley Medical College (1938) and Vivekananda College
   (1948), New College Chennai (1951) all of which affiliated themselves
   to the University of Madras on its formation. Other autonomous
   educational establishments include Women's Christian College (1915),
   Loyola College, Chennai (1925), Stella Maris College, (1947) the
   National Institute of Fashion Technology (1995), Asian College of
   Journalism (2000) and the Madras School of Social Work (1952).

   The prestigious Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Madras (1959), is
   located in the south of the city and is internationally renowned for
   its engineering program. Located nearby, is the main campus of Anna
   University (1978), which formed from a merger of the College of
   Engineering, Guindy (1794), the Madras Institute of Technology (1949),
   the Alagappa College of Technology (1944), and the School of
   Architecture and Planning (1957). Almost all colleges in Tamil Nadu
   that offer programs in engineering, technology and architecture are
   affiliated to Anna University. The remaining colleges are autonomous
   deemed universities.
   The main entrance of IIT Madras, showing its logo and its motto.
   Enlarge
   The main entrance of IIT Madras, showing its logo and its motto.

   The Dr. Ambedkar Government Law College, Chennai, a prominent law
   college in Tamil Nadu was founded in 1891. Madras Medical College,
   established in 1835, is one of the oldest educational institutions to
   offer medical education in the Indian subcontinent. Stanley Medical
   College, Kilpauk Medical College and Sri Ramachandra Medical College
   and Research Institute are the other notable medical colleges in the
   city. Madras Veterinary College established in 1903 was the first
   institution of its kind in India.

   The Connemara Public Library built in 1890 is one of the four National
   Depository Centres in India. These centres receive a copy of all
   newspapers and books published in India. It also is a declared UNESCO
   information centre. Other important libraries include the
   Archaeological Survey of India library at the Fort St. George, The
   Ramakrishna Math Library and The Krishnamurti Foundation library in the
   premises of the Krishnamurti Foundation world headquarters.

Sports

   Cricket is the most popular sport in Chennai. The M. A. Chidambaram
   Stadium (formerly known as Madras Cricket Club ground or Chepauk
   Stadium) in Chepauk and popularly called the MAC, is one of the oldest
   cricket stadiums in India built in 1916. It seats more than 50,000 and
   is home to the Tamil Nadu Cricket Association. The stadium is famous
   for its list of records, including the first ever test match victory
   that India recorded in 1951-52 when they defeated England. But more
   than the records, what stands out at Chepauk is the atmosphere and the
   crowd, reputed to be the most knowledgeable and appreciative in the
   country. This was proved when those present gave a standing ovation to
   Saeed Anwar after his record breaking 194 against India in the
   Independence Cup match in 1997 and again when Pakistan won the Test
   match in 1999. A truly overwhelmed Pakistani team even made a lap of
   honour in appreciation of the spectators' sporting behaviour. The
   Chemplast Cricket Ground in the IIT Madras campus is another important
   cricket venue.
   ATP Chennai Open - Centre Court at the SDAT Tennis Stadium complex in
   Nungambakkam
   Enlarge
   ATP Chennai Open - Centre Court at the SDAT Tennis Stadium complex in
   Nungambakkam

   Tennis is another popular game in Chennai. The SDAT Tennis Stadium in
   Nungambakkam seats about 6,000 spectators and has five synthetic
   surface courts. The stadium also hosts an ATP event, the Chennai Open.
   The tournament was awarded the title of the best new event in its
   second year by the Association of Tennis Professionals. Indian tennis
   professionals such as Vijay Amritraj, Ramanathan Krishnan, Ramesh
   Krishnan and Mahesh Bhupathi hail from Chennai. Leander Paes did his
   schooling and was trained in Chennai.

   Mayor Radhakrishnan Stadium is the venue for hockey matches and seats
   4,000. The Chennai Veerans, a Premiere Hockey League team is based in
   Chennai. The stadium has hosted the Champions Trophy (featuring the 6
   best teams in the world) twice, most recently in 2005.

   The Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium seats 40,000 and hosts football (soccer),
   and athletic competitions. The complex also houses a multi purpose
   indoor stadium with a seating capacity of 8,000 which hosts various
   competitions including volleyball, basket ball, table tennis. The
   Velachery Aquatic Complex seats 4,000 and hosts different kinds of
   water sports. Chennai has also hosted the South Asian Federation (SAF)
   Games 1995.

   The Guindy Race Course for horse racing was set up in 1777. Motor
   racing events are held at the Sriperumbudur (Thirupperumbudur) track
   for cars, and the Sholavaram track for motorcycles. The Madras Boat
   Club was set up 1867 at the Basin Bridge and hosts rowing races. The
   city has two 18-hole golf courses: the Cosmopolitan Club,& the Gymkhana
   Club golf course, both of which were established in the late 19th
   century.

   Chennai was the venue in 2006 for the first Commonwealth Junior Fencing
   Championships.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chennai"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
