   #copyright

Chew Stoke

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

                                  Chew Stoke

   Image:dot4gb.svg
                                  Statistics
   Population:          approx. 1000
                               Ordnance Survey
   OS grid reference:   ST555615
                                Administration
   District:            Bath and North East Somersets
   Region:              South West England
   Constituent country: England
   Sovereign state:     United Kingdom
                                    Other
   Ceremonial county:   Somerset
   Historic county:     Somerset
                                   Services
   Police force:        Avon and Somerset
   Fire and rescue:     Avon
   Ambulance:           South Western
                          Post office and telephone
   Post town:           BRISTOL
   Postal district:     BS40
   Dialling code:       01275
                                   Politics
   UK Parliament:       Wansdyke to be North East Somerset from next general
                        election.
   European Parliament: South West England
   Village sign depicting the Pack Horse Bridge, St Andrew's Church and a
   Bilbie Bell (and bell-foundry worker)
   Enlarge
   Village sign depicting the Pack Horse Bridge, St Andrew's Church and a
   Bilbie Bell (and bell-foundry worker)

   Chew Stoke is a small village within the Chew Valley, in the county of
   Somerset about eight miles south of Bristol, England. The village is at
   the northern edge of the Mendip Hills Area of Outstanding Natural
   Beauty and within the Bristol/ Bath Green Belt. The parish includes the
   hamlet of Breach Hill, which is approximately two miles southwest of
   the village.

   The village has a long history, illustrated by the range of listed
   buildings, and now lies at the northern end of Chew Valley Lake close
   to the dam, pumping station, sailing club and fishing lodge. A
   tributary of the River Chew runs through the village, possibly called
   Strode Brook, as it rises in the village of Strode, although it is not
   named on any maps.

   The village has a population of about 1,000 and has one shop, two pubs,
   a primary school and a bowling club. With Chew Magna it forms the Chew
   Valley North Ward in the Bath and North East Somerset Unitary Authority
   Council Area. Chew Valley School for secondary pupils and its
   associated leisure centre is less than a mile away from Chew Stoke. The
   village has some light industrial units, but is largely agricultural,
   with many residents commuting to nearby cities for employment.

Geography and transportation

   pictorial map of Chew Stoke
   Enlarge
   pictorial map of Chew Stoke

   Chew Stoke is located in the Chew Valley approximately 10 miles (16 km)
   south of Bristol, 15 miles (25 km) from Bath and 9 miles (15 km) from
   Keynsham. It is 1.3 miles (2 km) south of Chew Magna which is on the
   B3130 which joins the A37 and A38. Most of the roads in the area are
   small lanes, although the valley is crossed by the A368. The "Chew
   Valley Explorer" bus route 672/674 provides occasional public transport
   access.

   In 2002 a 1.9-mile (3 km) safe cycle route, the Chew Lake West Green
   Route, was opened around the western part of the lake from Chew Stoke.
   It forms part of the Padstow to Bristol West Country Way, National
   Cycle Network Route 3. It has all-weather surfacing, providing a smooth
   off-road facility for ramblers, mobility-challenged visitors and
   cyclists of all abilities. It was funded by Bath and North East
   Somerset Council with the support of Sustrans and the Chew Valley
   Recreational Trail Association. Minor roads around the lake are also
   frequently used by cyclists.

   Bristol International Airport is approximately 10 miles (15 km) away.
   The nearest train stations are at Keynsham, Bath and Bristol.

History

Prehistory

   Evidence of early occupation of the area was uncovered during
   archaeological excavations carried out by Philip Rahtz and Ernest
   Greenfield employed by the Ministry of Works, from 1953 to 1955. The
   excavations found evidence of people belonging to the consecutive
   periods known as Upper Palaeolithic, Mesolithic and Neolithic (Old,
   Middle and New Stone Age), Bronze Age and Iron Age, including
   implements such as stone knives, flint blades and the head of a mace,
   along with buildings and graves.

Romano-Celtic temple

   Chew Stoke boasts a Romano-Celtic temple, excavated by Philip Rahtz
   between 1949 and 1951, which was originally thought, on its discovery
   in 1830, to be a beacon, for signalling between adjoining hillforts.
   This double-octagonal temple building was comprised of an inner wall,
   which formed the cella, surrounded by an outer wall forming an
   ambulatory, or covered walkway, is situated on a promontory overlooking
   the River Chew. The outer portico measures about 56½ feet in diameter,
   the inner cellar about 32 feet across; all walls are about 3 feet
   thick. Along each wall were two features described by Rahtz as
   buttresses but were more likely to have been pilasters, as their small
   size would render them ineffective as wall supports. Rodwell suggests
   that the ambulatory would have been cross-vaulted and the pilasters
   used as external supports for this. This would allow for a good deal of
   natural light to circulate the building and give an aesthetically
   balanced look to the structure. The ambulatory would then give the
   illusion of a labyrinth of side chambers running off from the central
   area. The temple faced east and was first built in the late-3rd
   century. After the collapse of the original building another temple was
   built, again to fall into ruin. The final rebuild, after about AD 367
   included the addition of an internal screen. The building finally
   collapsed in the 5th century. The site of the temple is on the aptly
   named Pagans Hill, although any link to the site in the naming of the
   road has been lost in the mists of time.

   It is likely that there was other occupation during Roman times in the
   village, as there is in the surrounding area, although no definitive
   evidence has been found.

Middle Ages

   During the Middle Ages farming was the most important activity in the
   area. There is also evidence of lime kilns, which were used in the
   production of mortar for the construction of local churches. Farming,
   both arable and dairy, continues today. There were also a variety of
   orchards for fruit production, including apples, pears and plums.

   In the Domesday Book of 1086 it is listed at Chiwestoche, and belonged
   to Gilbert Fitz-Turold. He conspired with the Duke of Normandy against
   king William Rufus and subsequently all his lands were seized. The next
   recorded owner was Lord Beauchamps of Hatch, by whom it was held
   underthe Honour of Gloucester.

Bilbie family of bell and clockmakers

   Chew Stoke had a remarkable family of " bell founders and clockmakers"
   who lived and worked there for more than 200 years, from the late 1600s
   until the 1800s. The Bilbie family produced more than 1,350 bells,
   which are hung in churches all over the West Country. The oldest bell,
   cast in 1698, is still giving good service in St Andrew's Church. Their
   clocks date from 1724 and are highly prized. They produced mostly
   longcase clocks, the cheapest with 30-hour movements in modest oak
   cases, but they also made high quality 8-day movements with additional
   features such as including the high tide at Bristol docks. These were
   fitted into quality cabinet-maker cases that now command the highest
   prices.

Recent history

   In the 20th century the village has expanded slightly with the building
   of new houses, particularly to house residents of the area of the Chew
   Valley Lake who had to be moved in the 1950s when the lake area was
   flooded.

   In World War II 42 children and 3 teachers who had been evacuated from
   Avenmore school in London were accommodated in the village.

   On 10th July 1968 torrential rainfall led to widespread flooding in the
   village, which water reaching the first floor of many buildings. The
   damage in the village was not as severe as in some of the surrounding
   villages such as Pensford, however fears that the dam of Chew Valley
   Lake would be breached caused considerable anxiety in the village.

   Her Royal Highness Anne, Princess Royal buried a time capsule at the
   new Rural Housing Trust development at Salway Close, which had been
   built in the previous year and newly opened, on Friday, 2 February
   2001. The capsule contained items describing the life and history of
   the village, including a video of millennium celebrations, from scheme
   residents, Chew Stoke Women's Institute and the parish council.

   Each year, over a weekend in September at "Harvest Home" is held in the
   village with horse and pet shows, bands, a fun fair and a variety of
   entertainment.

   The Radford's factory site within the village, which used to be
   involved in the manufacture of refrigeration equipment, has been
   identified as a brownfield site suitable for residential use in the
   2002 Draft Local Plan of Bath and North East Somerset. It has been a
   matter of some controversy surrounding planning permission and the
   balance between residential, social and employment uses.

Government and politics

   Chew Stoke has its own Parish council which has some responsibility for
   local issues. The village is part of the Chew Valley North Ward on the
   Bath and North East Somerset Unitary Authority which has wider
   responsibilities for services such as education, refuse, tourism etc,
   it is currently represented by Councillor Malcolm Hannay, a
   Conservative. The village is a part of the Wansdyke constituency which
   elects one MP to the Westminster Parliament and part of the South West
   England constituency which elects 7 members to the European Parliament.
   The sitting Member of Parliament for Wansdyke is Dan Norris, a member
   of the Labour Party.

Demographics

   According to the 2001 Census the Chew Valley North Ward (which includes
   Chew Magna and Chew Stoke), had 2,307 residents, living in 911
   households, with an average age of 42.3 years. Of these 77% of
   residents describing their health as 'good', 21% of 16–74 year olds had
   no qualifications; and the area had an unemployment rate of 1.3% of all
   economically active people aged 16–74. In the Index of Multiple
   Deprivation 2004, it was ranked at 26,243 out of 32,482 wards in
   England, where 1 was the most deprived LSOA and 32,482 the least
   deprived.

Points of interest

   St Andrews Church Chew Stoke
   Enlarge
   St Andrews Church Chew Stoke

Bridges

   The pedestrian and "Irish" bridges and at Chew Stoke
   Enlarge
   The pedestrian and "Irish" bridges and at Chew Stoke

   In the old centre of the village, which is now quiet as the main road
   takes a different route through the village, is an old stone packhorse
   bridge which is now pedestrian only. Just below it is an Irish bridge
   which is dry in summer and a ford in winter, which was built in the
   1950s.

St Andrews Church

   St Andrews Church, which was constructed in the 15th Century and
   underwent extensive renovation in 1862, is on the outskirts of the
   village. In the churchyard is the reconstructed Moreton Cross which was
   moved here when Chew Valley Lake was flooded. Within the church itself
   there is a memorial plaque to the Bilbie family of bell founders and
   clock makers, and just inside the porch on the left of the church door,
   is a stone figure holding an anchor which was moved to the church from
   Walley Court with the flooding of the lake. There is an unconfirmed
   story that this was given to the Gilbert family, then living at the
   court by Queen Elizabeth I. The inside of the church is decorated with
   156 angels in wood and stone. The church is Grade II* listed. The
   church includes a tower with an unusual spirelet on the staircase
   turret, and contains bells cast by the Bilbie family in the village.
   The base of cross shaft in the churchyard about 24 metres south west of
   the tower is thought to date from the 14th Century and is a Grade II*
   listed building, as is the Webb monument in the churchyard. The
   churchyard gate, at the south east entrance, bears a lamp which was
   provided by public subscription to commemorate Queen Victoria's Jubilee
   of 1897. Itself a Grade II listed structure. Within the church are
   bronze plaques commemorating the eleven people from the village who
   died in World War I and six from World War II. There is also a stained
   glass window showing a saint with a sword standing on a snake and
   crossed flags commemorating those from World War II.

Rectory

   The Old Rectory, south front with carvings of shields
   Enlarge
   The Old Rectory, south front with carvings of shields
   The New Rectory
   Enlarge
   The New Rectory

   The village hall is at the end of Church Lane, opposite the Rectory
   which is believed to have been built in 1529 by the rector, Sir John
   Barry, (Rector 1524–46). It has undergone substantial renovations
   including the addition of a clock tower for the Rev. W.P. Wait, which
   has since been removed and further alterations c.1876 for Rev. J.
   Ellershaw. The building has an ornate south front with carvings of
   shields bearing the coat of arms of the St Loe family, who were once
   chief landowners in the area, alone or impaled with arms of Fitzpane,
   Ancell, de la Rivere and Malet. It is Grade II* listed.

New Rectory

   The new rectory was built by the Revereend John Ellershaw in the
   1870's. The last rector to occupy it was Lionel St. Clair Waldy from
   1907 to 1945.It was then bought by Douglas Wills who donated it and the
   rectory field to Winford Hospital as a convalescent home for 16
   children, and later used as a nurses home before being sold for private
   use. It is now split into several residential units.

Grade II listed buildings

   The oldest buildings of Chew Stoke School
   Enlarge
   The oldest buildings of Chew Stoke School

   The age of many of the buildings, including the church, school and
   several houses, reflects the long history of the village. Chew Stoke
   Church Primary School has approximately 170 pupils between 4 and 11
   years old. After the age of 11 most pupils move on to Chew Valley
   School. Parts of the current buildings, which are used for the youngest
   two classes, were built in 1858 by Samuel Burleigh Gabriel on the site
   of a former charity school, which was founded in 1718. Further
   classrooms were built in 1926, and altered and extended in 1970. It is
   a Grade II listed building.

   An obelisk on Breach Hill Lane, which dates from the early to mid 19th
   century, is said to have been built as a waterwork marker. It has a
   square limestone plinth about one metre high. The obelisk is about 10
   metres high with a pyramidal top and small opening at the top on two
   sides.
   Fairseats Farmhouse
   Enlarge
   Fairseats Farmhouse

   Farming has been important in the area for hundreds of years. This is
   reflected in the age of many of the farmhouses. Rookery Farmhouse in
   Breach Hill Lane is dated at 1720, with later 18th century additions to
   either side of rear wing. An attached stable 6 metres north east of the
   farmhouse is also a Grade II listed building. The School Farmhouse in
   School Lane dates from the late 17th century, and a studded oak door in
   the side of the house. Wallis Farmhouse further along School Lane is
   dated at 1782. Yew Tree Farmhouse dates back to the 15th century, and
   is one of the oldest buildings in the village, but has extensive
   alterations since. North Hill Farmhouse has 15th century origins.
   Paganshill Farmhouse dates from the 17th century. Fairseat Farmhouse is
   from the 18th century and includes a plaque recording John Wesley
   preaching at the house on 10 September 1790. In August of that year
   Fairseat Farmhouse was "registered among the records of this County as
   a House set apart for the worship of God and religious exercise for
   Protestant Dissenters". At that time belonged to Anna Maria Griffon. In
   the garden is a large Evergreen Oak (Ilex) which measured 98 feet
   across until half of it broke away in a gale in 1976.
   Methodist Chapel
   Enlarge
   Methodist Chapel

   The Methodist Chapel is was built in 1815/16, following regular
   services at Fairseat Farm. There is even a listed milestone at Stoke
   Village south of the main village saying "8 miles to Bristol".

Industry

   The area is largely rural with several farms, both arable and dairy.
   There are a small number of light industrial/craft units at Fairseat
   Workshops, which used to be a dairy, including Harptrees Photography,
   Realgames, Tablesports, Slightly Sheepish, Graphic Type and an office
   of Gradwell.com.

   Many residents commute to Bristol or Bath for employment.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chew_Stoke"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
