   #copyright

Chicago

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: North American Geography

   Chicago, Illinois
   Skyline of Chicago, Illinois

   Official flag of Chicago, Illinois

                                     Official seal of Chicago, Illinois
   Flag                              Seal
   Nickname: " The Windy City, The Second City, Chi Town, "The City of Big
   Shoulders""
   Motto: Urbs In Horto" (Latin: "City in a Garden"), "I Will"
   Location in Chicagoland and Illinois
   Location in Chicagoland and Illinois
   Coordinates: 41°54′N 87°39′W
   Country United States
   State Illinois
   County Cook
   Incorporated March 4, 1837
   Mayor Richard M. Daley ( D)
   Area
    - City 606.2 km²  (234.0  sq mi)
    - Land 588.3 km²  (227.2 sq mi)
    - Water 17.9 km² (6.9 sq mi)  3.0%
    - Urban 5,498.1 km² (2,122.8 sq mi)
    - Metro 28,163 km² (10,874 sq mi)
   Elevation 179 m  (587 ft)
   Population
    - City (2006) 2,873,790
    - Density 4,867/km² (12,604/sq mi)
    - Urban 8,711,000
    - Metro 9,661,840
   Time zone CST ( UTC-6)
    - Summer ( DST) CDT ( UTC-5)
   Website: egov.cityofchicago.org

   Chicago (pron. ʃɪˈkɑːgoʊ ) refers to a major city in Illinois and a
   metropolitan area that includes the city and surrounding areas. The
   City of Chicago is the largest city in the Midwest and the third-most
   populous city in the United States, with approximately 2.9 million
   people. The Chicago Metropolitan area, sometimes informally called
   Chicagoland, has a population of 9.4 million in Illinois, Wisconsin,
   and Indiana making it the third largest in the United States. Chicago
   is located along the southwestern shore of Lake Michigan and is a
   centre of transportation, industry, politics, finance, medicine and
   higher education. Chicago is informally called the " Second
   City,"(referring to the fire in 1873 that destroyed nearly all of the
   city) the " Windy City," the " City of Big Shoulders", and "Chi-town."

   Chicago was founded 1833 as a town to link the Great Lakes with the
   Mississippi River system It soon became a transportation hub of the Old
   Northwest, with major connections by steamboats, canals and (by 1855),
   railroads. By 1890 it was one of the ten most influential world cities.

History

   Chicago, looking north from State and Washington Streets in the 19th
   Century
   Enlarge
   Chicago, looking north from State and Washington Streets in the 19th
   Century
   Chicago City Hall just before completion in 1911.
   Enlarge
   Chicago City Hall just before completion in 1911.

   During the mid-1700s the Chicago area was inhabited primarily by
   Potawatomis, who took the place of the Miami and Sauk and Fox people.
   The first non-native settler in Chicago, Jean-Baptiste Pointe du Sable,
   was Haitian and arrived in the 1770s, married a Potawatomi woman, and
   founded the area's first trading post. In 1803, the United States Army
   built Fort Dearborn, which was destroyed in 1812 in the Fort Dearborn
   Massacre. The Ottawa, Ojibwa, and Potawatomi later ceded the land to
   the United States in the Treaty of St. Louis of 1816. On August 12,
   1833, the Town of Chicago was organized with a population of 350, and
   within seven years it grew to a population of over 4,000. The City of
   Chicago was incorporated on March 4, 1837.

   Chicago in its first century was one of the fastest growing cities in
   the world, heavily promoted by Yankee entrepreneurs and land
   speculators. It reached 1 million people by 1890.

   Starting in 1848, the city became an important transportation link
   between the eastern and western United States with the opening of the
   Galena & Chicago Union Railroad, Chicago's first railway, and the
   Illinois and Michigan Canal, which allowed steamboats and sailing ships
   on the Great Lakes to connect through Chicago to the Mississippi River.
   With a flourishing economy that brought many new residents from rural
   communities and German American, Irish American, Swedish American and
   numerous other immigrants, Chicago grew from a city of 299,000 to
   nearly 1.7 million between 1870 and 1900. The city's manufacturing and
   retail sectors dominated the Midwest and greatly influenced the
   American economy, with the Union Stock Yards' dominating the meat
   packing trade.
   State Street in 1907
   Enlarge
   State Street in 1907

   After the Great Chicago Fire of 1871, Chicago experienced rapid
   rebuilding and growth. During Chicago's rebuilding period, the first
   skyscraper was constructed in 1885 using steel-skeleton construction.
   In 1893, Chicago hosted the World's Columbian Exposition on former
   marshland at the present location of Jackson Park. The World's
   Columbian Exposition drew 27.5 million visitors, and is considered
   among the most influential world's fairs in history. The University of
   Chicago was founded one year earlier in 1892 on the same location. The
   term "midway" for a fair or carnival referred originally to the Midway
   Plaisance, a strip of park land that still runs through the University
   of Chicago campus & connects Washington & Jackson parks.

   The city was the site of labor conflicts and unrest during this period,
   which included the Haymarket Riot on May 4, 1886. Concern for social
   problems among Chicago's lower classes led to the founding of Hull
   House in 1889, of which Jane Addams was a co-founder. The city also
   invested in many large, finely-landscaped municipal parks, which also
   included public sanitation facilities.

   Lake Michigan - the primary source of fresh water for the city - was
   already highly polluted from population growth and the rapidly growing
   industries in and around Chicago. The city responded by embarking on
   several large public works projects, including a large excavation
   project which built tunnels below Lake Michigan to newly built water
   cribs which were two miles (3 km) off the lakeshore. However, the cribs
   failed to bring enough clean water since spring rains would wash the
   polluted water from the Chicago River into them. Beginning in 1855,
   Chicago constructed the first comprehensive sewer system in the U.S. In
   1900, the problem of sewage was solved by reversing the direction of
   the River's flow with the construction of the Chicago Sanitary and Ship
   Canal leading to the Illinois River.
   The Chicago River at night
   Enlarge
   The Chicago River at night

   The 1920s brought international notoriety to Chicago as gangsters such
   as Al Capone battled each other and the law during the Prohibition era.
   Nevertheless, the 1920s also saw a large increase in Chicago industry
   as well as the first arrivals of the Great Migration that would lead
   thousands of mostly Southern blacks to Chicago and other Northern
   cities. On December 2, 1942, the world's first controlled nuclear
   reaction was conducted at the University of Chicago as part of the top
   secret Manhattan Project.

   Mayor Richard J. Daley was elected in 1955, in the era of so-called
   machine politics. Starting in the 1950s, many upper and middle-class
   citizens left the inner-city of Chicago for the suburbs and left many
   impoverished neighborhoods in their wake. Nevertheless, the city hosted
   the 1968 Democratic National Convention and saw the construction of the
   Sears Tower (which became the world's tallest building), McCormick
   Place, and O'Hare Airport. In 1979 Jane Byrne, the city's first female
   mayor, was elected. She popularized the city as a movie location and
   tourist destination, but also failed to manage its finances well.

   In 1983 Harold Washington became the first African American to be
   elected to the office of mayor; during his time in office, Chicago
   spent the same amount of public funds in each of its wards for the
   first time in its history. Current mayor Richard M. Daley, son of
   Richard J. Daley, was first elected in 1989. New projects during the
   younger Daley's administration have made Chicago larger, more
   environmentally friendly, and more accessible.

   Since the early 1990s, Chicago has seen a turnaround with increased
   ethnic diversity and many formerly abandoned neighborhoods starting to
   show new life. As a part of its environmentally friendly image, Chicago
   declared the peregrine falcon, a protected species that started to
   build its nests in Chicago skyscrapers, the official bird of the city
   in 1999. Under the current Mayor Daley, Chicago has seen considerable
   investment in infrastructure, revitalizing downtown theatres and retail
   districts, and improving lakefront and riverfront cityscapes.

Origin of name

   The indigenous Potawatomi tribe called the marshes on which Chicago was
   later built "Checagou (prounounced 'She-Ka-Gan')," which translates to
   "wild onion" or "garlic." European explorers assigned the name to the
   Chicago River, followed by settlers' delegating it as the name of the
   city. Before Chicago's founding, the name of the river was spelled
   several ways, such as "Chetagu" or "Shikago."

   The origin of Chicago's nickname as "The Windy City" is debated (see
   List of nicknames for Chicago). The most common explanation had been
   that the phrase was created by New York newspapers in the 1880s during
   a national debate over which city would host the 1893 World's Fair,
   making reference to the long-windedness of the city's supporters.
   However, "Windy City" was used before this by the Chicago Fire. As a
   result, the name remains in common usage.

Geography

Topography

   Landsat image of the Chicagoland area
   Enlarge
   Landsat image of the Chicagoland area

   Located in northeastern Illinois at the southwestern tip of Lake
   Michigan, Chicago's official geographic coordinates are 41°53′0″N,
   87°39′0″W. It sits on the continental divide at the site of the Chicago
   Portage, connecting the Mississippi River and the Great Lakes
   watersheds. The city lies beside Lake Michigan and two rivers: the
   Chicago River in downtown and the Calumet River in the industrial far
   South Side flow entirely or partially through Chicago. The Chicago
   Sanitary and Ship Canal connects the Chicago River with the Des Plaines
   River, which runs to the west of the city.

   When Chicago was founded in the 1830s, most of the early building began
   around the mouth of the Chicago River. According to the U.S. Census
   Bureau, Chicago has a total area of 234.0 square miles (606.1  km²), of
   which 227.1 square miles (588.3 km²) is land and 6.9 square miles
   (17.8 km²) is water. The total area is 2.94% water.

   The city has been built on relatively flat land; the average elevation
   of land is 579 feet (176  m) above sea level. The lowest points are
   along the lake shore at 577 feet (176 m), while the highest point at
   735 feet (224 m) is in the landfill on the city's far south side (
   41°39′18″N, 87°34′44″W).

Climate

   Chicago, like much of the Midwest, has a climate that is prone to
   extreme, often volatile, weather conditions. The city experiences four
   distinct seasons. In July, the warmest month, high temperatures average
   84 ° F (29 ° C) and low temperatures 63 °F (17 °C). In January, the
   coldest month, high temperatures average 29 °F (−2 °C) with low
   temperatures averaging 13 °F (−11 °C). According to the National
   Weather Service, Chicago's highest official temperature reading of
   105 °F (40 °C) was recorded on July 24, 1934. The lowest temperature of
   −27 °F (−32 °C) degrees was recorded on January 20, 1985.

   Chicago's yearly precipitation averages about 38 inches (965  mm).
   Summer is the rainiest season, with short-lived rainfall and
   thunderstorms more common than prolonged rainy periods. Winter is the
   driest season, with most of the precipitation falling as snow.
   Chicago's highest one day precipitation total was 6.49 inches (164 mm)
   which fell on August 14, 1987.

Cityscape

   Downtown Chicago at night
   Enlarge
   Downtown Chicago at night
   The El
   Enlarge
   The El

   The city’s streets are organized in a grid pattern. The pattern is
   modified by the shoreline, the three branches of the Chicago River, the
   system of active/inactive rail lines, several diagonal streets
   (including Clybourn Street, Milwaukee, Lincoln, Elston, Archer,
   Broadway, and Ogden Avenues), the expressways, and hundreds of bridges
   and viaducts. In addition, the baselines for numbering streets and
   buildings are State Street (for east-west numbering) and Madison (for
   north-south numbering). Street numbers begin at "1" at the baselines
   and run numerically in directions indicated to the city limits, with N,
   S, E, and W indicating directions. Chicago is divided into one-mile
   sections which usually contain eight blocks to the mile. Chicago
   streets were renumbered in 1909. This adjustment was responsible for
   the current eight blocks to one mile rule, with the exception of the
   streets for three miles immediately south of Madison. Between Madison
   and Roosevelt (12th), twelve blocks are used per mile, between
   Roosevelt and Cermak (22nd Street), ten blocks make one mile, and
   between Cermak and 31st Street nine blocks make a mile. Even-numbered
   addresses are on the north and west sides of streets; odd-numbered
   addresses are on the south and east sides.

   Madison Street, in addition to simply being an origin point for
   north-south numbering, also divides the city into two well-established
   areas, the North Side and the South Side. The rivalry between the North
   and South sides are distinct, etched from different ethnic origins and
   historical developments, as well as culminating in the contemporary
   rivalry between the two Chicago baseball teams - the Chicago Cubs are
   considered to be the representative team for the North Side, whereas
   the Chicago White Sox are considered to be the South Side's
   counterpart. Note that despite the primary focus on the North-South
   rivalry, there are other geographic designations for the city, most
   commonly being the West Side, which broadly encompasses the area west
   of both the north and south branches of Chicago River. The Northwest
   and Southwest sides of the city area also referenced with frequency,
   though they tend to be subsumed under one of the three aforementioned
   areas.

   Since the first steel-framed high-rise building of the world was
   constructed in the city in 1885, Chicago has been known for its
   skyscrapers. Today, many high-rise buildings are located in the
   downtown area, notably in the Loop and along the lakefront and the
   Chicago River. The three tallest buildings are the Sears Tower (also
   the tallest building in the United States), the Aon Centre, and the
   John Hancock Centre. The rest of the city consists of low-rise
   buildings and single-family homes. There are clusters of industrialized
   areas, including the lakefront near the Indiana border, the area south
   of Midway Airport, and the banks of the Chicago Sanitary and Ship
   Canal.

   Future building sites that will contribute to Chicago's skyline include
   Waterview Tower, the Chicago Spire, and the Trump International Hotel
   and Tower. The 60602 zipcode was named by Forbes as the hottest zipcode
   in the country with upscale buildings such as The Heritage at
   Millennium Park (130 N. Garland) leading the way for other buildings
   such at Waterview Tower, The Legacy and Momo. The median sale price for
   residential real estate was $710,000 in 2005 according to Forbes.

   Along Lake Shore Drive, parks line the lakefront. The most notable of
   these parks are Grant Park and Millennium Park,
   Cloudgate at Millennium Park
   Enlarge
   Cloudgate at Millennium Park

   which border the east end of the Loop, Lincoln Park on the north side,
   and Jackson Park in the Hyde Park neighbourhood on the south side.
   Interspersed within this system of parks are 31 beaches, a zoo and
   several bird sanctuaries, McCormick Place Convention Centre, Navy Pier,
   Soldier Field, the Museum Campus, and a water treatment plant.

   Pushed along by the national real estate boom in recent years, Chicago
   has seen an unprecedented surge in skyscraper construction, most
   notably in the area directly south ( South Loop) and north ( River
   North) of the Loop. This has been accompanied by a rapid gentrification
   of many parts of the city, as once-dormant areas become "hip"
   neighborhoods replete with an increased level of commercial services.
   An example is a section of the near-west-side neighbourhood West Town
   called Wicker Park.
   Chicago Skyline stretching from Shedd Aquarium to Navy Pier taken from
   Adler Planetarium Oct. 06
   Enlarge
   Chicago Skyline stretching from Shedd Aquarium to Navy Pier taken from
   Adler Planetarium Oct. 06

Neighborhoods

   See also: Chicago Neighborhoods

North Side

   Boystown in Chicago's North Side during a Gay Pride Parade
   Enlarge
   Boystown in Chicago's North Side during a Gay Pride Parade

   The North Side encompasses neighborhoods such as Lincoln Park,
   Wrigleyville, Lakeview, Logan Square, Ravenswood, and Rogers Park. Due
   to historical economic developments and trends, the North Side is also
   the most densely developed and, on average, wealthiest side of Chicago.
   The North Side is primarily served by the Red Line on the CTA, though
   the further one lives from Lake Michigan, the less dense rail service
   of any kind becomes.

   Ethnically, the North Side perhaps serves as also the primary melting
   pot of Chicago. Originally the main destination for German, Swedish,
   and Polish immigrants, the legacy of immigration has created diverse
   areas, particularly the extremely popular area around Devon Avenue,
   which is home to primarily Near Eastern and South Asian residents, and
   the accompanying restaurants and accoutrements. Strong Vietnamese and
   other Southeast and East Asian populations are also prevalent,
   especially within and about the Uptown neighborhood. Of particular
   note, however, is the significant gay population, much of it
   concentrated in an area in the Lakeview neighbourhood coyly referred to
   as "Boystown," stretching along the north-south Halsted Avenue. Recent
   city-sponsored community projects have even resulted in numerous
   rainbow-colored abstract pillars being erected here to symbolize gay
   pride and to display Chicago's general acceptance of the gay community.

   Much of the North Side has benefited from Chicago's massive building
   and economic boom since the 1990s, resulting in the fast redevelopment
   and escalation of land values in now extremely popular neighborhoods
   such as Lincoln Park and Lakeview. River North, in particular, an area
   just north the Chicago River and the Loop, has undergone a rapid
   transition from a former and rather derelict warehouse district (aside
   from Michigan Avenue and its nearby developments) into a dense
   commercial, residential, and entertainment district, filled with
   numerous, modern skyscrapers.

South Side

   Chicago's Chinatown, located on the South Side
   Enlarge
   Chicago's Chinatown, located on the South Side

   The South Side encompasses neighborhoods such as Armour Square, Back of
   the Yards, Beverly, Bridgeport, Bronzeville, Hyde Park, historic
   Pullman, Morgan Park, Washington Park, and South Shore. In the
   1860-1940 era the South Side was home to numerous European ethnic
   groups, under the political leadership of the Irish. After 1945 most of
   the European ethnics moved to suburban areas, and were replaced by
   African American migrants from the South and Puerto Ricans. Recently
   Hispanics, especially Mexicans, have arrived in large numbers. The
   large industrial plants have mostly closed, most famously the Chicago
   stockyards that in the 1920s employed upwards of 50,000 men.

   Parts of the South Side historically were home to Chicago's elite and
   wealthy, as evidenced by the sprawling mansions in areas south of the
   Loop. The South Side is also less dense than the North Side, both in
   part due to historical trends in development but also due to
   significant loss of population in several of the South Side's
   neighborhoods. Redevelopment and reintegration of the South Side has
   also been hampered by historical actions that have had far-reaching
   consequences in segregating areas of the South Side. Of particular note
   was the routing of the Dan Ryan Expressway in such a way as to act as a
   dividing line between white neighborhoods (such as Bridgeport) and
   black neighborhoods (Bronzeville). In addition, a vast swath of South
   State Street was covered in a massive housing development project known
   as the Robert Taylor Homes, which had a reputation for high rates of
   crime and poverty. The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. and others
   tried direct action to replace slums through the Chicago Freedom
   Movement in the late 1960s, with little tangible success. However,
   these buildings have now been all but demolished in Chicago's recent
   movement to replace public housing with mixed-income, progressive new
   housing developments, known as the Plan for Transformation (see The
   Chicago Housing Authority).

   Many areas of the South Side are stable, middle-class, and diverse.
   Chinatown, for example, has seen a constant surge in growth and
   popularity, and has become a site of East Asian culture and
   restaurants. Hyde Park is home to the prestigious University of Chicago
   and most of its faculty. Rehabilitation and gentrification can be seen
   in parts of Woodlawn, Bronzeville, Bridgeport and McKinley Park.
   Historic Pullman is one of Chicago's most historic neighbourhood and is
   in the process of gentrification.

Southwest Side

   The southwest side of Chicago is comprised predominantly of residential
   neighborhoods, many of them home to significant Irish-American
   communities (unlike the predominantly black areas of the south side to
   the east). The area is host to the largest St. Patrick's Day parade in
   the city (the other being downtown).

   The " Bungalow Belt" reaches deeply into the southwest side of the
   city, giving the area a distinctive architectural look and
   significance, as well as a lower overall population density than areas
   closer to the lakefront.

   Midway International Airport is located in the southwest side of the
   city. The area is served by the Orange line elevated train (to Midway)
   & also the 54th/Cermak line on the Pink/(Blue) line train as well.

West Side

   The West Side encompasses neighborhoods such as Austin, Pilsen,
   Garfield Park, West Town, and Humboldt Park. This area has heavily
   industrialized sections and a vast swath of run-down neighborhoods
   through Lawndale and Garfield Park. These are areas of high crime and
   gang activity from Latin Kings & Vice Lords. However, other parts, such
   as West Town and the West Loop have been extensively gentrified and are
   now home to many transplanted suburbanites and are havens for new
   yuppies relocating from all over the Midwest. The southernmost
   neighborhoods are home to a large part of Chicago's Hispanic population
   while farther north are several working- and middle-class
   neighborhoods. The United Centre is located on the West Side.

Culture

   A Chicago jazz club
   Enlarge
   A Chicago jazz club

   In 1998, the city officially opened the Museum Campus, a 10- acre (4-
   ha) lakefront park surrounding three of the city's main museums: the
   Adler Planetarium, the Field Museum of Natural History, and the Shedd
   Aquarium. The Museum Campus was constructed on the southern section of
   Grant Park. Grant Park is also home to Chicago's other major downtown
   museum, the Art Institute of Chicago, which is partnered with The
   School of the Art Institute of Chicago. The Museum of Science and
   Industry in Chicago, located in the Hyde Park neighbourhood, is housed
   in the only in-place surviving building from the World's Columbian
   Exposition of 1893.

   The Oriental Institute, part of the University of Chicago, has an
   extensive collection of ancient Egyptian and Near Eastern
   archaeological artifacts, while the Freedom Museum is dedicated to
   exploring and explaining the First Amendment to the United States
   Constitution. Other museums and galleries in Chicago are the Chicago
   History Museum, DuSable Museum of African-American History, Mexican
   Fine Arts Centre Museum, Museum of Contemporary Art, and the Peggy
   Notebaert Nature Museum.

   Chicago has a major theatre scene, and is the birthplace of modern
   improvisational comedy. The city is home to two renowned comedy
   troupes: The Second City and I.O. (formerly known as ImprovOlympic).
   Renowned Chicago theatre companies include the Steppenwolf Theatre
   Company (on the city's north side), the Goodman Theatre, and the
   Victory Gardens Theatre. Other theatres, from nearly 100 storefront
   performance spaces such as the Strawdog Theatre Company, the House
   Theatre Company, TimeLine Theatre Company and Remy Bumppo Theatre
   Company in the Lakeview area to landmark downtown houses such as the
   Chicago Theatre, present a variety of plays and musicals. The city is
   home to the Lyric Opera of Chicago, the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, the
   Joffrey Ballet, and several modern and jazz dance troupes. The city's
   classical music scene is also home to companies including Music of the
   Baroque, Chicago Opera Theatre, the Chicago Chamber Musicians, Chicago
   a cappella, and many others.

   Chicago is known for its Chicago blues, Chicago soul, Jazz, and Gospel.
   This strong tradition of music and musical innovation have continued
   into contemporary styles. The city is the birthplace of the House style
   of music, and is the site of an influential Hip-Hop scene. In the 1980s
   the city was a centre for industrial, punk and new wave (spawning the
   famous Wax Trax! label); this influence continued into the alternative
   scene of the 1990s. Chicago was an epicenter of the development of rave
   culture in the 1980's even through today. There is a flourishing
   independent rock scene, including the recent explosion of Chicago emo
   acts, with multiple festivals featuring various acts each year (
   Lollapalooza, the Intonation Music Festival and Pitchfork Music
   Festival being the most prominent).

   Chicago has several signature foods which reflect the city's ethnic and
   working-class roots. These include the deep-dish pizza and the Chicago
   hot dog, which is almost always made of Vienna Beef and loaded with
   mustard, chopped onion, sliced tomato, pickle relish, celery salt,
   sport peppers, and a dill pickle spear (however, putting ketchup on a
   Chicago hot dog is often viewed as 'sacrilegious'). Chicago is also
   known for Italian Beef sandwiches and the Maxwell Street Polish (always
   served topped with grilled onions and mustard). The city has many
   upscale dining establishments as well as many ethnic restaurant
   districts. These include "Greektown" on South Halsted, "Little Italy"
   on Taylor Street, just west of Halsted, "Chinatown" on the near South
   Side, and South Asian on Devon Avenue. Each summer at the end of June
   there is a food festival called the Taste of Chicago in Grant Park. The
   park is home to the famous Buckingham fountain and is located right in
   the midst of downtown off the lake. Every type of food in the city is
   represented, with free concerts and events daily.

Tourism

   Navy Pier
   Enlarge
   Navy Pier

   Thirty-three million foreign and domestic visitors came to Chicago in
   2005. Luxury shopping along the Magnificent Mile, thousands of
   restaurants, as well as Chicago's position as global architectural
   capital, have attracted millions of tourist over the years. The city is
   also a convention hub, being America's third largest city for
   conventions, behind only Las Vegas, and Orlando.

   Navy Pier, a 3000- foot (900 m) pier housing restaurants, shops,
   museums, exhibition halls, auditoriums, and a 150-foot-tall (45 m)
   Ferris wheel, is located north of Grant Park on the lakefront, and is
   one of the most visited landmark in Midwest attracting over 8 million
   people in 2005.

   The Chicago Cultural Centre, built in 1897 as Chicago's first permanent
   public library, now houses the city's Visitor Information Centre,
   galleries, and exhibit halls. The ceiling of Preston Bradley Hall
   includes a 38-foot (11 m) Tiffany glass dome. Millennium Park is a
   rebuilt section of Grant Park that was planned for unveiling at the
   turn of the 21st century, though it was delayed for several years. The
   park includes the original sculpture Cloud Gate (known locally as The
   Bean). When visitors face The Bean and Lake Michigan, a curved image of
   the Chicago skyline is reflected back. Millennium Park also contains a
   restaurant with an outdoor seating section that is transformed into an
   ice skating rink in the winter. Two tall glass sculptures make up the
   Crown Fountain by Jaume Plensa. The fountain's two towers display huge
   LED images of Chicagoans' faces, with water spouting from their pursed
   lips. Frank Gehry's ornate stainless steel bandshell, Pritzker
   Pavilion, is home to the Grant Park Music Festival, a free summer
   series of classical concerts. Behind the pavilion's stage is the Harris
   Theater for Music and Dance, an indoor venue for mid-sized performing
   arts companies, including Chicago Opera Theatre and Music of the
   Baroque. Gehry's stainless steel BP Bridge connects Millennium Park
   with Daley Bicentennial Plaza.

Sports

   U.S. Cellular Field on Chicago's South Side. Home of the Chicago White
   Sox
   Enlarge
   U.S. Cellular Field on Chicago's South Side. Home of the Chicago White
   Sox

   Chicago has 15 sports teams. Chicago is one of only a few cities to
   have its major sports teams play within its city limits. It is one of
   three U.S. cities that has two Major League Baseball teams, and the
   only city to have always had more than one baseball team since the
   forming of the American League in 1900. The Chicago Cubs of the
   National League play at Wrigley Field, which is located in the North
   Side neighbourhood of Lakeview, commonly referred to as "Wrigleyville."
   The Chicago White Sox of the American League, who recently won the
   World Series in 2005, play at U.S. Cellular Field, located in the
   city's South Side Bridgeport neighbourhood.
   Wrigley Field on the North Side. Home of the Chicago Cubs
   Enlarge
   Wrigley Field on the North Side. Home of the Chicago Cubs

   The Chicago Bulls of the National Basketball Association are one of the
   world's most recognized basketball teams, thanks to their enormous
   success during the Michael Jordan era, when they won six NBA titles in
   the 1990s. The Bulls play at the United Centre on Chicago's Near West
   side. They share the "UC" with the Chicago Blackhawks, of the National
   Hockey League. The Hawks are an Original Six franchise, founded in
   1926, and last won the Stanley Cup in 1961.

   The Chicago Bears of the National Football League play at Soldier
   Field. The Chicago Bears have won nine American Football championships
   (eight NFL Championships and Super Bowl XX) trailing only the Green Bay
   Packers, who have twelve.

   The Chicago Fire, members of Major League Soccer, won one league and
   four US Open Cups since 1997. After eight years at Soldier Field, they
   recently moved to the new Toyota Park in Bridgeview at 71st and Harlem
   Avenue during the summer of 2006.

   The Chicago Wolves of the American Hockey League and Chicago Rush of
   the Arena football League both play at the Allstate Arena in nearby
   Rosemont. The Rush are the defending Arenabowl champions. The Wolves
   have won league champonships in 1998, 2000, and 2002. Their first
   season was 1994-95.

   Chicago United, USAFL members, are the Australian Rules football club
   in the city, competing in the MAAFL.

   The city has offered an official Olympic bid for the 2016 Summer
   Olympics, and is considered a strong contender among the two candidate
   American cities.. Chicago also hosted the 1959 Pan American Games, and
   Gay Games VII in 2006.

Economy

   The Chicago Board of Trade Building at night
   Enlarge
   The Chicago Board of Trade Building at night

   Chicago has the third largest gross metropolitan product in the nation
   - approximately $390 billion. The city has also been rated as having
   the most balanced economy in the United States due to its high level of
   diversification. Additionally, the Chicago metropolitan area recorded
   the greatest number of new or expanded corporate facilities in the
   United States for four of the past five years.

   Chicago is a major financial centre with the second largest central
   business district in the U.S. The city is the headquarters of the
   Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (the Seventh District of the Federal
   Reserve). The city is also home to four major financial and futures
   exchanges, including the Chicago Stock Exchange, the Chicago Board of
   Trade (CBOT), the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), and the
   Chicago Mercantile Exchange (the "Merc"). Chicago and the surrounding
   areas also house many major brokerage firms and insurance companies,
   such as Allstate Corporation and Zürich North America. In addition,
   despite Chicago commonly being perceived as a rust-belt city, a study
   indicated that Chicago has the largest high-technology and
   information-technology industry employment in the United States.

   Manufacturing (which includes chemicals, metal, machinery, and consumer
   electronics), printing and publishing, and food processing also play
   major roles in the city's economy. Nevertheless, much of the
   manufacturing occurs outside the city limits, especially since World
   War II. Several medical products and services companies are
   headquartered in the Chicago area, including Baxter International,
   Abbott Laboratories, and the Healthcare Financial Services division of
   General Electric. Moreover, the construction of the Illinois and
   Michigan Canal, which helped move goods from the Great Lakes south on
   the Mississippi River, and the railroads in the 1800s made the city a
   major transportation centre in the United States. In the 1840s, Chicago
   became a major grain port, and in the 1850s and 1860s Chicago's pork
   and beef industry expanded. As the major meat companies grew in Chicago
   many, such as Armour, created global enterprises. Though the
   meatpacking industry currently plays a lesser role in the city's
   economy, Chicago continues to be a major tranportation and distribution
   centre. The city remains the third busiest intermodal port in the world
   after Hong Kong and Singapore.

   The city is also a major convention destination; Chicago is third in
   the U.S. behind Las Vegas and Orlando as far as the number of
   conventions hosted annually. In addition, Chicago is home to eleven
   Fortune 500 companies, while the metropolitan area hosts an additional
   21 Fortune 500 companies. Chicago also hosts 12 Fortune Global 500
   companies and 17 Financial Times 500 companies. The city and its
   surrounding metropolitan area are also home to the second largest labor
   pool in the United States with approximately 4.25 million workers. In
   2006, Chicago placed 10th on the UBS list of the world's richest
   cities.

Demography

                                                       City of Chicago
                                                      Population by year
                                                    Census
                                                      year Population Rank
                                                      1840     4,470   92
                                                      1850    29,963   24
                                                      1860   112,172    9
                                                      1870   298,977    5
                                                      1880   503,185    4
                                                      1890 1,099,850    2
                                                      1900 1,698,575    2
                                                      1910 2,185,283    2
                                                      1920 2,701,705    2
                                                      1930 3,376,438    2
                                                      1940 3,396,808    2
                                                      1950 3,620,962    2
                                                      1960 3,550,404    2
                                                      1970 3,366,957    2
                                                      1980 3,005,072    2
                                                      1990 2,783,726    3
                                                      2000 2,896,016    3

   As one of the largest cities in North America, the population of
   Chicago is cosmopolitan. Chicago's citizens speak over 100 different
   languages, and draw from a diverse range of peoples, cultures and
   religions. Residents of Chicago are referred to as Chicagoans.

   A 2006 estimate puts the city's population at 2,873,790. As of the 2000
   census, there were 2,896,016 people, 1,061,928 households, and 632,909
   families residing within Chicago. This encompasses about one-fifth of
   the entire population of the state of Illinois and 1% of the population
   of the United States. The population density was 12,750.3 people per
   square mile (4,923.0/km²). There were 1,152,868 housing units at an
   average density of 5,075.8 per square mile (1,959.8/km²). The racial
   makeup of the city was 36.39% Black or African American, 31.32% White,
   26.02% Hispanic or Latino, 4.33% Asian and Pacific Islander, 1.64% from
   two or more races, 0.15% Native American, and 0.15% from other races.
   The city itself makes up 23.3% percent of the total population of
   Illinois, down from a high of 44.3% in 1930.

   Of the 1,061,928 households, 28.9% have children under the age of 18
   living with them, 35.1% were married couples living together, 18.9% had
   a female householder with no husband present, and 40.4% were
   non-families. Of all households, 32.6% are made up of individuals and
   8.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The
   average household size was 2.67 and the average family size was 3.50.

   Of the city population, 26.2% are under the age of 18, 11.2% are from
   18 to 24, 33.4% are from 25 to 44, 18.9% are from 45 to 64, and 10.3%
   are 65 years of age or older. The median age is 32 years. For every 100
   females there were 94.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over,
   there were 91.1 males.

   The median income for a household in the city was $38,625, and the
   median income for a family was $46,748. Males had a median income of
   $35,907 versus $30,536 for females. The per capita income for the city
   was $20,175. Below the poverty line are 19.6% of the population and
   16.6% of the families. Of the total population, 28.1% of those under
   the age of 18 and 15.5% of those 65 and older are living below the
   poverty line.

   Chicago has a large Irish-American population on its South Side. Many
   of the city's politicians have come from this population, including
   current mayor Richard M. Daley. Other European ethnic groups are the
   Germans, Italians and Polish. The majority of African Americans are
   also located on Chicago's South Side, although there is a sizable
   population on Chicago's less impoverished West Side. Chicago also has
   the largest number of African Americans in it's metropolitan area,
   behind New York City. Chicago has the largest population of
   Swedish-Americans of any city in the U.S. with approximately 123,000.
   After the Great Chicago Fire, many Swedish carpenters helped to rebuild
   the city, which led to the saying the Swedes built Chicago. Swedish
   influence is particularly evident in Andersonville. Chicago is the home
   of the Evangelical Covenant Church .

   Chicago has the largest Bulgarian community in the world (outside
   Bulgaria) with more than 150,000 Bulgarians living in the city. The
   city has the largest ethnically Polish population outside of Poland,
   making it one of the most important Polonia centers. Chicago is also
   the second-largest Serbian and Lithuanian city, and the third largest
   Greek city in the world. Chicago has a large Romanian-American
   community with more than 100,000, as well as a large Assyrian
   population with about 80,000. The city is home to the seat of the head
   of the Assyrian Church of the East, Mar Dinkha IV, the Evangelical
   Covenant Church , and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America
   headquarters.

   The Chicago Metropolitan area is also a major centre for
   Indian-Americans and South Asians. Chicago has the third-largest South
   Asian population in the United States, after New York City and the San
   Francisco Bay Area. The Devon Avenue corridor on Chicago's north side
   is one of the largest South Asian neighborhoods in North America.
   Chicago also has the second-largest Puerto Rican population in the
   United States after New York City. There are also around 185,000 Arabs
   in Chicago and with the majority located in the suburban parts of Cook
   County around Chicago. There are about 75,000 more Arabs who live in
   the five counties around Cook County including Lake, Kendall, Will, and
   DuPage.

   Chicago's 2006 population estimate of 2,873,790 is debated by some
   since there has been significant construction in the city in the 6
   years since the 2000 census.

   Over 1/3 of the population of Chicago is concentrated in the lakefront
   neighborhoods of the city (from Rogers Park in the north to Hyde Park
   in the south). Encompassing roughly 55 square miles & 1.2 million
   people with a population density of 21,205 people per square mile. This
   makes Chicago's lakefront the most densely populated area in the United
   States outside of New York City.

Law and government

   A Critical Mass gathering on the Daley Plaza, with the Chicago City
   Hall in the background
   Enlarge
   A Critical Mass gathering on the Daley Plaza, with the Chicago City
   Hall in the background

   Chicago is the county seat of Cook County. The government of the City
   of Chicago is divided into executive and legislative branches. The
   Mayor of Chicago is the chief executive, elected by general election
   for a term of four years. The mayor appoints commissioners and other
   officials who oversee the various departments. In addition to the
   mayor, Chicago's two other citywide elected officials are the clerk and
   the treasurer.

   The City Council is the legislative branch and is made up of 50
   alderman, one elected from each ward in the city. The council enacts
   local ordinances and approves the city budget. Government priorities
   and activities are established in a budget ordinance usually adopted
   each November. The council takes official action through the passage of
   ordinances and resolutions.

   During much of the last half of the 19th century, Chicago's politics
   were dominated by a growing Democratic Party organization dominated by
   ethnic ward-healers. During the 1880s and 1890s, Chicago had a powerful
   radical tradition with large and highly organized socialist, anarchist
   and labor organizations. For much of the 20th century, Chicago has been
   among the largest and most reliable Democratic strongholds in the
   United States, with Chicago's Democratic vote totals' leading the state
   of Illinois to be " solid blue" in presidential elections since 1992.
   The citizens of Chicago have not elected a Republican mayor since 1927,
   when William Thompson was voted into office. The strength of the party
   in the city is partly a consequence of Illinois state politics, where
   the Republicans have come to represent the rural and farm concerns
   while the Democrats support urban issues such as Chicago's public
   school funding.

   Former Chicago Mayor Richard J. Daley's mastery of machine politics
   preserved the Chicago Democratic Machine long after the demise of
   similar machines in other large American cities. During much of that
   time the city administration found opposition mainly from a liberal
   "independent" faction of the Democratic Party. The independents finally
   won control of city government in 1983 with the election of Harold
   Washington. Since Washington's death, Chicago has since been under the
   leadership of Richard M. Daley, the son of Richard J. Daley. Because of
   the dominance of the Democratic Party in Chicago, the Democratic
   primary vote held in the spring is generally more significant than the
   full November elections.

Crime

   A Chicago police officer
   Enlarge
   A Chicago police officer

   In addition to its gangland problems, Chicago historically saw a major
   rise in violent crime starting in the late 1960s. Nevertheless, like
   most major American cities, Chicago has experienced a decline in
   overall crime since the 1990s. Murders in the city peaked first in
   1974, with 970 murders when the city's population was over three
   million (resulting in a murder rate of around 29 per 100,000), and
   again in 1992, with 943 murders when the city had fewer than three
   million people, resulting in a murder rate of 34 per 100,000. It peaked
   again in 1993 with 931 murders. Following 1992, the murder count slowly
   decreased to 705 by 1999; by this time, it had the most murders of any
   big city in the U.S. After adopting crime-fighting techniques
   recommended by Los Angeles' and New York City Police Departments in
   2004, Chicago recorded 448 homicides, the lowest total since 1965.
   Nevertheless, this murder rate of 15.65 per 100,000 population is still
   above the U.S. average.

   Chicago has been among the first U.S. cities to build an integrated
   emergency response center to coordinate the city's response to
   terrorist attacks, gang violence, and natural disasters. Built in 1995,
   the centre is integrated with over 2000 cameras, a direct link to the
   National Counterterrorism Centre, and communications with all levels of
   city government. Recently installed anti-crime cameras have been
   introduced and are capable of pinpointing gunshot sounds, calculating
   where the shots were fired, and pointing and zooming the cameras in the
   direction of the shots within a two block radius. Early results show
   these new cameras to be highly effective in reducing crime. Placed in
   residential areas, these cameras cause some Chicagoans to feel uneasy
   about being so closely watched. They have prompted some calls of
   discrimination since these cameras tend to be prevalent in Black and
   Latino communities with higher than average crime rates.

   The FBI often does not accept crime statistics submitted by the Chicago
   Police Department, which tallies data differently than other cities.
   The police record all criminal sexual assaults as opposed to only rape
   as with other police departments. Aggravated battery is counted along
   with the standard category of aggravated assault. As a result, Chicago
   is often omitted from studies like Morgan Quitno's annual "Safest/Most
   Dangerous City" survey.

Education

Public education

   The Chicago Public Schools (CPS) is the school district that controls
   over 600 public elementary and high schools in Chicago. The school
   district, with more 400,000 students enrolled, is led by CEO Arne
   Duncan. The CPS also includes several selective-admission magnet
   schools, such as Whitney Young Magnet High School, Jones College Prep
   High School, Walter Payton College Prep, Lane Tech College Prep,[Paul
   Laurence Dunbar Vocational Career Academy], and Northside College
   Preparatory High School.

   Like many urban U.S. school districts, CPS suffered many problems
   throughout the latter half of the 20th century, including overcrowding,
   underfunding, mismanagement and a high dropout rate. In 1987, then U.S.
   Secretary of Education William Bennett named the Chicago Public Schools
   as the "worst in the nation." Several school reform initiatives have
   since been undertaken to improve the system's performance. Reforms have
   included a system of Local School Councils, Charter Schools, and
   efforts to end social promotion. The most notable and public of these
   reforms has been a concerted effort at aggressively closing down
   underperforming schools while at the same time renovating and improving
   successful ones or building new ones .

Higher education

   View of the University of Chicago from the Midway Plaisance, a long
   stretch of parkland that bisects the campus.
   Enlarge
   View of the University of Chicago from the Midway Plaisance, a long
   stretch of parkland that bisects the campus.

   Since the 1890s Chicago has been a world centre in higher education and
   research. Two of America's top research universities are University of
   Chicago in Hyde Park on the South Side and Northwestern University in
   northside suburb Evanston. Catholic universities are located in
   Chicago, such as DePaul University (the largest Catholic university in
   the U.S.), St. Xavier University, and Loyola University, which also
   maintains a campus on Michigan Avenue.
   DePaul University's College of Commerce at State Street and Jackson
   Boulevard downtown in the Chicago Loop.
   Enlarge
   DePaul University's College of Commerce at State Street and Jackson
   Boulevard downtown in the Chicago Loop.

   The University of Illinois at Chicago is the city's largest university
   and features the nation's largest medical school. The Illinois
   Institute of Technology in Bronzeville has renowned engineering and
   architecture programs. Dominican University, outside Chicago in River
   Forest, teaches many library courses at the Chicago Public Library's
   Harold Washington Building. North Park University, a small Christian
   liberal arts university affiliated with the Evangelical Covenant
   Church, is located on the northwest side in the North Park
   neighbourhood. The Chicago region has 12 accredited theological schools
   representing Catholic and most Protestant denominations. The United
   Church of Christ-related Chicago Theological Seminary is the city's
   oldest institution of higher education. These accredited seminaries are
   joined in a consortium known as the Association of Chicago Theological
   Schools (ACTS). The Moody Bible Institute is near downtown. Chicago
   State University and Northeastern Illinois University are other state
   universities in Chicago. The city also has a large community college
   system known as the City Colleges of Chicago. Additionally, there are
   several smaller colleges noted for their fine arts education programs -
   Roosevelt University, Columbia College Chicago, and The School of the
   Art Institute of Chicago.

   The Newberry Library is a major research centre in the humanities,
   while the Art Institute is one of the strongest in the country.

Infrastructure

Health and medicine

   The new Prentice Women's Hospital at Northwestern University's medical
   center
   Enlarge
   The new Prentice Women's Hospital at Northwestern University's medical
   centre

   Chicago is home to the Illinois Medical District on the Near West Side.
   It includes Rush University Medical Centre, the University of Illinois
   at Chicago medical centre, and John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital of Cook
   County, the largest trauma-centre in the city. The University of
   Chicago operates the University of Chicago Hospitals, which was ranked
   the fourteenth best hospital in the country by U.S. News and World
   Report. It is the only hospital in Illinois ever to be included in the
   magazine's "Honour Roll" of the best hospitals in the United States.

   The University of Illinois College of Medicine at UIC is the largest
   medical school in the United States (1300 students, including those at
   campuses in Peoria, Rockford and Urbana-Champaign). Chicago is also
   home to other nationally recognized medical schools including Rush
   Medical College, the Pritzker School of Medicine of the University of
   Chicago, and the Feinberg School of Medicine of Northwestern
   University. In addition, the Chicago Medical School and Loyola
   University Chicago's Stritch School of Medicine are located in the
   suburbs of North Chicago and Maywood, respectively. The Midwestern
   University Chicago College of Osteopathic Medicine is in Downers Grove.

   The leading healthcare informatics organizations are located in
   Chicago, including the American Medical Informatics Association and the
   Health Information Management Systems Society. These organizations
   include as members many healthcare IT vendors and the CIO/VP Technology
   leaders of most American healthcare operations. The American College of
   Surgeons, American Dental Association, American Hospital Association,
   American Medical Association, and the American Osteopathic Association
   are based in the city.

Transportation

   CTA Blue Line station at O'Hare Airport
   Enlarge
   CTA Blue Line station at O'Hare Airport

   Chicago is the premier transportation hub in America. It is an
   important component in global distribution, as it is the third largest
   inter-modal port in the world after Hong Kong and Singapore.
   Additionally, it is the only city in North America in which all six
   Class I railroads meet.

   Chicago is one of the largest hubs of passenger rail service in the
   nation. Many Amtrak long distance services originate from Chicago Union
   Station. Such services provide connections to New York, Seattle, New
   Orleans, Los Angeles and Washington, DC. Amtrak also provides a number
   of short-haul services throughout Illinois and toward nearby Milwaukee.

   Seven interstate highways run through Chicago. Segments that link to
   the city centre are named after influential politicians, and traffic
   reports tend to use the names rather than interstate numbers. The
   Kennedy Expressway is I-90 from the Loop to O'Hare International
   Airport. The Dan Ryan Expressway is I-90/ 94 from south of the "Circle
   Interchange" to the I-57 Split, and from the I-57 Split south is the
   Bishop Ford Freeway. The rest of I-94 is called the Edens Expressway.
   I-90 becomes the Chicago Skyway when it breaks off from the Dan Ryan
   Expressway. Other named highway segments are the Stevenson Expressway (
   I-55), Eisenhower Expressway ( I-290) and Reagan Memorial( I-88).

   The Chicago Transit Authority (CTA) handles public transportation in
   Chicago and a few adjacent suburbs. The CTA operates an extensive
   network of buses and a rapid transit system known locally as the 'L'
   (for "elevated"), which among other things provides rail service from
   downtown to Midway and O'Hare airports. Pace provides bus and
   paratransit service in over 200 surrounding suburbs with some
   extensions into the city.

   Metra operates commuter rail service in Chicago and its suburbs. The
   Metra Electric Line shares the railway with the South Shore Line's
   NICTD Northwest Indiana Commuter Rail Service, which accesses
   Gary/Chicago Airport. The Regional Transportation Authority (RTA)
   coordinates the operation of the three service boards: CTA, Metra, and
   Pace.

   Chicago is served by Midway Airport on the south side and O'Hare
   International Airport, one of the world's busiest airports, on the far
   northwest. In 2005, O'Hare was the world's busiest airport by aircraft
   movements and the second busiest by total passenger traffic (due to
   government enforced flight caps). Both O'Hare and Midway are owned and
   operated by the City of Chicago. Gary/Chicago International Airport,
   located in nearby Gary, Indiana, serves as the third Chicagoland
   airport, although SkyValue offers the only scheduled passenger service.
   The State of Illinois has debated opening a new airport near Peotone.

Utilities

   Electricity for all of northern Illinois is provided by Commonwealth
   Edison, also known as ComEd. Their service territory borders Iroquois
   County to the south, the Wisconsin border to the north, the Iowa border
   to the west and the Indiana border to the east. In northern Illinois,
   ComEd (a division of Exelon) operates the greatest number of nuclear
   generating plants in any US state. Because of this, ComEd reports
   indicate that Chicago receives about 75% of its electricity from
   nuclear power.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chicago"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
