   #copyright

Child

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Health and medicine

   A child (plural: children). Precise definitions vary; is the offspring,
   of any age, of two people. The American Heritage Dictionary defined a
   child as an individual who has not yet reached puberty.

   The term "child" is also a counterpart of parent: adults are the
   children of their parents despite their maturation beyond infancy; for
   example "Benjamin, aged 46, is the child of Tobias, aged 73". Similarly
   in a generalized sense, see child node.

Legal definition of child

   The Convention on the Rights of the Child defines a child as "every
   human being below the age of 18 years unless under the law applicable
   to the child, majority is attained earlier".

Development

   Two little girls.
   Enlarge
   Two little girls.
   Bouguereau's A Calling.
   Enlarge
   Bouguereau's A Calling.
   Boy showing tongue.
   Enlarge
   Boy showing tongue.

   Child development is the study or examination of processes and
   mechanisms that operate during the physical and mental development of
   an infant into an adult. Pediatrics is the branch of medicine relating
   to the care of children. It encompasses ages from prenatal to teenagers
   and even young adults (ages 0-21 years).

   Terms for stages of age-related physical development are listed below.
   Approximate age ranges are shown, but conceptions about the boundaries
   between different stages of life vary between cultures and periods. The
   age ranges and terms listed reflect 21st century conceptions in the
   developed world.
     * Zygote, the point of Conception, fertilization
     * Embryo; in the later stages also called fetus
     * Birth
     * Child:
          + Infant (baby) (ages 0 - 1.5)
               o Neonate (newborn) in the first month of life
          + Toddler (ages 1.5 - 4)
          + Middle childhood (schoolchild (or schoolboy or schoolgirl)) -
            Primary school/Elementary school age (ages 4 - 11)
               o prepubescence, a subset of the above (ages 10 - 11,
                 approximately)
          + Preadolescence (preteen, or late childhood) - in the United
            States, middle school age (ages 11 - 13, approximately. Note
            overlap with prepubesent stage of middle childhood.)
     * Adolescence and puberty (teenager) (14-20)
     * Young adult (18-25)
     * Adult (starts at age 18-21 or older; exact minimum age may vary)
          + Early adulthood (21-32)
          + Middle age (33-54)
          + Advanced adult/ Senior citizen (55+)
     * Death (occurs at various ages depending on person)

   Also sometimes used are terms that specify one's age in decades, such
   as:
     * Twenty something (20-29)
     * Thirty something (30-39)
     * Forty something/Quadragenarian (rarely used since 1980)(40-49)
     * Quinquagenarian (50-59)
     * Sexagenarian (60-69)
     * Septuagenarian (70-79)
     * Octogenarian (80-89)
     * Nonagenarian (90-99)
     * Centenarian (100-109)
     * Supercentenarian (110+)

Cognitive development

     * Learning
     * Music lessons
     * Infant Education
     * Language acquisition
     * Developmental psychology
     * Child art

Notable child prodigies

     * Christian Friedrich Heinecken (The Infant of Lübeck)
     * Isaac Albéniz
     * Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart
     * Sarah Chang
     * Tiger Woods

Human development

   Alice Liddell at 7.
   Enlarge
   Alice Liddell at 7.

   Human development refers to all forms of development above, often in
   the context of clinical or developmental psychology, or as human
   development theory (in economics, an outgrowth of welfare economics).

   Both the psychological and economic fields share a special concern with
   education and language fluency including literacy and numeracy, and
   with identification and development of more unique talents into the
   economic variable known as individual capital.

   Earlier branches of economics see humans in terms of labour for
   production, means of persuasion or protection, which tend to be skills
   acquired only in adolescence and adulthood. The human development view
   is more evident in sports, music and other performing arts, such as
   acting where the child begins training often as early as three years of
   age. A contemporary example is Tiger Woods and his early training in
   golfing.

   Children are often targeted at for advertising, as many people,
   including Eric Schlosser, have told the world via books.

   While there are problems with such early "streaming", child murder,
   child abandonment, military use of children and other major social ills
   are thought to be reduced by a human development approach – as there is
   a high value assigned to children by the state.

   The UN Human Development Index is a means of measuring well-being used
   to rank states by these criteria.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Child"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
