   #copyright

Chives

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Food and agriculture;
Plants

                    iChives
           Scientific classification

   Kingdom:    Plantae
   Subkingdom: Tracheobionta
   Division:   Magnoliophyta
   Class:      Liliopsida
   Subclass:   Liliidae
   Order:      Asparagales
   Family:     Alliaceae
   Genus:      Allium
   Species:    A. schoenoprasum

                                Binomial name

   Allium schoenoprasum
   L.

   Chives (Allium schoenoprasum), is the smallest species of the onion
   family Alliaceae, native to Europe, Asia and North America. They are
   referred to only in the plural, because they grow in clumps rather than
   as individual plants. Allium schoenoprasum is also the only species of
   Allium native to both the New and the Old World.

   Its species name derives from the Greek [word]s skhoinos ( sedge) and
   prason (onion). Its English name, chive, derives from the French word
   cive, which was derived from cepa, being the Latin word for onion.

   Culinary uses for chives involve shredding its leaves (straws) for use
   as condiment for fish, potatoes and soups. Because of this, it is a
   common household herb, frequent in gardens as well as in grocery
   stores. It also has insect-repelling properties which can be used in
   gardens to control pests.

Biology

   The chive is a bulb-forming herbaceous perennial plant, growing to
   30-50 cm tall. The bulbs are slender conical, 2-3 cm long and 1 cm
   broad, and grow in dense clusters from the roots. The leaves are hollow
   tubular, up to 50 cm long, and 2-3 mm in diameter, with a soft texture,
   although, prior to the emergence of a flower from a leaf, it may appear
   stiffer than usual. The flowers are pale purple, star-shaped with six
   tepals, 1-2 cm wide, and produced in a dense inflorescence of 10-30
   together; before opening, the inflorescence is surrounded by a papery
   bract. The seeds are produced in a small three-valved capsule, maturing
   in summer. The herb flowers from April to May in the southern parts of
   its habitat zones and in June in the northern parts.

   Chives are the only species of Allium native to both the Old World and
   New; however, some argue that the race found in North America should be
   classified as A. schoenoprasum Var. sibiricum, although this is
   disputed. There have, however, been significant differences among type
   specimens: one example was found in northern Maine growing solitary,
   instead of in clumps, also exhibiting dingy grey flowers.

   Albeit repulsive to insects in general, due to its sulfur compounds,
   its flowers are attractive to bees, and it is sometimes kept to
   increase desired insect life.

Uses

Culinary

   Chives are grown for their leaves, which are used for culinary purposes
   as condiment, which provide a somewhat milder flavour than its
   neighbouring Allium species.

   Chives have a wide variety of culinary uses, such as in traditional
   dishes in France and Sweden, among others. In his 1806 book Attempt at
   a Flora (Försök til en flora), Retzius describes how chives are used
   with pancakes, soups, fish and sandwiches. It is also an ingredient of
   the gräddfil sauce served with the traditional herring dish served at
   Swedish midsummer celebrations. The flowers may also be used to garnish
   dishes.

   Chives are one of the " fines herbes" of French cuisine, which also
   include tarragon, chervil and/or parsley.

   Chives can be found fresh at most markets year-round, making it a
   readily available spice herb; it can also be dry-frozen without much
   impairment to its taste, giving home-growers the opportunity to store
   large quantities harvested from their own garden.

In cultivation

   Retzius also describes how farmers would plant chives between the rocks
   making up the borders of their flowerbeds, to keep the plants free from
   pests (such as Japanese beetles).. While the growing plant repels
   unwanted insect life, the juice of the leaves can be used for the same
   purpose, as well as fighting fungal infections, mildew and scab.

   As mentioned before, its flowers are attractive to bees, which are
   important for gardens with an abundance of plants in need of
   pollination.

Medical uses

   The medical properties of chives are similar to those of garlic, but
   weaker; the faint effects in comparison with garlic are probably the
   main reason for its limited use as a medicinal herb. Containing
   numerous organisulplide compounds such as allyl sulfides and alkyl
   sulfoxides, chives have a beneficial effect on the circulatory system,
   acting upon it by lowering the blood pressure. As chives are usually
   served in small amounts and never as the main dish, negative effects
   are rarely encountered, albeit digestive problems may occur following
   over-consumption.

   Chives are also rich in vitamin A and C, as well as trace amounts of
   sulfur and iron, both needed by the body.

Cultivation

   Chives are cultivated both for its culinary uses as well as its
   ornamental value; the violet flowers are popular to dry to make
   ornamental dry bouquets.

   Chives thrive in well drained soil, rich in organic matter, with a pH
   of 6-7 and full sun.

   Chives can be grown from seed when mature in summer, or early the
   following spring. Typically, chives need to be germinated at a
   temperature of 15 °C to 20 °C and kept moist. They can also be planted
   under a cloche or germinated indoors in cooler climates, then planted
   out later. After at least four weeks, the young shoots should be ready
   to be planted out. Some prefer to replant the small clump of chives
   available in plastic pots at some markets, thus avoiding unnecessary
   work with sowing seeds and cloche cultivation.

   In the winter, chives die back to the underground bulbs, with the new
   leaves appearing in early spring. Chives starting to look old can be
   cut back to about 2-5 cm; this length is also preferred when
   harvesting, making the unattractive yellowing appear close to the
   ground, so that the plant can retain its aesthetic value.

History and cultural importance

   Chives have been cultivated in Europe since the Middle Ages, although
   signs of its usage date back to 5000 years ago, used by the Chinese.

   The Romans believed chives could relieve the pain from sunburn or a
   sore throat. They believed that eating chives would increase blood
   pressure and acted as a diuretic.

   Romanian Gypsies have used chives in fortune telling.

   It was believed that bunches of dried chives hung around a house would
   ward off disease and evil.

Gallery

Clump of chives

               Close-up of a chive flower

                                         Close-up of a flower

                                                             Capsules with seeds

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chives"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
