   #copyright

Chocolate

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Food and agriculture

   Chocolate most commonly comes in dark, milk, and white varieties, with
   cocoa solids contributing to the brown coloration.
   Enlarge
   Chocolate most commonly comes in dark, milk, and white varieties, with
   cocoa solids contributing to the brown coloration.

   Chocolate ( pronounced /ˈtʃɒklət, -lɪt/ ; see below for etymology)
   comprises a number of raw and processed foods that originate from the
   bean of the tropical cacao tree. It is a common ingredient in many
   kinds of sweets, chocolate candy, ice creams, cookies, cakes, pies, and
   desserts. It is one of the more popular flavours in the world.

   Chocolate was created by the Mesoamerican civilization, from cacao
   beans, and cultivated by pre-Columbian civilizations such as the Maya
   and Aztec, who used it as a basic component in a variety of sauces and
   beverages. The cocoa beans were ground and mixed with water to produce
   a bitter beverage which was reserved only to the highest noblemen and
   clerics of the Mesoamerican world. The word "chocolate" comes from the
   Nahuatl words Xocol meaning "bitter" and Atl meaning "water". Chocolate
   is made from the fermented, roasted, and ground beans taken from the
   pod of the tropical cacao tree, Theobroma cacao, which was native to
   Central America and Mexico, but is now cultivated throughout the
   tropics. The beans have an intensely flavored bitter taste. The
   resulting products are known as "chocolate" or, in some parts of the
   world, cocoa.

   It is the solid and fat combination, sweetened with sugar and other
   ingredients, that is made into chocolate bars and which is commonly
   referred to as chocolate by the public. It can also be made into
   beverages (called cocoa and hot chocolate). The first chocolate
   beverages were made by the Aztecs and the Mayas and later the
   Europeans. Chocolate is often produced as small molded forms in the
   shape of animals, people, or inanimate objects to celebrate festivals
   worldwide. For example, there are moulds of rabbits or eggs for Easter,
   coins for Hanukkah, Saint Nicholas (Santa Claus) for Christmas, and
   hearts for Valentine's Day.

Types and definition

   Chocolate truffles typically have a thin shell of powdered chocolate
   with a soft creamy center.
   Enlarge
   Chocolate truffles typically have a thin shell of powdered chocolate
   with a soft creamy centre.

   Chocolate is an extremely popular ingredient and it is available in
   many types. Different forms and flavors of chocolate are produced by
   varying the quantities of the different ingredients. Other flavours can
   be obtained by varying the time and temperature when roasting the
   beans.

   Chocolate is any product based 99% on cocoa solid and/or cocoa fat.
   Because it is used in a vast number of other foods, any change in the
   cost of making it has a huge impact on the industry. Adding ingredients
   is an aspect of the taste. On the other hand, reducing cocoa solid
   content, or substituting cocoa fat with a non-cocoa one, reduces the
   cost of making it. There has been disagreement in the EU about the
   definition of chocolate.

History

   A mug of modern hot chocolate. The first chocolate was drunk rather
   than eaten.
   Enlarge
   A mug of modern hot chocolate. The first chocolate was drunk rather
   than eaten.

   The word chocolate is derived from the Nahuatl language of the Aztecs
   of Mexico. The word is derived from the Nahuatl word xocolatl ( IPA
   /ɕɔ.kɔ.atɬ/; SHOCK-o-lattle). The word is derived from xocolli bitter,
   and atl, water. It is associated with the Mayan god of Fertility.
   Mexican philologist Ignacio Davila Garibi, proposed that "Spaniards had
   coined the word by taking the Maya word chocol and then replacing the
   Maya term for water, haa, with the Aztec one, atl." However, it is more
   likely that the Aztecs themselves coined the term, having long adopted
   into the Nahuatl the Mayan word for the "cacao" bean; the Spanish had
   little contact with the Mayans before Cortés's early reports to the
   Spanish King of the beverage known as xocolatl.

   The chocolate residue found in an ancient Maya pot suggests that Mayans
   were drinking chocolate 2,600 years ago, which is the earliest record
   of cacao use. The Aztecs associated chocolate with Xochiquetzal, the
   goddess of fertility. In the New World, chocolate was consumed in a
   bitter and spicy drink called xocoatl, often seasoned with vanilla,
   chile pepper, and achiote, (which we know today as annatto). Xocoatl
   was believed to fight fatigue, a belief that is probably attributable
   to the theobromine content. Chocolate was an important luxury good
   throughout pre-Columbian Mesoamerica, and cocoa beans were often used
   as currency. Other chocolate drinks combined it with such edibles as
   maize gruel (which acts as an emulsifier) and honey.

   Roughly two-thirds of the entire world's cocoa is produced in Western
   Africa, with close to half of the total sourced from Côte d'Ivoire.
   Like many food industry producers, individual cocoa farmers are at the
   mercy of volatile world markets. The price can vary from £500 ($945) to
   £3,000 ($5,672) per ton in the space of just a few years. While
   investors trading in cocoa can dump shares at will, individual cocoa
   farmers can not increase production or abandon trees at anywhere near
   that pace. It has been alleged that an estimated 90% of cocoa farms in
   Côte d'Ivoire have used some form of slave labor in order to remain
   viable. When cocoa prices drop, farmers in West Africa sometimes cut
   costs by resorting to slave labor.

Production

   A cacao tree with fruit pods
   Enlarge
   A cacao tree with fruit pods

Varieties

   The three main varieties of cacao beans used in chocolates are Criollo,
   Forastero and Trinitario. Criollo, the variety native to Central
   America, the Caribbean islands and the northern tier of South American
   states, is the rarest and most expensive cocoa on the market. There is
   some dispute about the genetic purity of cocoas sold today as Criollo,
   since most populations have been exposed to the genetic influence of
   other varieties. Criollos are difficult to grow, as they are vulnerable
   to a host of environmental threats and deliver low yields of cocoa per
   tree. The flavor of Criollo is characterized as delicate but complex,
   low in classic chocolate flavor, but rich in "secondary" notes of long
   duration. Forastero is a large group of wild and cultivated cacaos,
   probably native to the Amazon basin. The huge African cocoa crop is
   entirely of the Forastero variety. They are significantly hardier and
   of higher yield than Criollo. Forastero cocoas are typically big in
   classic "chocolate" flavor, but this is of short duration and is
   unsupported by secondary flavours. There are exceptional Forasteros,
   such as the "Nacional" or "Arriba" variety, which can possess great
   complexity. Trinitario, a natural hybrid of Criollo and Forastero,
   originated in Trinidad after an introduction of (Amelonado) Forastero
   to the local Criollo crop. These cocoas exhibit a wide range of flavor
   profiles according to the genetic heritage of each tree. Nearly all
   cacao produced over the past five decades is of the Forastero or
   lower-grade Trinitario varieties. The share of higher quality Criollos
   and Trinitarios (so-called flavor cacao) is just under 5% per annum.

Harvesting

   First, the pods, containing cacao beans, are harvested. The beans,
   together with their surrounding pulp, are removed from the pod and left
   in piles or bins to ferment for 3-7 days. The beans must then be
   quickly dried to prevent mold growth; weather permitting, this is done
   by spreading the beans out in the sun.

   The beans are then roasted, graded and ground. Cocoa butter is removed
   from the resulting chocolate liquor either by being pressed or by the
   Broma process. The residue is what is known as cocoa powder.

   Approximately 80% of the world's chocolate comes from Africa. According
   to human rights organizations, most of the chocolate is grown and
   harvested by small family farmers, many of whom use child slaves for
   the work. These child slaves are said to be treated as family members,
   and the human rights groups do not encourage a boycott of chocolate.

Blending

   Chocolate liquor is blended with the butter in varying quantities to
   make different types of chocolate or couvertures. The basic blends of
   ingredients, in order of highest quantity of cocoa liquor first, are as
   follows. (Note that since U.S. chocolates have a lower percentage
   requirement of cocoa liquor for dark chocolate, some dark chocolate may
   have sugar as the top ingredient.)
    1. Plain dark chocolate: sugar, cocoa butter, cocoa liquor, and
       (sometimes) vanilla
    2. Milk chocolate: sugar, cocoa butter, cocoa liquor, milk or milk
       powder, and vanilla
    3. White chocolate: sugar, cocoa butter, milk or milk powder, and
       vanilla

   Usually, an emulsifying agent such as soya lecithin is added, though a
   few manufacturers prefer to exclude this ingredient for purity reasons
   and to remain GMO-free (Soya is a heavily genetically modified crop),
   sometimes at the cost of a perfectly smooth texture. Some manufacturers
   are now using PGPR, an artificial emulsifier derived from castor oil
   that allows them to reduce the amount of cocoa butter while maintaining
   the same mouthfeel.

   The texture is also heavily influenced by processing, specifically
   conching (see below). The more expensive chocolates tend to be
   processed longer and thus have a smoother texture and "feel" on the
   tongue, regardless of whether emulsifying agents are added.

   Different manufacturers develop their own "signature" blends based on
   the above formulas but varying proportions of the different
   constituents are used.

   The finest plain dark chocolate couvertures contain at least 70% cocoa
   (solids + butter), whereas milk chocolate usually contains up to 50%.
   High-quality white chocolate couvertures contain only about 33% cocoa.
   Inferior and mass-produced chocolate contains much less cocoa (as low
   as 7% in many cases) and fats other than cocoa butter. Some chocolate
   makers opine that these "brand name" milk chocolate products can not be
   classed as couvertures, or even as chocolate, because of the low or
   virtually non-existent cocoa content.
   Chocolate, with enough cocoa butter, flows gently over a chocolate
   fountain to serve fondue.
   Enlarge
   Chocolate, with enough cocoa butter, flows gently over a chocolate
   fountain to serve fondue.

Conching

   The penultimate process is called conching. A conche is a container
   filled with metal beads, which act as grinders. The refined and blended
   chocolate mass is kept liquid by frictional heat. The conching process
   produces cocoa and sugar particles smaller than the tongue can detect;
   hence the smooth feel in the mouth. The length of the conching process
   determines the final smoothness and quality of the chocolate.
   High-quality chocolate is conched for about 72 hours, lesser grades
   about four to six hours. After the process is complete, the chocolate
   mass is stored in tanks heated to approximately 45–50 °C (113–122 °F)
   until final processing.

Tempering

   The final process is called tempering. Uncontrolled crystallization of
   cocoa butter typically results in crystals of varying size, some or all
   large enough to be clearly seen with the naked eye. This causes the
   surface of the chocolate to appear mottled and matte, and causes the
   chocolate to crumble rather than snap when broken. The uniform sheen
   and crisp bite of properly processed chocolate are the result of
   consistently small cocoa butter crystals produced by the tempering
   process.

   The fats in cocoa butter can crystallize in six different forms
   (polymorphous crystallization). The primary purpose of tempering is to
   assure that only the best form is present. The six different crystal
   forms have different properties.
   Crystal Melting Temp.                         Notes
   I       17°C (63°F)   Soft, crumbly, melts too easily.
   II      21°C (70°F)   Soft, crumbly, melts too easily.
   III     26°C (78°F)   Firm, poor snap, melts too easily.
   IV      28°C (82°F)   Firm, good snap, melts too easily.
   V       34°C (94°F)   Glossy, firm, best snap, melts near body temperature
                         (37°C).
   VI      36°C (97°F)   Hard, takes weeks to form.

   Making good chocolate is about forming the most of the type V crystals.
   This provides the best appearance and mouth feel and creates the most
   stable crystals so the texture and appearance will not degrade over
   time. To accomplish this, the temperature is carefully manipulated
   during the crystallization.

   The chocolate is first heated to 45°C (113°F) to melt all six forms of
   crystals. Then the chocolate is cooled to about 27°C (80°F), which will
   allow crystal types IV and V to form (VI takes too long to form). At
   this temperature, the chocolate is agitated to create many small
   crystal "seeds" which will serve as nuclei to create small crystals in
   the chocolate. The chocolate is then heated to about 31°C (88°F) to
   eliminate any type IV crystals, leaving just the type V. After this
   point, any excessive heating of the chocolate will destroy the temper
   and this process will have to be repeated.

   Two classic ways of tempering chocolate are:
     * Working the melted chocolate on a heat-absorbing surface, such as a
       stone slab, until thickening indicates the presence of sufficient
       crystal "seeds"; the chocolate is then gently warmed to working
       temperature.
     * Stirring solid chocolate into melted chocolate to "inoculate" the
       liquid chocolate with crystals (this method uses the already formed
       crystal of the solid chocolate to "seed" the melted chocolate).

   No more than a pound at a time should ever be tempered, and tempering
   shouldn't be attempted when the air temperature is over 24°C (75
   degrees Fahrenheit). A third, more modern tempering method involves
   using a microwave oven. A pound of coarsely chopped chocolate should be
   placed in an open, microwave-safe glass or ceramic container. The
   chocolate should be microwaved at full power for one minute and then
   stirred briefly. Continue to microwave at full power in ten-second
   increments until the chocolate is about ⅔ melted and ⅓ solid or lumpy.
   Then stir briskly until all the chocolate is completely melted and
   smooth.

   Using a candy thermometer, the temperature must be tested as follows
   for the different types of chocolate:
     * 31.1 to 32.7 degrees Celsius (88 to 91 degrees Fahrenheit) for dark
       chocolate, the generic term for semisweet chocolate or bittersweet
       chocolate.
     * 28.9 to 30.5 degrees Celsius (84 to 87 degrees Fahrenheit) for milk
       chocolate or white chocolate.

Storing

   Chocolate is very sensitive to temperature and humidity. Ideal storage
   temperatures are between 15 and 17 degrees Celsius (59 to 63 degrees
   Fahrenheit), with a relative humidity of less than 50%. Chocolate
   should be stored away from other foods as it can absorb different
   aromas. Ideally, chocolates are packed or wrapped and then placed in
   proper storage areas with the correct humidity and temperatures.
   Additionally chocolate should be stored in a dark place or protected
   from light by wrapping paper. Sunlight could warm up the surface of the
   chocolate and cause it to get 'grey', this being the cocoa butter
   crystals forming on the surface of it. It will also slightly change the
   tasting sensation, because of the different stage that the cocoa butter
   is in then.

Physiological effects

Pleasure of consuming chocolate

   Melted Chocolate
   Enlarge
   Melted Chocolate

   Part of the pleasure of eating chocolate is due to the fact that its
   melting point is slightly below human body temperature; it melts in the
   mouth. Chocolate intake has been linked with release of serotonin in
   the brain, which is thought to produce feelings of pleasure. Research
   has shown that heroin addicts tend to have an increased liking for
   chocolate; this may be because it triggers dopamine release in the
   brain's reinforcement systems – an effect, albeit a legal one, similar
   to that of opium.

Health benefits

   Recent studies have suggested that cocoa or dark chocolate may possess
   certain beneficial effects on human health. Dark chocolate, with its
   high cocoa content, is a rich source of the flavonoids epicatechin and
   gallic acid, which are thought to possess cardio protective properties.
   Cocoa possesses a significant antioxidant action, protecting against
   LDL oxidation, perhaps more than other polyphenol antioxidant rich
   foods and beverages. Processing cocoa with alkali destroys most of the
   flavonoids. Some studies have also observed a modest reduction in blood
   pressure and flow mediated dilation after consuming approximately 100g
   of dark chocolate daily. There has even been a fad diet named,
   "Chocolate diet", that emphasizes eating chocolate and cocoa powder in
   capsules. However, consuming milk chocolate or white chocolate, or
   drinking milk with dark chocolate, appears to largely negate the health
   benefit. Chocolate is also a calorie-rich food with a high fat content,
   so daily intake of chocolate also requires reducing caloric intake of
   other foods.

   Two-thirds of the fat in chocolate comes in the forms of a saturated
   fat called stearic acid and a monounsaturated fat called oleic acid.
   However, unlike other saturated fats, stearic acid does not raise
   levels of LDL cholesterol in the bloodstream. Consuming relatively
   large amounts of dark chocolate and cocoa does not seem to raise serum
   LDL cholesterol levels; some studies even find that it could lower
   them.

   Several population studies have observed an increase in the risk of
   certain cancers among people who frequently consume sweet 'junk' foods
   such as chocolate. However very little evidence exists to suggest
   whether consuming flavonoid-rich dark chocolate may increase or
   decrease the risk of cancer. Evidence from laboratory studies suggest
   that cocoa flavonoids may possess anticarcinogenic mechanisms, but more
   research is needed to prove this idea.

   The major concern that nutritionists have is that even though eating
   dark chocolate may favorably affect certain biomarkers of
   cardiovascular disease, the amount needed to have this effect would
   provide a relatively large quantity of calories which, if unused, would
   promote weight gain. Obesity is a significant risk factor for many
   diseases including cardiovascular disease. As a consequence, consuming
   large quantities of dark chocolate in an attempt to protect against
   cardiovascular disease has been described as 'cutting off one's nose to
   spite one's face'..

Chocolate as a drug

   A chocolate candy.
   Enlarge
   A chocolate candy.

   Chocolate contains a variety of substances, some of which are addictive
   (such as caffeine). These include:
     * Sugar - Chocolate bars (as opposed to cocoa) contain large amounts
       of sugar.
     * Caffeine - The stimulant present in coffee and tea.
     * Theobromine - Various theobromines are present.
     * Anandamide - An endogenous cannabinoid.
     * Tryptophan - An essential amino acid that is a precursor to
       serotonin, an important neurotransmitter involved in regulating
       moods.
     * Phenylethylamine - An endogenous amphetamine. Often described as a
       'love chemical'. However, it is quickly metabolized by the enzyme
       MAO-B, preventing significant concentrations from reaching the
       brain.

   Current research indicates that chocolate has a weak stimulant effect
   due mainly to its content of theobromine. However, chocolate contains
   too little of this compound for a reasonable serving to create effects
   in humans that are on par with a coffee buzz. Chocolate contains only
   small amounts of the compound caffeine. There are 5 to 10 milligrams of
   caffeine in one ounce of bittersweet chocolate, 5 milligrams in milk
   chocolate, and 10 milligrams in a 170 millilitre cup of cocoa. There
   are 100 to 150 milligrams of caffeine in an 220 millilitre cup of
   coffee, it would be necessary to eat more than a dozen chocolate bars
   to get the same amount of caffeine as one cup of coffee. The
   pharmacologist Ryan J. Huxtable has described chocolate as "more than a
   food but less than a drug". However, chocolate is a very potent
   stimulant for horses; its use is therefore banned in horse-racing.
   Theobromine is also a contributing factor in acid reflux because it
   relaxes the esophageal sphincter muscle, allowing stomach acid to more
   easily enter the esophagus.
   Melted chocolate and a piece of a chocolate bar
   Enlarge
   Melted chocolate and a piece of a chocolate bar

   Chocolate also contains small quantities of the endogenous cannabinoid
   anandamide and the cannabinoid breakdown inhibitors
   N-oleoylethanolamine and N-linolenoylethanolamine. Anandamides are
   produced naturally by the body, in such a way that their effects are
   extremely targeted (compared to the broad systemic effects of drugs
   like tetrahydrocannabinol) and relatively short-lived. In experiments
   N-oleoylethanolamine and N-linolenoylethanolamine interfere with the
   body's natural mechanisms for breaking down endogenous cannabinoids,
   causing them to last longer. However, noticeable effects of chocolate
   related to this mechanism in humans have not been demonstrated.

   Some studies have described a condition called Hysteroid dysphoria,
   characterized by repeated episodes of depressed mood in response to
   feeling rejected, and a craving for chocolate.

Medical applications

   Mars, Incorporated, a Virginia-based candy company, spends millions of
   dollars each year on flavonol research. The company is talking with
   pharmaceutical companies to license drugs based on synthesized cocoa
   flavonol molecules. According to Mars-funded researchers at Harvard,
   the University of California, and European universities, cocoa-based
   prescription drugs could potentially help treat diabetes, dementia and
   other diseases.

Coughing

   Research indicates that chocolate may be effective at preventing
   persistent coughing. The ingredient theobromine was found to be almost
   ⅓ more effective than codeine, the leading cough medicine. The
   chocolate also appears to soothe and moisten the throat.

Chocolate as an aphrodisiac

   Romantic lore commonly identifies chocolate as an aphrodisiac. The
   reputed aphrodisiac qualities of chocolate are most often associated
   with the simple sensual pleasure of its consumption. More recently,
   suggestion has been made that serotonin and other chemicals found in
   chocolate, most notably phenethylamine, can act as mild sexual
   stimulants. While there is no firm proof that chocolate is indeed an
   aphrodisiac, giving a gift of chocolate to one's sweetheart is a
   familiar courtship ritual.

Acne

   There is a popular belief that the consumption of chocolate can cause
   acne. Pure chocolate contains anti-oxidants which aid better skin
   complexion. The University of Pennsylvannia and the US Naval Academy
   conducted experiments that fed subjects chocolate or a bar with similar
   amounts of macronutrients (fat, sugar etc.) and found that consumption
   of chocolate, frequent or not, had no effect on the developing of acne.
   Professional dermatologists today do not link acne with diet. One study
   showed that women who drank three or more glasses of milk a day were
   22% more likely to develop severe acne than women who consumed less
   milk. Chocolate bars with milk content may contribute to acne. It is
   not the chocolate itself that causes acne, but rather the milk with
   which the chocolate is mixed.
   Chocolate, ranging from dark to light, can be molded and decorated like
   these chickens with ribbons.
   Enlarge
   Chocolate, ranging from dark to light, can be molded and decorated like
   these chickens with ribbons.

Lead

   Chocolate has one of the higher concentrations of lead among products
   that constitute a typical Westerner's diet. Recent studies have shown
   that, although lead tends to bind to cocoa shells, the beans themselves
   absorb little lead in their country of origin. Contamination of certain
   samples appears to happen later in the manufacturing process. According
   to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, levels of lead in chocolate
   are sufficiently low that even people who eat large amounts of
   chocolate every day are not at risk of any adverse effects.

Toxicity in animals

   In sufficient amounts, the theobromine found in chocolate is toxic to
   animals such as horses, dogs, parrots, and cats ( kittens especially)
   because they are unable to metabolise the chemical effectively. If they
   are fed chocolate, the theobromine will remain in their bloodstream for
   up to 20 hours, and these animals may experience epileptic seizures,
   heart attacks, internal bleeding, and eventually death. Medical
   treatment involves inducing vomiting within two hours of ingestion, or
   contacting a veterinarian.

   A typical 20-kilogram dog will normally experience great intestinal
   distress after eating fewer than 240 grams (8.47 oz) of dark chocolate,
   but will not necessarily experience bradycardia or tachycardia unless
   it eats at least a half a kilogram (1.1 lbs) of milk chocolate. Dark
   chocolate has 2 to 5 times more theobromine and thus is more dangerous
   to dogs. According to the Merck Veterinary Manual, approximately 1.3
   grams of baker's chocolate per kilogram of a dog's body weight (0.02
   oz/lb) is sufficient to cause symptoms of toxicity. For example, a
   typical 25-gram (0.88 oz) baker's chocolate bar would be enough to
   bring about symptoms in a 20-kilogram (44 lb) dog. Of course, baking
   chocolate is rarely consumed directly due to its unpleasant taste, but
   other dark chocolates' canine toxicities may be extrapolated based on
   this figure. Large dogs such as St. Bernards or Rottweilers are
   somewhat less susceptible to poisoning, but as dogs like the taste of
   chocolate products as much as humans do, they should still be kept out
   of their reach; treats made from carob are a good substitute and pose
   no threat. There are reports that mulch made from cacao bean shells is
   dangerous to pets (and other animals)

Trivia

     * Consumers spend more than $7 billion a year on chocolate.
     * U.S. consumers eat about 2.8 billion pounds of chocolate annually,
       making per capita consumption about 12 pounds per person a year.
     * American chocolate producers use about 1.5 million pounds of milk.
     * Chocolate has over 500 flavours components, more that twice the
       amount found in strawberry and vanilla.

Significant chocolate makers

          Main article: List of chocolate manufacturers

Large volume chocolate makers

     * Cadbury (UK)
     * Ferrero SpA (Italy)
     * Hershey's (U.S.)
     * Kraft Foods ( Milka, Suchard, Toblerone, Côte d'Or, and many
       others) (U.S.)
     * Mars Incorporated ( M&M's, Dove) (U.S.)
     * Nestlé (Switzerland)

Regionally large chocolate makers

     * Chocolates Garoto (Brazil)
     * Fazer (Finland)
     * Ghirardelli (USA)
     * Neuhaus (Belgium)
     * Ritter Sport (Germany)
     * Royce' (Japan)
     * Teuscher (Switzerland)
     * Whittaker's (New Zealand)
     * Freia (Norway)
     * Marabou (Sweden)

Makers of chocolate primarily for confectioners or premium markets

     * Belcolade (Belgium)
     * Callebaut (Belgium)
     * Green & Black's (UK)
     * Guittard (U.S.)
     * Haigh's Chocolates (Australia)
     * Michel Cluizel (France)
     * Perugina (Italy)
     * Valrhona (France)
     * Scharffen Berger (U.S.)
     * Thorntons (UK)

Historically significant chocolate makers

     * J. S. Fry & Sons (UK) (first eating chocolate manufacturer)
     * Lindt & Sprüngli (Switzerland) (Sprüngli developed conching)
     * Menier Chocolate (France)
     * Pierre Paul Caffarel (Italy)(Caffarel built the first mass
       production manufacturing facility for chocolate in 1826).

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chocolate"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
