   #copyright

Christina Aguilera

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Performers and composers

   Christina Aguilera
   Background information
   Birth name Christina Maria Aguilera
   Also known as X-Tina (Stripped, 2002)
   Baby Jane (Back to Basics, 2006)
   Born December 18, 1980 (age 25) in United States Staten Island, New
   York, United States
   Genre(s) Pop
   Adult contemporary
   Urban
   Dance-pop
   Occupation(s) Vocalist, songwriter, record producer
   Instrument(s) Vocals
   Years active 1998–present
   Label(s) RCA Records (1998–present)
   Website ChristinaAguilera.com

   Christina María Aguilera (born December 18, 1980) is a four time Grammy
   Award winning American pop singer and songwriter. She was signed to RCA
   Records after recording " Reflection" for the film Mulan, and her
   bubblegum pop-oriented debut album Christina Aguilera (1999) was a
   critical and commercial success: it produced four hit singles,
   including " Genie in a Bottle", and helped Aguilera win a Grammy Award
   for Best New Artist in 2000. A Latin Pop album Mi Reflejo which won a
   2001 Latin Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album and a Christmas album
   My Kind of Christmas released during this period also sold strongly. In
   2001, she participated in collaboration projects for Ricky Martin's
   Sound Loaded album and the Moulin Rouge soundtrack, which she won
   another Grammy Award for Lady Marmalade in the category Best Pop
   Collaboration with Vocals in 2002.

   Aguilera took creative control over her second studio album Stripped
   (2002), which produced the hip-hop-influenced " Dirrty" and the
   award-winning (including the 2004 Grammy Award for Best Female Pop
   Vocal Performance) " Beautiful". It received mixed reviews, and
   Aguilera's increasingly sexual image during its promotion became the
   subject of much criticism and controversy. She contributed to several
   other artists' songs in 2004 and 2005 and married record executive
   Jordan Bratman. Her third studio album Back to Basics (2006), which was
   preceded by the hit single " Ain't No Other Man", included elements of
   soul, jazz and blues music and was released to good sales and positive
   critical reception.

Biography

Early life and career

   Aguilera, a military brat, was born in Staten Island, New York to
   Fausto Wagner Xavier Aguilera, a U.S. Army sergeant, and Shelly Loraine
   Fidler, a Spanish teacher. Aguilera's father was born in Guayaquil,
   Ecuador, while her mother, a Newfoundlander, has German, English, Irish
   and Dutch ancestry. Aguilera's parents met while Fausto was serving at
   Earnest Harmon Air Force Base in Stephenville, Newfoundland. They were
   both Catholics. Her parents married when her mother was 20 years old
   and her father was almost 32. Aguilera lived with her father and mother
   until she was 6 or 7 years old, when her parents divorced her mother
   took her and her younger sister Rachel to her grandmother's home in
   Rochester, Pennsylvania, a blue-collar suburb of Pittsburgh. According
   to Aguilera and Fidler, her father was very controlling, as well as
   physically and emotionally abusive, which was reflected in her songs,
   "I'm OK" in Stripped, and "Oh Mother" in Back to Basics. Since then,
   Fidler has married a paramedic named Jim Kearns, and has changed her
   name to Shelly Kearns. .

   Aguilera's grandmother was the first person to recognize her vocal
   skills. Since Aguilera was a small child, she aspired to be a singer.
   She grew up admiring artists such as Billie Holiday, Ella Fitzgerald,
   Etta James, Judy Garland, Lena Horne, Barbra Streisand, Otis Redding,
   Madonna, Minnie Riperton, Bessie Smith, Janis Joplin, Whitney Houston,
   Mariah Carey, Janet Jackson, Sade, Stevie Wonder, and Aretha Franklin.
   As a child she performed at block parties and in talent competitions,
   where she defeated her opponents. Aguilera soon gained media attention,
   and was known as "the little girl with the big voice".

   According to VH1's Driven, this label eventually backfired on her. When
   competitors learned they would be up against her in any given week,
   they immediately backed out, prompting insiders to claim it was "like
   sending a lamb to the slaughter." Her peers soon became jealous of her
   and would frequently subject her to ridicule, ostracism, and, in one
   gym class, attempted assault. Acts of vandalism around her house
   included the slashing of the tires on the family car. Eventually the
   family relocated and, by her own order, swore to secrecy about her
   talent lest another backlash occur.

   On March 15, 1990, she appeared on Star Search singing Etta James's "A
   Sunday Kind of Love", but failed to win. Soon after losing on Star
   Search, she returned home and appeared on Pittsburgh's KDKA-TV's Wake
   Up with Larry Richert to perform the same song again. People remarked
   that the then 10-year-old "sounded 20".

   Throughout her youth in Pittsburgh, Aguilera sang " The Star-Spangled
   Banner" before Pittsburgh Penguins Hockey games, Pittsburgh Steelers
   football and Pittsburgh Pirates baseball] games. Her first major role
   in entertainment came in 1993 when she joined the Disney Channel's
   variety show The New Mickey Mouse Club. Her co-stars included Britney
   Spears, Justin Timberlake, JC Chasez, Rhona Bennett (who later became a
   member of En Vogue), Ryan Gosling, and Keri Russell. According to the
   documentary Driven, Aguilera's Mickey Mouse Club co-stars called her
   "the Diva". One of her most notable performances was of Whitney
   Houston's " I Have Nothing". When the show ended in 1994, Aguilera
   began recording demos in an attempt to get signed to a record label.

1998–2001: Pop music beginnings

   In 1998 she sang the High "E" (second "E" above middle "C") in full
   voice on a cover of Whitney Houston's " Run to You" which she recorded
   with an old tape recorder in her bathroom. She was then selected to
   record the song " Reflection" for the Disney animated production of
   Mulan (1998). Recording "Reflection" led to Aguilera earning a contract
   with RCA Records during the same week. "Reflection" peaked within the
   top twenty on the Adult Contemporary Singles Chart, and it was
   nominated for a Golden Globe Award for " Best Original Song" in 1998.

   Under the exclusive representation of Steve Kurtz, Aguilera's
   self-titled debut album Christina Aguilera was released in the United
   States on August 24, 1999. It reached the top of the Billboard 200 and
   Canadian album charts, shipping over 8 million copies in the United
   States alone.

   Her singles " Genie in a Bottle", " What a Girl Wants" and " Come on
   Over Baby (All I Want Is You)" topped the Billboard Hot 100 during 1999
   and 2000, and " I Turn to You" reached #3. Aguilera won the " Best New
   Artist" award at the 2000 Grammy Awards, and she was nominated for "
   Best Female Pop Vocal Performance" for "Genie in a Bottle". According
   to the album's songwriters who appeared on the documentary Driven,
   Aguilera wanted to display the range and audacity in her voice during
   the promotion of the album, and performed acoustic sets and appeared on
   television shows accompanied only by a piano. She ended the year on
   MTV's 2 Large New Year's Special, as she performed and was MTV's first
   artist of the millennium.

   Later in 2000 Aguilera first emphasized her Latin heritage, following
   the Latin pop trend of the time, by releasing her first Spanish album,
   Mi Reflejo on September.12, 2000. This album contained Spanish versions
   of songs from her English debut as well as new Spanish tracks. It
   peaked at #27 on the Billboard 200 and number one on the Latin album
   charts, and in 2001 it won Aguilera a Latin Grammy Award for "Best
   Female Pop Vocal Album". The Album has sold 2.1 million copies
   worldwide and has been certified Gold(500,000) in the USA and 3x
   Platinum (600,000* Latin album) under the RIAA's Los Premios de Oro y
   Platino program. The single " Falsas Esperanzas" from the album reached
   the top forty in Argentina. Christina also released a Christmas album
   on October 24, 2000 called My Kind of Christmas. It peaked at #28 on
   the Billboard 200, has sold 1.3 million copies worldwide, and has been
   certified Platinum (1 million) in the USA. Ricky Martin asked her to
   duet with him on the track " Nobody Wants to Be Lonely" from his album
   Sound Loaded; released in 2001 as the album's second single, it reached
   the top five in the United Kingdom and Germany, top twenty in the U.S.,
   and top forty in Canada, Switzerland, and Australia.

   In 2001, Aguilera, Lil' Kim, Mya, and P!nk were chosen to remake Patti
   LaBelle's 1975 single " Lady Marmalade" for the Moulin Rouge!
   soundtrack. "Lady Marmalade" hit number one on the Hot 100 for five
   weeks and reached number one in eleven other countries, and it earned
   all four performers a Grammy Award for " Best Pop Collaboration with
   Vocals".

   That year a single emerged into record stores called "Just Be Free",
   one of the demos Aguilera recorded when she was around fifteen years
   old. When RCA Records discovered the single, they officially advised
   fans not to purchase it and had German authorities pull the single off
   shelves. Months later, Warlock Records was set to release Just Be Free,
   an album which contains the demo tracks. Aguilera filed a breach of
   contract and unfair-competition suit against Warlock and the album's
   producers to block the release. Instead, the two parties came to a
   settlement to release the album. Aguilera lent out her name, likeness
   and image for an unspecified amount of damages. Many of the details of
   the lawsuit remain confidential. When the album was released in August
   2001, it had a photograph of Aguilera when she was fifteen years old.

   Although Aguilera's debut album was very well-received, she was
   dissatisfied with the music and image her management had created for
   her. At the time, Aguilera was marketed as a bubblegum pop artist,
   because of the genre's upward financial trend. However, she publicly
   mentioned plans of her next album to have much more depth, both
   musically and lyrically. Steve Kurtz's influence in matters of the
   singer's creative direction, the role of being her exclusive personal
   manager and overscheduling had in part caused her to seek legal means
   of terminating their management contract.

   In October 2000 Aguilera filed a Breach of Fiduciary Duty lawsuit
   against Kurtz for improper, undue and inappropriate influence over her
   professional activities, as well as fraud. According to legal
   documents, Kurtz did not protect her rights and interests. Instead, he
   took action that was for his own interest, at the cost of hers. The
   lawsuit came about when Aguilera discovered Kurtz used more of her
   commissionable income than he was allotted, and had paid other managers
   to assist him. She also petitioned the California State Labor
   Commission to nullify the contract. After terminating Kurtz's services,
   Irving Azoff was hired as her new manager. The change in management
   marked a new change in how Aguilera was marketed, as well as what music
   she would do in the future.

   Kurtz countersued later that month for breach of contract, claiming
   that the singer violated the same agreement she had sued to void. In
   the lawsuit, he included others close to Aguilera, alleging their
   intent to sabotage his business relationship with Aguilera. He also
   singled out Azoff for being in violation of the terms of Kurtz's
   contract.

2002–2003: Stripped Era

   On October.29, 2002, after much delay, Aguilera's second full-length
   English album, Stripped, was released selling more than 330,000 copies
   in the first week and peaking at #2 on the Billboard 200. The majority
   of Stripped was co-written by Aguilera (who had recently signed a
   global music publishing deal with BMG Music Publishing), and was
   influenced by many different subjects and music styles, including
   rhythm and blues, gospel, soul, balladry, pop rock, hip-hop and jazz.
   The album was not received as well as her debut by most critics, and
   Aguilera's vocals were overlooked as she began to cultivate a more
   sexually provocative image. After the release of the album, she took
   part in photoshoots for magazines such as Maxim, Rolling Stone and
   CosmoGirl!. Many of these photographs featured her nude or semi-nude.
   She denied that this change was a matter of publicity, claiming that
   the image better reflected her true personality than did the image she
   cultivated back in 1999. It was during this time Aguilera referred to
   herself as "Xtina", stating that it was a "reflection of her darker
   self". Initially, the raunchy image had a negative effect on Aguilera
   in the U.S. While the video for " Dirrty" became a huge hit on MTV, it
   disappointed on the U.S. singles chart. However, the single was a huge
   hit worldwide, reaching number one in several countries. The album
   reached the top five on the UK, U.S. and Canadian album charts, though
   it was initially considered a " sophomore slump". The second single, "
   Beautiful", became a huge radio hit and three more singles from the
   album (" Fighter", " Can't Hold Us Down" featuring Lil' Kim, " The
   Voice Within" were released in the following two years and were huge
   hits helping the album stay on the charts for the next two years.
   Stripped stayed on the U.S. and UK album charts until well into 2004,
   and went on to be certified 4x Platinum in the U.S., ending up at
   number ten on Billboard's year-end album chart. Kelly Clarkson's second
   single " Miss Independent" was co-written by Aguilera, having been
   half-finished for Stripped. " "

   In June, Aguilera joined Justin Timberlake on the final leg of his
   international Justified tour, held in the U.S. This portion of the tour
   became a co-headliner called the Justified & Stripped tour. In August
   an overhead lighting grid collapsed from the ceiling of the Boardwalk
   Hall in Atlantic City, New Jersey, causing major damage to the sound
   and video equipment below. Because the collapse occurred hours before
   the performance, only a few stagehands were injured, but a few shows
   were cancelled or postponed. In the fourth quarter of that year
   Aguilera continued to tour internationally without Timberlake, and
   changed the name of the tour to the Stripped tour. She also dyed her
   hair black. It was one of the top-grossing tours of that year, and sold
   out most of its venues. Rolling Stone readers named it the best tour of
   the year.

   In light of the tour's success, another U.S. tour was scheduled to
   begin in mid-2004 with a new theme and featuring Chingy as an opening
   act. The tour was scrapped because of Aguilera's vocal cord injuries
   suffered shortly before its opening date. It was later reported by the
   British tabloid newspaper The Sun that low ticket sales and lack of new
   material were actually the major contributing factors in the tour's
   cancellation. Aguilera has since denied the report. In a tribute to
   Madonna's performance at the inaugural MTV Video Music Awards'
   ceremony, Aguilera performed a kiss with the singer-actress at the 2003
   edition of the ceremony in August. The incident occurred during the
   opening performance of Madonna's songs " Like a Virgin" and "
   Hollywood" with fellow popstar Britney Spears.

   During 2003, Christina also became the face of the fashion house
   Versace.

2004–2005: Post-Stripped activities

   A January 2004 ZOO magazine (a British men's tabloid magazine) article
   reported that Aguilera is possibly bisexual. The article quotes her
   stating in an interview: "I find it hornier looking at women than men.
   Sorry, I love experimenting with my sexuality. If that means girls,
   then so be it." The article also reports that Christina enjoys casual
   sex: "I have casual sex, I love casual sex. But that doesn't mean I'm
   incapable of keeping my legs together".

   Aguilera later decided to embrace a more mature image; this move was
   met with more praise than criticism, with articles using punch lines
   such as "From Crass to Class". She eventually dyed her hair cherry
   blonde and recorded a jingle, " Hello", for a Mercedes-Benz ad,
   becoming the new face of Mercedes-Benz. Shortly after, she dyed her
   hair blonde and cut it short, and took on a Marilyn Monroe look; many
   of her fans believe she is one of the main proponents (along with Dita
   Von Teese, Gwen Stefani and Ashley Judd) in bringing back the
   1920s-1940s Hollywood glamour look.

   In the run-up to the 2004 United States presidential election, Aguilera
   was featured on billboards for the "Only You Can Silence Yourself"
   online voter registration drive run by the nonpartisan, non-profit
   campaign " Declare Yourself". In these political advertisements
   Aguilera was shown with her mouth sewn shut, to symbolize the effects
   of not voting. She appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show to discuss the
   importance of voting.

   In late summer 2004 Aguilera released two singles. The first, " Car
   Wash", was a remake of the Rose Royce disco song recorded as a
   collaboration with rapper Missy Elliott for the soundtrack to the film
   Shark Tale. The second song is also a collaboration, but this time as a
   second single from one of Nelly's double-release albums, Sweat, titled
   " Tilt Ya Head Back". Both singles failed commercially in the U.S., but
   did considerably better in other parts of the world. After much delay,
   Aguilera's first DVD live-recording from a concert tour, Stripped Live
   in the UK, was released in November 2004. In late December she
   officially released a fragrance, Xpose, which has only been available
   in a few European countries.

   Aguilera collaborated with jazz artist Herbie Hancock on a cover of
   Leon Russell's " A Song for You" recorded for Hancock's album
   Possibilities, released in August 2005. Aguilera and Hancock were later
   nominated for the Grammy Award for " Best Pop Collaboration with
   Vocals". Aguilera went back to her Mickey Mouse Club roots when she
   helped open the 50th Anniversary for Disneyland by performing "When You
   Wish upon a Star", and she also collaborated with Andrea Bocelli on the
   song "Somos Novios (We are Fiancès)" for his album Amore, released in
   early 2006. She performed at "Unite of the Stars" charity banquet in
   Johannesburg, South Africa in late 2005 with stars such as Diana Ross
   and Westlife in aid of Unite Against Hunger, and she also performed at
   the Nelson Mandela Children's Fund at the Coca-Cola Dome in November.

2006–present: Back to Basics

   In March 2006 Aguilera signed a contract with European cellphone
   operator Orange to represent the company and promote the new Sony
   Ericsson Walkman phones across Europe. She was featured in a Pepsi
   commercial alongside Arab singer Elissa as well as Korean pop singer
   Rain in May; the spot aired during the 2006 World Cup.

   Aguilera also posed nude for a Marilyn Monroe-inspired photoshoot in
   the May 2006 issue of GQ magazine, in which she was also interviewed.
   She expressed disappointment in fellow singer Mariah Carey, saying,
   "She was never cool to me... to the point that one time we were at a
   party and I think she got really drunk, and she had just really
   derogatory things to say to me." Carey responded in a press release,
   "It is sad yet predictable that she would use my name at this time to
   reinvent past incidents for her promotional gain." Aguilera then
   released her own statement claiming, "My intentions were not to upset
   Mariah with any statements that were published or taken out of context.
   I have all the respect in the world for her."

   Aguilera's third English studio album Back to Basics, which was
   released on August 15, 2006, went to #1 in 15 countries. Lead single "
   Ain't No Other Man" was a substantial success, reaching #6 in the U.S.
   and the top three in the UK. Aguilera described the double-CD as "a
   throwback to the 20s, 30s, and 40s-style jazz, blues, and feel-good
   soul music, but with a modern twist." Producers on the album include DJ
   Premier, Kwamé, Linda Perry, and Mark Ronson. One track, "F.U.S.S.",
   was written as a response to the animosity between Aguilera and Scott
   Storch during the recording of Stripped. She received writing credit
   for every track and was the executive producer for the album, which
   debuted at number one in the U.S. and the UK. The album introduced the
   public to Aguilera's era-inspired alter-ego, Baby Jane. It was reported
   that one of her dancers gave her the name; in an interview with MTV she
   stated rapper Nelly gave her the name, but she never stated the reason
   for it. "Back To Basics" has sold more than 930,000 copies to date in
   the United States.
   Christina Aguilera performing "Hurt" at the 2006 MTV Video Music Awards
   Enlarge
   Christina Aguilera performing " Hurt" at the 2006 MTV Video Music
   Awards

   Aside from promoting her own album, Aguilera teamed up with Diddy on a
   track, titled " Tell Me", from his album, " Press Play". The single was
   released in Autumn 2006 and debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 and the
   Billboard Pop 100 at numbers 55 and 50 respectively.

   In September 2006 she announced her " Back To Basics Tour" with
   eighteen European dates scheduled to begin on November 17 and end on
   December 17. This tour will also see her return to Ireland including
   Belfast's Odyssey Arena, the first since her Stripped tour came to the
   city in 2003. Following this contrary to her previous plans to tour
   blues and jazz clubs for a more intimate setting, she will tour North
   America in a 41- date concert kicking off February 20 in Houston and
   wrapping up on May 5 in Florida. But she insist that the Jazz Tour will
   push through sometime after. "We're definitely going to mix it up,
   change it up, do some things that are not on the record, do some
   favorite classics of mine," Aguilera said in an interview with MTV.
   "We're really going to have fun and experiment with new ideas and
   interesting places to go to that have a throwback appeal and vibe."
   Also British band Nizlopi have been confirmed as Christina's support
   act at Wembley arena on 29th and 30th of November. Christina won the
   2006 Best Female Artist in MTV Europe Music Awards.

   Meanwhile, " Hurt" is released as the 2nd single of Back To Basics. It,
   so far, has peaked at #22, it has been on the charts for 2 months now.

Personal life

   During 2000, Aguilera was rumored to have been with MTV VJ Carson Daly,
   although both parties denied it, the relationship was of much
   discussion after the release of Eminem's The Real Slim Shady. The line,
   "Christina Aguilera better switch me chairs so I can sit next to Carson
   Daly and Fred Durst and hear 'em argue over who she gave head to
   first," suggested a romance between the two. Aguilera called the
   comments "disgusting" and "untrue", and further fueled the other
   rumored relationship with Limp Bizkit frontman Fred Durst. Both
   Christina and Eminem later made peace at an award show backstage.

   She dated Brooklynite dancer Jorge Santos for two years until the
   relationship ended in September 2001. She would later reveal in 2006's
   issue of The Advocate that she dated someone with a gay past,
   undoubtedly referring to Jorge.

   She began dating music executive Jordan Bratman in late 2002. After
   dating him for almost three years, their engagement was announced in
   February 2005. They were married on November 19, 2005, in the Napa
   Valley. . A year on the couple celebrated their one year anniversary in
   Dublin Ireland

Charity work

   Throughout her career, Aguilera has been involved with certain
   charities. She was the first celebrity to sign a letter from PETA to
   the South Korean government asking that the country stop its alleged
   "abuse of dogs killed for food". Her involvement in supporting the
   Defenders of Wildlife have also added to her donations with charities.
   Aguilera is still a major contributor in her hometown of Pittsburgh
   contributing regularly to the Women's Centre & Shelter of Greater
   Pittsburgh. According to her official website, she toured the centre
   and donated $200,000 to the shelter. She also has auctioned off front
   row seats and back stage passes for the Pittsburgh based charity . She
   also supports the National Coalition Against Domestic Violence, and
   Refuge UK.

   Aguilera contributes in the fight against AIDS, by participating in
   AIDS Project Los Angeles' Artists Against AIDS " What's Going On?"
   cover project. In 2004 Aguilera became the new face for cosmetic
   company M·A·C and spokesperson for M·A·C AIDS Fund. Aguilera appeared
   in advertisements of the M·A·C's Viva Glam V lipstick and lipgloss.
   According to published reports, in November 2005, all of her wedding
   gifts were submitted to various charities around the nation in support
   of Hurricane Katrina victims. In addition, Aguilera contributed to
   YouthAIDS by posing for a joint YouthAIDS and Aldo Shoes campaign for
   "Empowerment Tags" in Canada, the U.S. and the UK. She was featured
   with one of three ubiquitous slogans, "Speak No Evil?" and was quoted
   saying, "HIV is something that people don't want to talk about, hear
   about, or face."

   According to Billboard, singer Elton John hand-picked Aguilera, among
   others, for his Fashion Rocks concert benefiting his AIDS foundation.
   The show, which accompanies music and fashion to benefit the fight
   against AIDS/HIV, is televised annually and aired in September.

Vocal ability

   In the MTV special All Eyes on Christina, John Norris said that
   Aguilera "has a four octave range". Aguilera possesses the ability to
   hit notes in the whistle register, as stated in a review of her song
   "Soar" from the album Stripped (at the 3:20 mark) in an Entertainment
   Weekly article, which mentions her "tackling that dog-whistle high
   note".

Commercials & Endorsements

     * Sears (2000)
     * Levis (2000)
     * Fetish Make-up/Perfume by Christina Aguilera (2000)
     * Coca Cola (2001)
     * Motorola Phones (2002)
     * NBA Love It Live (2003)
     * Versace (2003)
     * Skechers (2003)
     * Skechers (2004)
     * MAC Viva Glam Lipstick (2004)
     * Virgin Mobile Phones (2004)
     * Mercedes Benz A-Class (2004)
     * Xpose Perfume by Christina Aguilera (2004)
     * Verizon V-Cast (2005)
     * ALDO Accessories (2005)
     * Pepsi (2006)
     * Sony Erickson & Orange Walkman (2006)

Concerts & Tours

US/World Tours

     * 1997 The Spinning Tour
     * 2000 TLC Tour (Opening Act)
     * 2000 Sears & Levis US Tour
     * 2001 Latin America Tour
     * 2003 The Justified & Stripped North American Tour
     * 2003 The Stripped World Tour
     * 2006 Back To Basics World Tour

Concerts

     * 2003 Atlantis Birthday Concert (Bahamas)
     * 2004 Mercedes Benz: Follow Your Own Star Concert Tour
       (Italy/Germany)
     * 2005 Nelson Mandela Children's Fund Benefit Concert (South Africa)
     * 2005 Unite Of The Stars Gala Banquet (South Africa)
     * 2006 Back To Basics Showcase (France/UK)
     * 2006 8th Motorola Anniverssary (USA)
     * 2006 Yahoo!/Nissan Live Sets (USA)

Filmography

     * 1999 Beverly Hills 90210 - Herself
     * 2003 Saturday Night Live - Herself
     * 2004 Saturday Night Live - Lizbeth, Samantha, Ellena & Mrs.
       Reemington Steel
     * 2004 Shark Tale - Jellyfish
     * 2006 Saturday Night Live - Herself
     * 2007 CSI: New York - TBA

Discography

Albums

    1. Christina Aguilera ( August 24, 1999)
    2. Mi Reflejo ( September 12, 2000)
    3. My Kind of Christmas ( October 24, 2000)
    4. Just Be Free ( August 21, 2001)
    5. Stripped ( October 29, 2002)
    6. Back to Basics ( August 15, 2006)

Number-one singles

   The following singles reached number one in the United States, the
   United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and/or the United World Chart.
   Year                  Single                     Peak positions
                                                 U.S. UK CAN AUS WORLD
   1999 " Genie in a Bottle"                      1   1   1   2    1
        " What a Girl Wants"                      1   3   5   5    1
   2000 " Come on Over Baby (All I Want Is You)"  1   8   4   9    4
   2001 " Nobody Wants To Be Lonely"
        (with Ricky Martin)                       13  4   4   8    1
        " Lady Marmalade"
        (with P!nk, Lil' Kim & Mya)               1   1   8   1    1
   2002 " Dirrty"
        (feat. Redman)                            48  1   5   4    5
   2003 " Beautiful"                              2   1   1   1    1
                         Total                    4   4   2   2    5

Awards and achievements

   Year Category Genre Recording Result
   Grammy Awards
   2000 Best Female Pop Vocal Performance Pop "Genie in a Bottle"
   Nominated
   2000 Best New Artist General — Won
   2001 Best Female Pop Vocal Performance Pop "What A Girl Wants"
   Nominated
   2001 Best Latin Pop Album Latin Mi Reflejo Nominated
   2002 Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals Pop "Nobody Wants to Be Lonely"
   (with Ricky Martin) Nominated
   2002 Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals Pop "Lady Marmalade" (with Lil'
   Kim, Mya and Pink) Won
   2003 Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals Pop "Dirrty" (featuring Redman)
   Nominated
   2004 Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals Pop "Can't Hold Us Down"
   (featuring Lil' Kim) Nominated
   2004 Best Pop Vocal Album Pop Stripped Nominated
   2004 Best Female Pop Vocal Performance Pop "Beautiful" Won
   2006 Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals Pop "A Song for You" (with
   Herbie Hancock) Nominated
   Latin Grammy Awards
   2000 Mejor Desempeño Vocal Pop y Femenino
   (Best Female Pop Vocal Performance) Pop "Genio Atrapado" Nominated
   2001 Grabación del Año
   (Record of the Year) General "Pero Me Acuerdo De Ti" Nominated
   2001 Mejor Álbum Vocal Pop y Femenino
   (Best Female Pop Vocal Album) Pop Mi Reflejo Won

Videos

     * 1999: Genie Gets Her Wish — Autobiographical presentation — #1 U.S.
       — platinum certification.
     * 2000: My Reflection — Video release of ABC special — #1 U.S. — gold
       certification.
     * 2004: Stripped Live in the UK — Complete video of Stripped Tour
       concert (sans "Make Over") live from Wembley Arena, London,
       England, extended version of The WB and MTV specials — #3 U.S. —
       platinum certification.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christina_Aguilera"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
