   #copyright

Cider

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Drink

   Thatchers traditional scrumpy cider in a pint glass
   Thatchers traditional scrumpy cider in a pint glass

   Cider (or cyder) is an alcoholic beverage made primarily from the
   juices of specially grown varieties of apples and pears. In most places
   in the world, the term refers to fermented apple juice and pear juice,
   but the drink is known as hard cider or ciderjack in the United States
   and parts of Canada, where the term "cider" almost exclusively refers
   to non-alcoholic apple cider.

   Cider generally has a stronger alcoholic content than typical beer,
   usually over 5%, and appears golden yellow and often cloudy. To produce
   cider, apples are washed and mashed, pressed (usually in a stone mill
   or hydraulic press), then fermented in oak vats using natural or added
   yeasts.

   Cider is very popular in the United Kingdom, especially in South West
   England, in comparison to other countries. The UK has the highest per
   capita consumption as well as the largest cider producing companies in
   the world including H. P. Bulmer, the largest . The drink is also
   popular and traditional in Brittany and Normandy (France), in Ireland
   and northern Spain. The drink is making a resurgence in both Europe and
   the United States . Overall, the UK produces 110 million imperial
   gallons (500,000,000 L) of cider per year.

   Apples grown for consumption or consumer outlets are far from ideal for
   cidermaking, as they are low in tannins. Most makers use cider apples,
   the cultivars developed specifically for cidermaking, of which there
   are many hundreds of varieties.

Types of cider

   Cider comes in a variety of tastes, from sweet to dry, although flavour
   differs enormously within these descriptions. The appearance of cider
   ranges from very dark, cloudy and sludgy through to very crisp, clean
   and golden yellow, and with the most processed, almost entirely clear.
   The varying colours and appearances are generally as a result of how
   much of the apple material is removed between pressing and
   fermentation.

   Modern, mass-produced ciders are generally heavily processed and
   resemble sparkling wine in appearance. More traditional brands tend to
   be darker and cloudier, as less of the apple is filtered out. They are
   often stronger than processed varieties, tasting more strongly of
   apples.

   White cider is made by processing cider after the traditional milling
   process is complete, resulting in a nearly colourless product. This
   processing allows the manufacturer to produce strong (typically 7-8%
   ABV) cider cheaply, quickly, and on an industrial scale. Brands of
   white cider include White Lightning, Three Hammers, Polaris and Frosty
   Jack's.

   More detail about the various types of cider by region can be found
   under the country headings below.

Cider production

Scratting and pressing

   Most cider is made industrially nowadays, although traditional methods
   still survive. In this picture the layers of pomace are wrapped in
   canvas.
   Most cider is made industrially nowadays, although traditional methods
   still survive. In this picture the layers of pomace are wrapped in
   canvas.

   Once the apples are gathered from trees in orchards they are "scratted"
   (ground down) into what is called " pomace" or "pommage". Historically
   this was done using pressing stones with circular troughs, or by a
   cider mill. Cider mills were traditionally driven by the hand,
   water-mill, or horse-power. In modern times they are likely to be
   powered by electricity. The pulp is then transferred to the cider
   "press", where the pommage is pressed and formed by pressure into a
   kind of cake, which is called the "cheese".

   Traditionally the method for squeezing the juice from the cheese
   involves placing clear, sweet straw or hair cloths between the layers
   of pomace. This will usually alternate with slatted ash-wood racks,
   until there is a pile of ten or twelve layers. It is important to
   minimise the time that the pomace is exposed to air in order to keep
   oxidation to a minimum. The cheese needs to be constructed evenly, or
   the whole pile slithers onto the floor.

   This pile is then subjected to different degrees of pressure in
   succession, until all the 'must' or juice is squeezed from the pomage.
   This juice, after being strained in a coarse hair-sieve, is then put
   into either open vats or closed casks. The pressed pulp is given to
   farm animals as winter feed, composted or discarded, or used to make
   liqueurs .

Fermentation

   Fermentation is best effected at a temperature of 4 to 16 °C (40 to 60
   °F). This is low for most kinds of fermentation, but works for cider as
   it leads to slower fermentation with less loss of delicate aromas.

   Shortly before the fermentation consumes all the sugar, the liquor is
   "racked" into new vats. This leaves dead yeast cells and other
   undesirable material at the bottom of the old vat. At this point it
   becomes important to exclude airborne acetic bacteria, so care is taken
   to fill the vat completely, and the fermenting of the remaining
   available sugar generates a small amount of carbon dioxide that helps
   to prevent air seeping in. This also creates a certain amount of
   sparkle, and sometimes extra sugar, such as white cane sugar, is added
   at this stage for this purpose and also to raise the alcohol level.
   Racking is sometimes repeated if the liquor remains too cloudy.

   Homebrewers can use elaborate 55 gallon plastic drums. More simply they
   use a 2 or 3 liter bottle of pasteurized store bought preservative free
   apple juice, add a touch of yeast, champagne ideally, and replace the
   cap after drilling a small snug hole for an airlock. For larger batches
   of hard cider, using a culligan water jug works well with the addition
   of a rubber stopper, or even a garbage bag, to keep the system sealed.
   The cider may then be racked by careful pouring and bottled with 3 tsp.
   of raw sugar into a 2 liter pop bottle to secondarily ferment for
   carbonation. Apple based juices with cranberry also make fine ciders.

   The cider is ready to drink at this point, though more often it is
   matured in the vats for up to two or three years. Though it is
   perfectly tasty at around 2 months.

Blending and bottling

   For larger-scale cider production, ciders from vats produced from
   different varieties of apple may be blended to accord with market
   taste. If the cider is to be bottled, usually some extra sugar is added
   for sparkle. Higher quality ciders can be made using the champagne
   method, but this is expensive in time and money and requires special
   corks, bottles, and other equipment. Some home brewers use beer
   bottles, which work perfectly well, and inexpensively. This allows the
   cider to become naturally carbonated.

Health

   Conventional apple cider has a relatively high concentration of
   phenolics, antioxidants which may be helpful for preventing heart
   disease, cancer, and other ailments . This is, in part, because apples
   themselves have a decent concentration of phenolics in them to begin
   with.

Cider festivals

   A Cider Festival is a large event promoting cider (and usually perry, a
   similar drink made from pears). A variety of ciders and perries will be
   available for tasting and buying. A limited selection of other drinks,
   such as beer and soft drinks, is often available too. Some festivals
   are put on by cider-promoting private organizations , others by pubs,
   and still others by cider producers themselves.

Uses of Cider

   A distilled spirit, apple brandy, is made from cider. Its best known
   forms are Calvados and applejack. Applejack is a strong alcoholic
   beverage made in North America by concentrating cider, either by the
   traditional method of " freeze distillation", or by true evaporative
   distillation. In traditional freeze distillation, a barrel of cider is
   left outside during the winter. When the temperature is low enough, the
   water in the cider starts to freeze. If the ice is removed, the (now
   more concentrated) alcoholic solution is left behind in the barrel. If
   the process is repeated often enough, and the temperature is low
   enough, the alcohol concentration is raised to 30–40% alcohol by
   volume. In freeze distillation, methanol and fusel oil, which are
   natural fermentation byproducts, may reach harmful concentrations.
   These toxins can be separated when regular heat distillation is
   performed. Home production of applejack is illegal in most countries.

   A popular aperitif in Normandy is pommeau—a drink produced by blending
   unfermented cider and apple brandy in the barrel (the high alcoholic
   content of the spirit stops the fermentation process of the cider and
   the blend takes on the character of the aged barrel).

   Cocktails may include cider. Besides kir and snakebite, an example is
   Black Velvet in a version of which cider may replace champagne, usually
   referred to as a "Poor Man's Black Velvet".

   A few producers in Quebec have developed cidre de glace (literally "ice
   cider", sometimes called "apple ice wine"), inspired from ice wines,
   where the apples are naturally frozen either before or after harvest.
   The alcohol concentration of cidre de glace is 9–13%.

Related drinks

   Other fruits can be used to make cider-like drinks. The most popular is
   perry, known in France as poiré and produced mostly in Normandy, which
   is made from fermented pear-juice. A branded sweet perry known as
   Babycham, marketed principally as a women's drink and sold in miniature
   Champagne-style bottles, was once popular but has now become
   unfashionable. Another related drink is cyser (cider fermented with
   honey).

   Although not widely made in modern times, various other pome fruits can
   produce palatable drinks. Apicius, in Book II of De Re Coquinaria,
   includes a recipe calling for quince cider.

   Another similar drink is plum jerkum, made from fermented plums,
   traditional of Warwickshire in the English Midlands. It is said that it
   "left the head clear while paralysing the legs". The Warwickshire
   Drooper plum from which it is traditionally brewed is now uncommon,
   which explains the rarity of the drink.

   Peach juice can be fermented into "peachy".

Cider by country

   Before the development of rapid long-distance transportation, regions
   of cider consumption generally coincided with regions of cider
   production: that is, areas with apple orchards. For example, R. A.
   Fletcher notes that in the Liber Sancti Jacobi, cider was said to be
   more common than wine in 12th-century Galicia.

Argentina

   In Argentina, cider, or sidra is by far the most popular alcoholic
   carbonated drink during the Christmas and New Year holidays. It has
   traditionally been considered the choice of the middle and lower
   classes (along with ananá fizz, a sort of pineapple cider), whereas the
   higher classes would rather go for champagne for their Christmas or New
   Year toast. Popular commercial brands of cider are Real, La Farruca and
   Rama Caída. It is usually marketed in 0.7-liter glass or plastic
   bottles.

Austria

   In Austria cider is made in the southwest of Lower Austria, the so
   called " Mostviertel" and in Upper Austria. Almost every farmer there
   has some apple or pear trees. Many of the farmers also have a kind of
   inn called "Mostheuriger". There they serve cider and also something to
   eat.

Australia

   In Australia, 'cider' is considered an alcoholic beverage made from
   apples. The most popular brands of alcoholic cider in Australia are
   Strongbow, and Mercury Cider made at the Cascade Brewery in Hobart,
   Tasmania. Cascade's ' Apple Isle' Sparkling Apple Juice is the most
   popular selling brand of non-alcoholic cider in Australia. Alcoholic
   cider is sold in bottleshops, while the non-alcoholic version is
   stocked in the soft-drink aisles of supermarkets.

Belgium

   Scottish & Newcastle own Belgium cider maker Stassen SA, who in
   addition to their own local brands such as Strassen X Cider also
   produce Strongbow Jacques, a 5.5% ABV cider with cherry, raspberry and
   blackcurrant flavours. Zonhoven based Konings NV specialises in private
   label ciders for European retailers and offers a wide variety of
   flavours and packaging options to the beverage industry.

Canada

   In Quebec, cider is considered a traditional alcoholic beverage.
   Cidermaking was, however, forbidden from the early years of the British
   rule as it was in direct conflict with established British brewers'
   interests (most notably John Molson). In recent years, a unique variety
   has emerged on the market: ice cider. This type of cider is made from
   apples with a particularly high level of sugar caused by natural frost.

   In Ontario, apple cider or apple hooch is often home-made. Apples are
   de-cored, juiced, and boiled. Sugar is dissolved into the apple/water
   mixture. Brewer's yeast is added and the cider is fermented for up to
   two weeks, or three before bottling, and then aged to taste.

   In New Brunswick, cider is commercially available from the Gagetown
   Cider Company and several small farms.

   Cider is commercially produced in British Columbia, New Brunswick and
   Ontario, usually with a 7% alcohol content. It is sold in 341 ml glass
   bottles or sometimes in 2 liter plastic bottles, and does not have the
   added sugar injected into much of US hard cider.

Channel Islands

   Few traditional horse-drawn circular apple crushers are still in use,
   but many may still be seen used as garden ornaments, flower planters or
   architectural features
   Few traditional horse-drawn circular apple crushers are still in use,
   but many may still be seen used as garden ornaments, flower planters or
   architectural features

   Along with the rest of Normandy, the Channel Islands had a strong
   cider-making tradition. Cider had been the ordinary drink of people of
   Jersey from the 16th century, when the commercial opportunities offered
   by cider exports spurred the transformation of feudal open-field
   agriculture to enclosure. Until the 19th century, it was the largest
   agricultural export with up to a quarter of the agricultural land given
   over to orchards. In 1839, for example, 268,199 gallons of cider were
   exported from Jersey to England alone, and almost half a million
   gallons were exported from Guernsey 1834-1843, but by 1870 exports from
   Jersey had slumped to 4,632 gallons. Beer had replaced cider as a
   fashionable drink in the main export markets, and even the home markets
   had switched to beer as the population became more urban. Potatoes
   overtook cider as the most important crop in Jersey in the 1840s, and
   in Guernsey glasshouse tomato production grew in importance.
   Small-scale cider production on farms for domestic consumption,
   particularly by seasonal workers from Brittany and mainland Normandy,
   was maintained, but by the mid-20th century production dwindled until
   only 8 farms were producing cider for their own consumption in 1983.
   The number of orchards had been reduced to such a level that the
   destruction of trees in the Great Storm of 1987 demonstrated how close
   the Islands had come to losing many of its traditional cider apple
   varieties. A concerted effort was made to identify and preserve
   surviving varieties and new orchards were planted. As part of
   diversification, farmers have moved into commercial cider production,
   and the cider tradition is celebrated and marketed as a heritage
   experience. In Jersey, a strong (above 7%) variety is currently sold in
   shops and a bouché style is also marketed.

   In Jersey, cider is used in the preparation of black butter ( Jèrriais:
   nièr beurre), a traditional preserve.

East Asia

   Cider in Japan and Korea sometimes means just a soft drink, not
   necessarily made from apples.

France

   French cidre is an alcoholic drink produced predominantly in Normandy
   and Brittany. It varies in strength from below 4% alcohol to
   considerably more. Cidre Doux is a sweet cider, usually up to 3% in
   strength. 'Demi-Sec' is from 3 to 5% and Cidre Brut is a strong dry
   cider of 5% alcohol and above. Most French ciders are sparkling. Higher
   quality cider is sold in Champagne-style bottles (cidre bouché), and
   while much of cidre is sold in corked bottles, some screw-top bottles
   exist. Until the mid-20th century, cidre was the second most-consumed
   drink in France (after wine) but an increase in the popularity of beer
   displaced cider's market share outside traditional cider-producing
   regions. In restaurants in Brittany, cider is sometimes served in
   traditional ceramic bowls (or wide cups) rather than glasses. A kir
   normand is a cocktail apéritif made with cider and cassis, rather than
   white wine and cassis for the traditional kir.

   Some cider is also made in southwestern France, in the French portion
   of the Basque country. Ciders produced here are generally of the style
   seen in Spanish part of the Basque country.

Keeving

   Breton cidermaking employs the technique of keeving (from the French
   cuvée). In keeving, calcium chloride and a special enzyme are added to
   the pressed apple juice, causing protein in the juice to precipitate to
   the top for removal. This reduces the amount of protein available to
   the yeast, starving it and therefore causing the cider to finish
   fermenting while sugar is still available. The result is a sweeter
   drink at a lower alcohol level but still retaining the full flavor of
   the apples, without dilution.

Germany

   German cider, usually called Apfelwein (apple wine), and regionally
   known as Apfelmost (apple must), Viez (from Latin vice, the second or
   substitute wine), or Saurer Most (sour must), has an alcohol content of
   5.5% - 7% and a tart, sour taste.

   German cider is mainly produced and consumed in Hessen, particularly in
   the Frankfurt, Wetterau and Odenwald areas, in Moselfranken, Merzig (
   Saarland) and the Trier area, as well as the lower Saar area and the
   region bordering on Luxembourg. In these regions, there are several
   large producers, as well as numerous small, private producers often
   using traditional recipes.

   In some of these regions, there are regular cider competitions and
   fairs, in which the small, private producers participate. Cider songs
   are composed and sung at these events. The Merzig region crowns a Viez
   Queen, and the lower Saar area a Viez King.

   An official Viez route or cider route connects Saarburg with the border
   to Luxembourg.

India

   Cider is a new introduction in India under the brand TEMPEST, produced
   by Green Valley Cider located in the apple producing state of Himachal
   Pradesh, India. Tempest is primarily available in the carbonated form
   and is witnessing a resurgence in popularity. However, traditionally
   and obviously not under the name cider, it has been known to be locally
   produced in villages in the apple producing states of Uttaranchal and
   Himachal Pradesh .

Ireland

   Cider is a popular drink in Ireland; for a long time cider production
   was officially encouraged and supported by a preferential tax
   treatment. A single cider, Bulmers, dominates sales in Ireland: Owned
   by C&C and produced in Clonmel, Co. Tipperary, this Bulmers is
   unrelated to the British Bulmers cider - outside the Republic of
   Ireland, C&C brand their cider as Magners.

Mexico

   There are two types of cider sold in Mexico. One type is a popular
   carbonated soft drink, the best known being Sidral Mundet. The
   alcoholic version is known as sidra, a sparkling cider typically sold
   in champagne-style bottles. Sidra is, due to the expense of imported
   champagne, the traditional drink used for New Year's Eve toasts in
   Mexico.

Luxembourg

   In Luxembourg, viez (pronounced feetz) is rather like English scrumpy.
   It is cloudy and varies from non-alcoholic to very alcoholic. It is
   made only in autumn. It is sold by the side of the road in reused
   plastic bottles and should be drunk within a few days of purchase. The
   quality can be extremely good.

New Zealand

   In New Zealand, cider is fermented apple juice. The most popular brand
   is Scrumpy due to its low price, availability in supermarkets and high
   alcohol content,- this being taken advantage of by under age drinkers.

Norway

   In Norway, cider ( sider) is a naturally fermented apple juice. Pear
   juice is sometimes mixed with the apple to get a better fermenting
   process started. The main area for cider production is in the "fruit
   garden" surrounding the Hardangerfjord. Most cider production is by
   private persons. There is a cider festival in Øystese, Norway each fall
   were a panel determines the years best cider for the Hardanger area.

South Africa

   Hunter's Gold and Hunter's Dry are popular ciders, along with Redd's
   and Savanna Dry.

Spain

   Man in a cider house
   Man in a cider house

   The Spanish regions of Asturias, Cantabria and the Basque Country are
   well known for traditional sidra, an alcoholic cider of 4 to 8%
   strength. Sidra, also Sagardoa in the Basque Country, is traditionally
   poured in very small quantities from a height into a wide glass, with
   the arm holding the bottle extended upwards and the one holding the
   glass extended downwards. This technique is called to escanciar (or, in
   Asturian, echar) and is done to get air bubbles into the drink, thus
   giving it a sparkling taste like Champagne that lasts a very short
   time. Spanish sidra is closely associated with sidrerías or sidreríes
   (Asturias) or sagardotegiak (Euskadi) ("cider houses"). In the Basque
   region of Guipúzcoa, it is a tradition to visit sagardotegiak between
   February and May to drink new sidra from the barrel accompanied by a
   meal such as txuleton.

Sweden

   Herrljunga Cider was one of the first commercial ciders to be produced
   in Sweden since 1969. In 1997 Swedish government relaxed the rules
   which allowed others to prduce cider of a higher ABV. This is where the
   likes of Rekorderlig, Kopparbergs.. came about to follow the lead by
   Herrljunga (who are still the number 1 selling cider in Sweden)

   Kopparberg Cider is growing in popularity particularly in the UK where
   it is now stocked by UK supermarkets, IKEA and the pub chain
   Wetherspoons. It comes in a variety of flavours, including apple, pear,
   summer fruits, forest berries and peach. Their most popular is pear.

The United Kingdom

Types of cider

   In the United Kingdom, cider is mostly associated with the West
   Country, but is also extensively produced in Wales and the east of
   England, particularly Kent, Suffolk and Norfolk. Cider comes in a wide
   variety of tastes and types in the UK and ranges in taste from very
   sweet to very dry, although flavour differs within these descriptions.

   There are two broad main styles of cider in the UK - West Country-style
   and Eastern-style. The former are made using a much higher percentage
   of true cider-apples and so are richer in tannins and usually heavier
   in body and fuller in flavour. Eastern ciders tend to use a higher
   percentage of, or are exclusively made from, culinary and dessert
   fruit; Kentish ciders (such as Biddenden's) are typical of this style.
   They tend to be clearer, more vinous and lighter in body and flavour,
   but also higher in acidity and high in alcohol.

   At one end of the scale are the very traditional microbrewed varieties
   often called Scrumpy in England. These are non-carbonated, very cloudy,
   and often dark in appearance. England's West Country and parts of Wales
   are littered with small breweries and farms. Production is often on
   such a small scale the product is only sold at the point of manufacture
   or in local pubs and shops. . Taste will depend on a number of factors
   including the season, location and apple variety. Many will find such
   ciders an acquired taste; although the usage has almost disappeared
   now, until recently non-sweet scrumpy was often referred to as "rough"
   rather than "dry", with good reason. The alcohol content may range up
   to 8% ABV, the maximum allowed by law.

   Mass produced commercial cider such as that produced by Bulmers is
   likely to be very clean and crisp, carbonated and heavily processed.
   The colour is likely to be golden yellow with a clear appearance a
   result of industrial processes to remove apple sediment, which has
   often led to it being compared to carbonated urine by cider
   aficianados. Two common examples are Strongbow and Blackthorn . These
   ciders are the best-selling type.

   Mass-produced farmhouse-style ciders have become more popular in recent
   years. These may be made from a single variety of cider apple or retain
   their cloudy appearance.

   White ciders are almost clear in appearance due to a process carried
   out after the traditional brewing process is complete, resulting in a
   nearly white product. This processing allows the manufacturer to
   produce strong (typically 7-8% ABV) cider cheaply, quickly, and on an
   industrial scale, often from poor raw materials.

Image

   Cider has suffered from an image problem in the past, often seen as the
   drink of choice for teenagers in the UK, along with alcopops. This
   preference is aided by preferentially low duty rates for cider compared
   to beer, which reduces the drink's cost, and its high alcohol by volume
   compared to beer. A popular drink among students is snakebite, which is
   a blend of pale lager and cider; this is often served with a dash of
   blackcurrant cordial, in which case it is usually termed 'Snakebite and
   Black', or occasionally 'Sweet Diesel'. However, recent years have seen
   a significant increase in cider sales in the UK, as the industry has
   innovated and caught the interest of more drinkers.

   Cidermaking and consumption has found its way into the popular culture
   associated with the West Country; Somerset novelty band The Wurzels
   perform many songs about scrumpy and the drinking thereof, while West
   Country-resident author Terry Pratchett makes reference to scrumpy in
   his descriptions of the Discworld beverage " scumble".

The West Country

   Cider made in the West Country is often referred to as "scrumpy", from
   the local dialect verb "to scrump": to steal apples. It is also
   referred to as Cyder which is an old term for strong cider (8-12%).
   Ciders from Gloucestershire, Herefordshire and Worcestershire made from
   traditional recipes forms a European Union Protected Geographical
   Indication; important traditional cidermaking also takes place in Devon
   and Somerset. Examples of a working cider house still existed here in
   recent times, though many have now gone. There are, however, over 25
   cider producers in Somerset alone, many being small family businesses.

   During the 17th and 18th centuries, a condition known as Devon colic, a
   form of lead poisoning, was associated with the consumption of cider; a
   campaign to remove lead components from cider presses made the
   condition almost unknown by the early 19th century.

   Shepton Mallet, Somerset is home to the largest cider plant in Europe.
   This plant produces Blackthorn and Olde English as well as light perry
   Babycham.

Wales

   Cider and perry production in Wales began a dramatic revival in the
   early 2000s, with many small firms entering production throughout the
   country. Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA) has actively encouraged this
   establishment, and Welsh ciders and perries have won many awards at
   CAMRA festivals; meanwhile, the establishment of groups such as UKCider
   and the Welsh Perry & Cider Society have spurred communication among
   those producers.

   Welsh varieties of apples and pears are often distinct from those grown
   in England, giving Welsh cider a significantly different flavour
   despite the proximity of the orchards.

"Real cider" in the United Kingdom

   At the 2007 AGM CAMRA amended their own definition of 'real' cider to
   read as the follows:

     'CAMRA defines real cider as cider that has been stored in the
     traditional way, and is living in the container from which it is
     dispensed. Real cider must not be stored or dispensed using
     extraneous gas pressure'.

   UKCider, a Community of Practice for small scale cidermakers, has
   developed a contrasting definition of real cider:

     "What do we mean by Real Cider?
     Real cider is the product of fermenting fresh apple juice.
     The amount of apple juice which went into the final product must be
     between 85 and 100% and should be clearly stated on the container it
     is sold in or dispensed from. No artificial sweeteners, flavourings
     or colourings are permitted.
     (For real perry substitute pear juice.)"

   (from the ukcider website)

   These contrasting definitions mean that for example, Sheppy's
   Westcountry full juice single varietal bottled ciders would be accepted
   by ukcider and rejected by CAMRA whereas Saxon's Yorkshire draught
   ciders made from apple concentrate, water and other adjuncts flavoured
   with ingredients such as cranberries are now acceptable to CAMRA as
   'real cider' but not to ukcider.

The United States

   During colonial times, apple cider was consumed as the main beverage
   with meals, because water was often unsafe for drinking.

   Somewhere around the time of Prohibition, the word cider came to mean
   sparkling apple juice, possibly through the influence of Martinelli's
   sparkling apple cider, which was once touted specifically as
   "non-alcoholic cider". Martinelli's is sold as "cider" or "juice"
   depending on regional preference of the term.

   In other parts of the United States, the word "cider" simply means,
   unfiltered, unfermented apple juice. For instance, in Pennsylvania,
   apple cider is legally defined as an "amber golden, opaque,
   unfermented, entirely non-alcoholic juice squeezed from apples".
   Natural or artificial flavours or colors generally recognized as safe
   may be added if their presence is declared on the label by the use of
   the word "Imitation" in type at least one-half the size of the type
   used to declare the flavour. Cider containing more than 0.15 percent
   alcohol by volume is classified as hard cider.

   Despite this, alcoholic cider is produced in the United States,
   especially in New England and upstate New York. Woodchuck cider, from
   Vermont, is one of the most common brands in the north-eastern US,
   though the most known national brand is Cider Jack.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cider"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
