   #copyright

Coconut

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Food and agriculture;
Plants

                     iCoconut
   Coconut Palm (Cocos nucifera)
   Coconut Palm (Cocos nucifera)

                             Conservation status

   Secure
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Plantae
   Division: Magnoliophyta
   Class:    Liliopsida
   Order:    Arecales
   Family:   Arecaceae
   Genus:    Cocos
   Species:  C. nucifera

                                Binomial name

   Cocos nucifera
   L.

   The Coconut Palm (Cocos nucifera) is a member of the Family Arecaceae
   (palm family). It is the only species in the genus Cocos, and is a
   large palm, growing to 30 m tall, with pinnate leaves 4-6 m long,
   pinnae 60-90 cm long; old leaves break away cleanly leaving the trunk
   smooth. The term coconut refers to the fruit of the coconut palm.

Origins and cultivation

   A man climbing a tree to harvest coconuts. Behind the tree a young
   plant is visible
   Enlarge
   A man climbing a tree to harvest coconuts. Behind the tree a young
   plant is visible

   The origins of this plant are the subject of controversy with some
   authorities claiming it is native to southeast Asia, while others claim
   its origin is in northwestern South America. Fossil records from New
   Zealand indicate that small, coconut-like plants grew there as far back
   15 million years ago. Even older fossils have been uncovered in
   Rajasthan and Maharashtra, India. Regardless of its origin, the coconut
   has spread across much of the tropics, probably aided in many cases by
   sea-faring peoples. The fruit is light and buoyant and presumably
   spread significant distances by marine currents: fruits collected from
   the sea as far north as Norway have been found to be viable
   (subsequently germinated under the right conditions). In the Hawaiian
   Islands, the coconut is regarded as a Polynesian introduction, first
   brought to the Islands by early Polynesian voyagers from their
   homelands in the South Pacific.

   The coconut palm thrives on sandy soils and is highly tolerant of
   salinity. It prefers areas with abundant sunlight and regular rainfall
   (750 to 2,000 mm annually), which makes colonising shorelines of the
   tropics relatively straightforward. Coconuts also need high humidity
   (70–80%+) for optimum growth, which is why they are rarely seen in
   areas with low humidity (e.g. the Mediterranean), even where
   temperatures are high enough (regularly above 24°C). They are very hard
   to establish and grow in dry climates without frequent irrigation. The
   only two states in the U.S. where coconut palms can be grown and
   reproduce outdoors without irrigation are Hawaii and Florida. The
   farthest north a coconut palm has been known to grow outdoors is in
   Newport Beach, California along the Pacific Coast Highway. In order for
   coconut palm to survive in Southern California they need sandy soil,
   minimal water in the winter to prevent root rot and would benefit from
   root heating coils.

   The flowers of the coconut palm are polygamomonoecious, with both male
   and female flowers in the same inflorescence. Flowering occurs
   continuously, with female flowers producing seeds. Coconut palms are
   believed to be largely cross- pollinated, although some dwarf varieties
   are self-pollinating.

Pests and diseases

   Coconuts affected by eriophyid mites, at Taliparamba, Kannur, Kerala,
   India.
   Enlarge
   Coconuts affected by eriophyid mites, at Taliparamba, Kannur, Kerala,
   India.

   Coconuts are susceptible to the phytoplasma disease lethal yellowing.
   One recently selected cultivar, 'Maypan', has been bred for resistance
   to this disease. The fruit may also be damaged by eriophyid mites.

The fruit

   Maturing Coconuts on the tree
   Enlarge
   Maturing Coconuts on the tree

   Botanically, a coconut is a simple dry fruit known as a fibrous drupe
   (not a true nut). The husk ( mesocarp) is composed of fibres called
   coir and there is an inner "stone" (the endocarp). This hard endocarp
   (the outside of the coconut as sold in the shops of non-tropical
   countries) has three germination pores that are clearly visible on the
   outside surface once the husk is removed. It is through one of these
   that the radicle emerges when the embryo germinates. Adhering to the
   inside wall of the endocarp is the testa, with a thick albuminous
   endosperm (the coconut "meat"), the white and fleshy edible part of the
   seed. The endosperm surrounds a hollow interior space, filled with air
   and often a liquid referred to as coconut water, not to be confused
   with coconut milk. Coconut milk is made by grating the endocarp and
   mixing it with (warm) water. This produces a thick, white liquid called
   coconut milk that is used in much Asian cooking, for example, in
   curries. Coconut water from the unripe coconut, on the other hand, is
   drunk fresh as a refreshing drink.

   When viewed on end, the endocarp and germination pores resemble the
   face of a monkey, the Portuguese word for which is macaco, sometimes
   abbreviated to coco, hence the name of the fruit. The specific name
   nucifera is Latin for nut bearing.

   When the coconut is still green, the endosperm inside is thin and
   tender, a favourite snack. But the main reason to pick the nut at that
   stage is to drink its water; a big nut contains up to one litre of
   refreshing drink. When the nut has ripened and the outer husk has
   turned brown, a couple of months later, it will fall from the tree of
   its own accord. At that time the endosperm has thickened and hardened,
   while the coconut water has become somewhat bitter.
   Coconut flower. Location: Taliparamba, Kannur, Kerala, India.
   Enlarge
   Coconut flower. Location: Taliparamba, Kannur, Kerala, India.

   To open a coconut, remove the outer husk (if not purchased already
   removed) and pierce two of the three eyes of the fruit (one for the
   juice to come out of, one to enable air to go in); drain the juice from
   the fruit. Since coconuts have a naturally-forming fracture point, they
   can be opened by taking a heavy knife, such as a meat cleaver, and
   striking the coconut with the flat edge of the knife. Or you can use a
   flat-bladed screwdriver and a hammer (which is easier, and may be safer
   than using a cleaver). After inserting the screwdriver slightly, twist
   it to crack the shell. The coconut should then be turned, and this
   process repeated until there is a contiguous crack in the shell around
   the entire fruit. Afterwards, the fruit can be separated at this
   fracture point.

   When the nut is still green the husk is very hard, but green nuts
   rarely fall, only when they have been attacked by moulds, etc. By the
   time the nut naturally falls, the husk has become brown, the coir has
   become dryer and softer, and the nut is less likely to cause damage
   when it drops. Still, there have been instances of coconuts falling
   from trees and injuring people, and claims of some fatalities. This was
   the subject of a paper published in 1984 that won the Ig Nobel Prize in
   2001. Falling coconut deaths are often used as a comparison to shark
   attacks, making the claim that it is more likely to be killed by a
   falling coconut than by a shark. There is no evidence of people being
   killed in this manner. However William Wyatt Gill, an early LMS
   missionary on Mangaia recorded a story in which Kaiara, the concubine
   of King Tetui, was killed by a falling, green nut. The offending tree
   was immediately cut down. This was around 1777, the time of Captain
   Cook's visit.

   In some parts of the world, trained pig-tailed macaques are used to
   harvest coconuts. Training schools for pig-tailed macaques still exist
   in southern Thailand and in the Malaysian state of Kelantan.
   Competitions are held each year to discover the fastest harvester.

Uses

   A Coconut that has been cracked open, showing the composition of the
   shell, seed, and the cavity inside
   Enlarge
   A Coconut that has been cracked open, showing the composition of the
   shell, seed, and the cavity inside
   A relatively young coconut which has been served in a hawker centre in
   Singapore with a straw with which to drink its water.
   Enlarge
   A relatively young coconut which has been served in a hawker centre in
   Singapore with a straw with which to drink its water.
   Extracting the fibre from the husk (Sri Lanka)
   Enlarge
   Extracting the fibre from the husk (Sri Lanka)
   fresh coconut
   Enlarge
   fresh coconut

   All parts of the coconut palm are useful, and the trees have a
   comparatively high yield (up to 75 fruits per year); it therefore has
   significant economic value. The name for the coconut palm in Sanskrit
   is kalpa vriksha, which translates as "the tree which provides all the
   necessities of life". In Malay, the coconut is known as pokok seribu
   guna, "the tree of a thousand uses". In the Philippines, the coconut is
   commonly given the title " Tree of Life".

   Uses of the various parts of the palm include:

Culinary uses

     * The white, fleshy part of the seed is edible and used fresh or
       dried in cooking.
     * The cavity is filled with " coconut water" containing sugars,
       fibre, proteins, anti-oxidants, vitamins and minerals, which
       provide excellent isotonic electrolyte balance, and an exceptional
       nutritional food source, which is why it is used as a refreshing
       drink throughout the humid tropics. It is also used in the making
       of the gelatinous dessert nata de coco. Mature fruits have
       significantly less liquid than young immature coconuts. Coconut
       water is sterile until the coconut is opened (unless the coconut is
       spoiled).
     * Sport fruits are also harvested, primarily in the Philippines,
       where they are known as macapuno.
     * Coconut milk (which is approximately 17% fat) is made by processing
       grated coconut with hot water or hot milk which extracts the oil
       and aromatic compounds from the fibre, and should not be confused
       with the juice found naturally in young coconuts, called coconut
       water or coconut juice.
     * Coconut cream is what rises to the top when coconut milk is
       refrigerated and left to set.
     * The leftover fibre from coconut milk production is used as
       livestock feed.
     * The sap derived from incising the flower clusters of the coconut is
       fermented to produce palm wine, also known as " toddy" or, in the
       Philippines, tuba. The sap can also be reduced by boiling to create
       a sweet syrup or candy.
     * Apical buds of adult plants are edible and are known as
       "palm-cabbage" (though harvest of this kills the tree).
     * The interior of the growing tip may be harvested as heart-of-palm
       and is considered a rare delicacy. Harvesting this also kills the
       tree. Hearts of palm are often eaten in salads; such a salad is
       sometimes called "millionaire's salad".
     * Newly germinated coconuts contain an edible fluff of
       marshmallow-like consistency called coconut sprout, produced as the
       endosperm nourishes the developing embryo.

Non-culinary uses

     * Coconut water can be used as an intravenous fluid (see PMID
       10674546).
     * The coir (the fibre from the husk of the coconut) is used in ropes,
       mats, brushes, caulking boats and as stuffing fibre; it is also
       used extensively in horticulture for making potting compost.
     * Copra is the dried meat of the seed which is the source of coconut
       oil.
     * The leaves provide materials for baskets and roofing thatch.
     * Palmwood comes from the trunk and is increasingly being used as an
       ecologically-sound substitute for endangered hardwoods. It has
       several applications, particularly in furniture and specialized
       construction (notably in Manila's Coconut Palace).
     * Hawaiians hollowed the trunk to form a drum, a container, or even
       small canoes.
     * The husk and shells can be used for fuel and are a good source of
       charcoal.
     * Shells with husks are also used in the Philippines as floor
       shiners, known as bunot.
     * Dried half coconut shells are used to buff floors.
     * Shirt buttons can be carved out of dried coconut shell. Coconut
       buttons are often used for Hawaiian Aloha shirts.
     * The stiff leaflet midribs make cooking skewers, kindling arrows, or
       bound into bundles, brooms and brushes.
     * The roots are used as a dye, a mouthwash, or a medicine for
       dysentery. A frayed-out piece of root makes a poor man's
       toothbrush.
     * Half coconut shells are used in theatre, banged together to create
       the sound effect of a horse's hoofbeats. They were used in this way
       in the Monty Python film Monty Python and the Holy Grail.
     * Half coconut shells may be deployed as an improvised bra,
       especially for comedic effect or theatrical purposes. They were
       used in this way in the 1970s UK sitcom It Ain't Half Hot Mum for
       example.
     * In fairgrounds, a " coconut shy" is a popular target practice game,
       and coconuts are commonly given as prizes.
     * A coconut can be hollowed out and used as a home for a rodent or
       small bird.
     * Fresh inner coconut husk can also be rubbed on the lens of
       snorkling goggles to prevent fogging during use
     * Dried coconut leaves when burned into ash contains amounts of lime
     * Dried half coconut shells are used as the bodies of musical
       instruments, including the Chinese yehu and banhu, and the
       Vietnamese đàn gáo.
     * Coconut is also commonly used as a herbal remedy in Pakistan to
       treat bites from rats.
     * The "branches" (leaf petioles) are whippy (strong and flexible)
       enough to make a redouted switch, the traditional use of which in
       tribal justice was for instance revived by referendum among the
       Gilbertese community on Choiseul ( Solomon islands) in 2005 CorPun.
     * Coconut seedlings are popular novelty houseplants.
     * The leaves can be woven (by weaving opposing leaves into each
       other) to create effective roofing materials, or Reed Mats.

World history

     * In World War II, coastwatcher scout Biuki Gasa was the first of two
       from the Solomon Islands to reach the shipwrecked John F. Kennedy
       and the wounded and exhausted crew of his PT-109. He would suggest
       for lack of paper, delivering a message inscribed on a husked
       coconut shell by dugout canoe. This coconut was later kept on the
       president's desk, and is now in the John F. Kennedy Library.

Cultural aspects

   A young coconut palm
   Enlarge
   A young coconut palm

   Coconuts are extensively used in Hindu religious rites. Coconuts are
   usually offered to the gods, and a coconut is smashed on the ground or
   on some object as part of an initiation or inauguration of building
   projects, facility, ship, etc.; this act signifies sacrificing ego,
   that wealth stems from divinity, and if due credit is not given, bad
   karma is taken on. In Hindu mythology it is referred as Kalpavruksha.
   In Hindu mythologies it is said that Kalapavruksha gives what is asked
   for.
     * The Indonesian tale of Hainuwele tells a story of the introduction
       of coconuts to Seram.

     * The people of the state of Kerala in southern India consider Kerala
       to be the "Land of Coconuts", in the native language the phrase is
       nalikerathinte nattil.

     * The word "coconut" is also used as a mild derogatory slang word
       referring to a person of Latino, Filipino, or Indian subcontinent
       descent who emulates a white person (brown on the outside, white on
       the inside).

     * "Coconut" is Australian slang for a Tongan, or other person of
       "Polynesian" descent, although usually not Maori.

     * " Coconut" is also the title of a song by Harry Nilsson.

     * "Coconut" is also the title of an In Reverie b-side track by Saves
       the Day.

     * "Coconut" is also used as a slang term for breasts.

     * The word Coconut is used in the song by The Strokes called Ask Me
       Anything

     * Kid Creole's backing singers were known as his Coconuts

Gallery

   View of a Coconut palm from below

   Coconut close-up photo

   Harvested coconuts cut open and drying in the sun, Fiji.

   19th century illustration of a Coconut Palm

   19th century illustration of the flowers

   Grated coconut

   Coconuts Ganesh Festival Paris

   Making a rug from coconut fibre (Sri Lanka)
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coconut"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
