   #copyright

Coffee

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Drink

   A cup of coffee
   Enlarge
   A cup of coffee

   Coffee is one of the most widely consumed beverages in the world. It is
   prepared from the roasted seeds – commonly referred to as beans – of
   the coffee plant, and is usually served hot but can also be served
   cold. A typical 7 fluid ounce (ca. 207 mL) cup of coffee contains
   80-140 milligrams of caffeine, depending on the method of preparation.
   Coffee represents 71% of all the United States caffeine consumption
   followed by soft drinks and tea. Coffee, along with tea and water, is
   one of the most frequently-drunk beverages, its volume amounting to
   about a third that of tap water. In 2003, coffee was the world's sixth
   largest agricultural export in terms of value, behind wheat, maize,
   soybeans, palm oil and sugar.

Etymology and history

   The history of coffee begins in the 9th century. It originated in the
   highlands of Ethiopia and spread to the rest of the world via Egypt and
   Europe. The word coffee is believed to be derived from the word Kaffa,
   a region in Ethiopia where coffee originated. Later through its
   expansion, the name later evolved from Arabic word قهوة Qah'wa, over
   Ottoman Turkish Kahve, which originally meant wine or other
   intoxicating liquors. In the 15th century, Muslims introduced coffee in
   Persia, Egypt, northern Africa and Turkey, where the first coffeehouse,
   Kiva Han, opened in 1475 in Constantinople. The stimulant effect of
   drinking coffee caused it to be forbidden among orthodox and
   conservative imams in Mecca in 1511 and in Cairo in 1532 by a
   theological court. In Egypt, coffeehouses and warehouses containing
   coffee cherries were sacked. But the product's popularity, particularly
   among intellectuals, led to the reversal of this decision in 1524 by an
   order of the Ottoman Turkish Sultan Selim I.

   From the Muslim world, coffee spread to Europe, where it became popular
   in the 17th century. Dutch traders were the first to start the large
   scale importation of coffee into Europe. In 1538, Léonard Rauwolf, a
   German physician, having come back from a ten-year trip in the Near
   East, was the first westerner to describe the brew:


Coffee

         A beverage as black as ink, useful against numerous illnesses,
         particularly those of the stomach. Its consumers take it in the
      morning, quite frankly, in a porcelain cup that is passed around and
      from which each one drinks a cupful. It is composed of water and the
                        fruit from a bush called bunnu.


                                                                          Coffee

   These remarks were noted by merchants, who were sensitive to this kind
   of information through experience in the commerce of spices. English
   coffeehouses were centers of intellectual and commercial activity.
   Lloyds of London, the famous insurance firm, was originally a
   coffeehouse.

   In the American colonies, coffee drinking developed slowly. Colonists
   thought that coffee was a poor substitute for alcohol. High alcohol
   consumption was normal and even children would drink beer at dinner.
   However, during the Revolutionary War, there was a large enough demand
   that dealers hoarded their scarce supplies and raised the prices
   substantially. Americans' preference for coffee grew during the early
   1800's after the War of 1812, which temporarily cut off access to tea
   imports. Also, all things French, including coffee drinking, became
   stylish and the price dropped. Although prices went up during the civil
   war, many advancements in brewing as well as the substantial amount
   drank by soldiers helped make coffee an everyday commodity. After the
   Civil War, prices remained high, but it is estimated that Americans
   consumed 6 times that of most Europeans.

Coffee seed types

   Coffea arabica—Brazil
   Enlarge
   Coffea arabica—Brazil

   There are two main species of the coffee plant, Coffea arabica being
   the older one. Coffee is thought to be indigenous to south-western
   Ethiopia, specifically from Kaffa, from which it may have acquired its
   name. While more susceptible to disease, it is considered by most to
   taste better than the second species, Coffea canephora (robusta).
   Robusta, which contains about 40-50% more caffeine, can be cultivated
   in environments where arabica will not thrive and probably originated
   in Uganda. This has led to its use as an inexpensive substitute for
   arabica in many commercial coffee blends. Compared to arabica, robusta
   tends to be bitter and has little flavor, with a telltale "burnt
   rubber" or "wet cardboard" aroma and flavor. Good quality robustas are
   used in some espresso blends to provide a better "crema" (foamy head),
   and to lower the ingredient cost. In Italy, many espresso blends are
   based on dark-roasted robusta. The large industrial roasters use a
   steam treatment process to remove undesirable flavours from robusta
   beans for use in mass-marketed coffee blends. Other species include
   Coffea liberica and Coffea esliaca, believed to be indigenous to
   Liberia and southern Sudan respectively.

   Arabica coffees were traditionally named by the port they were exported
   from, the two oldest being Mocha, from Yemen, and Java, from Indonesia.
   The modern coffee trade is much more specific about origin, labeling
   coffees by country, region, and sometimes even the producing estate.
   Varietal is a botanical term denoting a taxonomic category ranking
   below species, a designation more specific than arabica or robusta and
   unrelated to the coffee's place of origin. Coffees consisting entirely
   of beans from a single varietal, bourbon, for example, are generally
   referred to as such, along with a reference to their place of origin
   (as in: Rwanda Blue Bourbon). Coffee aficionados may even distinguish
   auctioned coffees by lot number.

   Most arabica coffee beans originate from one of three growing regions;
   Latin America, East Africa/Arabia and Asia/Pacific. Beans from
   different countries or regions usually have distinctive characteristics
   such as flavor (flavor criteria include terms such as "citrus-like" or
   "earthy"), aroma (sometimes "berry-like" or "flowery"), body or
   mouthfeel, and acidity. Acidity refers to a tangy or clean-tasting
   quality, typically present in washed or wet processed coffees. It does
   not refer to a coffee's pH level. (Black coffee has a pH of around 5).
   These distinguishing taste characteristics are dependent not only on
   the coffee's growing region, but also on its method of process and
   genetic subspecies or varietal.

   A peaberry, (also sometimes called a "Caracoli" bean) is a coffee bean
   that that develops singly inside the coffee cherry instead of the usual
   pair of beans. This situation occurs 5-10% of the time. Since flavour
   is concentrated when only a single bean is grown inside the cherry,
   these beans (especially Arabica) are highly prized.

Processing and roasting

   Roasted coffee beans
   Enlarge
   Roasted coffee beans

   Much processing and human labour is required before coffee berries and
   its seed can be processed into the roasted coffee with which most
   Western consumers are familiar. Coffee berries must be picked,
   defruited, dried, sorted, and—in some processes—also aged.

   Coffee is usually sold roasted, and the roasting process has a great
   degree of influence on the taste of the final product. All coffee is
   roasted before being consumed. Coffee can be sold roasted by the
   supplier; alternatively it can be home roasted.

   Everyday alchemy, coffee roasting coaxes golden flavor from a bland
   bean. Unroasted beans boast all of coffee’s acids, protein, and
   caffeine—but none of its taste. It takes heat to spark the chemical
   reactions that turn carbohydrates and fats into aromatic oils, burn off
   moisture and carbon dioxide, and alternately break down and build up
   acids, unlocking the characteristic coffee flavor.

Preparation

   Espresso brewing
   Enlarge
   Espresso brewing

   The processing of coffee typically refers to the agricultural and
   industrial processes needed to deliver whole roasted coffee beans to
   the consumer. Grinding the roasted coffee beans is done at a roastery,
   in a grocery store, or at home. It is most commonly ground at the
   roastery and sold to the consumer ground and packaged, though
   "whole-bean" coffee that is ground at home is becoming more popular
   despite the extra effort required. A grind is referred to by its
   brewing method. "Turkish" grind, the finest, is meant for mixing
   straight with water, while the coarsest grinds, such as coffee
   percolator or French press, are at the other extreme. Midway between
   the extremes are the most common: "drip" and "paper filter" grinds,
   which are used in the most common home coffee brewing machines. The
   "drip" machines operate with near-boiling water passed in a slow stream
   through the ground coffee in a paper filter. The espresso method uses
   more advanced technology to force very hot (not boiling) water, through
   the ground coffee, resulting in a stronger flavor and chemical changes
   with more coffee bean matter in the drink. Once brewed, it may be
   presented in a variety of ways: on its own, with sugar, with milk or
   cream, hot or cold, and so on. Roasted arabica beans are also eaten
   plain and covered with chocolate. See the article on coffee preparation
   for a comprehensive list.

   A number of products are sold for the convenience of consumers who
   don't want to prepare their own coffee. Instant coffee has been dried
   into soluble powder or freeze dried into granules, which can be quickly
   dissolved in hot water for consumption. Canned coffee is a beverage
   that has been popular in Asian countries for many years, particularly
   in Japan and South Korea. Vending machines typically sell a number of
   varieties of canned coffee, available both hot and cold. To match the
   often busy life of Korean city dwellers, companies mostly have canned
   coffee with a wide variety of tastes. Japanese convenience stores and
   groceries also have a wide availability of plastic-bottled coffee
   drinks, which are typically lightly sweetened and pre-blended with
   milk. Lastly, liquid coffee concentrate is sometimes used in large
   institutional situations where coffee needs to be produced for
   thousands of people at the same time. It is described as having a
   flavor about as good as low-grade robusta coffee, and costs about 10
   cents a cup to produce. The machines used to process it can handle up
   to 500 cups an hour, or 1,000 if the water is preheated.

Economics of coffee

   Coffee being ground at a coffee shop in Chennai, India
   Enlarge
   Coffee being ground at a coffee shop in Chennai, India

   Coffee is one of the world's most important primary commodities due to
   being one of the world's most popular beverages. In total, 6.7 million
   tonnes of coffee were produced annually in 1998-2000, and the forecast
   is a rise to 7 million tonnes annually by 2010. Coffee also has several
   types of classifications used to determine environmental and labor
   standards.
   Shade-trees in Orosí, Costa Rica. After the harvest, they are pruned
   Enlarge
   Shade-trees in Orosí, Costa Rica. After the harvest, they are pruned
   Unroasted Coffee (Coffea Arabica) - Brazil
   Enlarge
   Unroasted Coffee (Coffea Arabica) - Brazil
   Unroasted Coffee (Coffea Canephora / Robusta)
   Enlarge
   Unroasted Coffee (Coffea Canephora / Robusta)

   Brazil remains the largest coffee exporting nation, but in recent years
   the green coffee market has been flooded by large quantities of robusta
   beans from Vietnam. Many experts believe the giant influx of cheap
   green coffee after the collapse of the International Coffee Agreement
   of 1975-1989 with Cold War pressures led to the prolonged pricing
   crisis from 2001 to 2004. In 1997 the "c" price of coffee in New York
   broke US$3.00/ lb, but by late 2001 it had fallen to US$0.43/lb.
   Robusta coffees (traded in London at much lower prices than New York's
   Arabica) are preferred by large industrial clients (multinational
   roasters, instant coffee producers, etc.) because of their lower cost.

   The preference of the "Big Four" coffee companies for cheap robusta is
   believed by many to have been a major contributing factor to the crash
   in coffee prices, and the demand for high-quality arabica beans is only
   slowly recovering. After the crash, many coffee farmers in Africa,
   Indonesia and South and Central America lost their livelihoods, or
   turned to illicit crops such as coca to earn a living. The Dutch brand
   ' Max Havelaar' started the concept of fair trade Labelling, which
   attempted to remedy the situation by guaranteeing coffee growers a
   negotiated pre-harvest price; many smaller roasters and recently
   Procter & Gamble and Starbucks have joined Fair Trade. Another issue
   with coffee is ecological: the American Birding Association has led a
   campaign for sustainably harvested, shade-grown and organic coffees vs.
   the newer mono-cropped full-sun varieties, which lead to deforestation
   and loss of bird habitat.

   Coffee ingestion on average is about a third that of tap water in most
   of North America and Europe. In 2002 in the US, coffee consumption was
   22.1 gallons per person.

Health and pharmacology of coffee

   Many studies have been performed on the relationship between coffee
   consumption and many medical conditions, ranging from diabetes and
   cardiovascular disease to cancer and cirrhosis. Studies are
   contradictory as to whether coffee has any specific health benefits,
   and results are similarly conflicting with respect to negative effects
   of coffee consumption. In addition, it is often unclear whether these
   risks or benefits are linked to caffeine or whether they are to be
   attributed to other chemical substances found in coffee (and whether
   decaffeinated coffee carries the same benefits or risks).

   One fairly consistent finding has been the reduction of diabetes
   mellitus type 2 in coffee consumers, an association that cannot be
   explained by the caffeine content alone and indeed may be stronger in
   decaffeinated coffee.

   Recently, coffee was found to reduce the chances of developing
   cirrhosis of the liver: the consumption of 1 cup a day was found to
   reduce the chances by 20%, and 4 cups a day reduced the chances by 80%.

Social aspects of coffee

   Coffeehouse in Damascus
   Enlarge
   Coffeehouse in Damascus

   Coffee plays an important role in many societies throughout the world
   today. From the coffeehouses of the 16th century, to the modern day
   cafés, coffee has had a profound impact on the lifestyles of people
   from all walks of life. When it first appeared in Africa and Yemen, it
   was commonly used as a type of religious intoxicant. This usage in
   religious rites among the Sufi branch of Islam led to it being put on
   trial in Mecca for being a "heretic" substance much as wine was. It was
   briefly repressed at this point, and was later part of a larger ban in
   Ottoman Turkey under an edict that led to the death of thousands of
   people. Its early association in Europe with rebellious political
   activities led to its banning in England, among other places.

   In India the Indian Coffee Houses became an icon of the worker's
   struggle. This restaurant chain is now owned by the workers of ICHs, as
   a result of the struggle performed by the thrown-out workers from the
   Coffee Houses of Coffee Board. This struggle was led by famed Communist
   leader of India A. K. Gopalan. Thus the ICHs became the meeting places
   of the progressive-minded in India later.

Other uses

   Spent coffee grounds are a good fertilizer in gardens because of their
   high nitrogen content. Starbucks, and some other coffee shops, have a
   specific policy of giving away their used coffee grounds to gardeners.
   While they tend to be only slightly acidic, they also tend to improve
   the acidity of garden soil through the same chemical processes that
   make sawdust a good fertilizer. Coffee grounds raise soil acidity
   sooner if they are added fresh, instead of after brewing. Likewise,
   coffee diluted with four times its volume of water can be used to amend
   soil acidity, especially useful for tomatoes, chili peppers,
   blueberries, and other plants that like high soil acidity.

   The grounds are also used as bait in " Vegas roach traps".

   Some use coffee to create art. Latte art involves designs in the foam
   of espresso-based drinks. Arfé is the use of coffee as a coloring for
   painting or other visual effects.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coffee"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
