   #copyright

Colditz Castle

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Military History and War

   Colditz Castle in April 1945. Photo taken by a U.S. Army soldier.
   Enlarge
   Colditz Castle in April 1945. Photo taken by a U.S. Army soldier.

   Colditz Castle is a castle in the town of Colditz near Leipzig,
   Dresden, and Chemnitz in the state of Saxony in Germany ( 51°7′50.82″N,
   12°48′26.94″E). Used as a workhouse for the indigent and a mental
   institution for over 100 years, it became notorious as Oflag IV-C a
   prisoner-of-war camp for "incorrigible" Allied officers who had
   repeatedly escaped from other camps. The Nazi Schutzstaffel (SS) made
   Colditz a Sonderlager (high-security prison camp), the only one of its
   type within Germany. Hermann Göring — holder of the singular rank
   Reichsmarschall (" Field Marshal of the Empire") — even declared
   Colditz "escape-proof". This was in part because of its lack of escapes
   during its term as prison camp in World War I, but mostly due to it
   being the only German prisoner-of-war camp with more guards than
   prisoners. Yet despite this audacious claim, there were multiple
   escapes by British, Canadian, French, Polish, Dutch, and Belgian
   inmates.

History

The original castle

   The Colditz coat of arms over the gate to the outer courtyard
   Enlarge
   The Colditz coat of arms over the gate to the outer courtyard

   In 1046, Henry III of the Holy Roman Empire gave the burgher of Colditz
   permission to build the first documented settlement at the site. In
   1083, Henry IV recommended Markgraf Wiprecht of Groitzsch to develop
   the castle site, which Colditz accepted. In 1158, Emperor Frederick
   Barbarossa appointed Thimo I "Lord of Colditz", and major building
   works began. Around 1200, the actual city around the market was
   established. Forests, empty meadows, and farmland were settled and
   organized next to the pre-existing slavic villages Zschetzsch,
   Zschadraß, Zollwitz, Terpitzsch and Koltzschen. Around that time the
   larger villages Hohnbach, Thierbaum, Ebersbach and Tautenhain also
   emerged.

   In the Middle Ages, the castle played an important role as a watchtower
   for the German Emperors and therefore was the centre of the Reich
   territories of the Pleißenland (anti- Meißen Pleiße-lands). Around
   1404, the nearly 250-year-old dynasty of the Lords of Colditz ended
   when Thimo VIII sold Colditz Castle for 15,000 silver marks into the
   possession of the Wettin family dynasty.

   As a result of territorial politics in Saxony, the city and state of
   Colditz was officially established in the Margravate (county) of
   Meißen. In 1430, the Hussites attacked Colditz and set city and castle
   on fire. Around 1464, renovation and new building work on the Castle
   was carried out by Prince Ernst, who died in Colditz Castle in 1486.
   Under Frederick the Wise and Johann the Gentle, Colditz was a royal
   residence of the Electors of Saxony.

The rebuilt castle

   The porphyry mannerist portal of the church house carved by Andreas
   Walther II in 1584.
   Enlarge
   The porphyry mannerist portal of the church house carved by Andreas
   Walther II in 1584.

   In 1504, the servant Clemens the baker accidentally set Colditz on
   fire, and the city hall, church, castle and a large part of the city
   went up in flames. In 1506, reconstruction began and new buildings were
   raised around the rear castle courtyard. In 1523 the castle park was
   turned into one of the largest zoos in Europe. In 1524, rebuilding of
   the upper floors of the castle began. The castle was reconstructed in a
   fashion that corresponded to the way it was divided up — into the
   cellar, the royal house and the banquet hall building. There is nothing
   more to be seen of the original fortified castle, where the present
   rear castle is located, but it is still possible to make out where the
   original divisions were (the Old or Lower House, the Upper House and
   the Great House).

   The structure of the castle was changed under the long reign of the
   elector Augustus of Saxony (1553 to 1586), and the complex was
   reconstructed into a Renaissance style castle from 1577 to 1591,
   including the portions that were still in the gothic architectural
   style. Architects Hans Irmisch and Peter Kummer supervised the further
   restoration and rebuilding. Later, Lucas Cranach the Younger was
   commissioned as an artist in the Castle.

   During this period the portal at what is known as the church house was
   created in 1584, made of porphyry and richly decorated in the mannerist
   style by Andreas Walther II. It was at this time that both the interior
   and the exterior of "the Holy Trinity" castle chapel that links the
   cellar and royal house with one another were redesigned. Shortly
   thereafter, the castle became an administrative centre for the Office
   of Colditz and a hunting lodge. In 1694, its then-current holder,
   Augustus the Strong, began to expand it, resulting in a second
   courtyard and a total of 700 rooms.

The modern castle

   Colditz bridge during in 1945 after the town had been occupied by the
   US Army
   Enlarge
   Colditz bridge during in 1945 after the town had been occupied by the
   US Army

   In the 19th century, the church space was rebuilt in the neo-classic
   architectural style, but its condition was allowed to deteriorate. The
   castle was used by Frederick Augustus III, Elector of Saxony as a
   workhouse to feed the poor, the ill, and persons under arrest. It
   served this purpose from 1803 to 1829, when its workhouse function was
   taken over by an institution in Zwickau. In 1829 the castle became a
   mental hospital for the "incurably insane" from Waldheim. In 1864, a
   new hospital building was erected in the Gothic Revival style, on the
   ground where the stables and working quarters were previously located.
   It remained a mental institution until 1924.

   During World War I, the castle was used as a Prisoner of War camp (see
   POW). No escapes were made at this time. When the Nazis came to power
   in 1933, they turned the castle into a political prison for communists,
   homosexuals, Jews, and other "undesirables". It was not until 1939 that
   allied prisoners were housed there. In April 1945, US troops entered
   Colditz town and, after a two-day fight, conquered the castle on April
   16.

   In May 1945, the Soviet occupation of Colditz began. Following the
   Yalta Conference it then became a part of East Germany. The Soviets
   turned Colditz castle into a prison camp for local burghers and
   non-communists. Later the castle was a home for the aged and nursing
   home, as well as a hospital and psychiatric clinic. For many years
   after the War, forgotten hiding spots and tunnels were found by
   repairmen.
   In 2005, the scaffolding was visible from town.
   Enlarge
   In 2005, the scaffolding was visible from town.

The current castle

   Today the castle and the church space require a significant amount of
   refurbishment and restoration. The last users moved out on August 1,
   1996, and since then the castle has been almost empty except for the
   occasional visitor. The "Gesellschaft Schloss Colditz e.V." (the Castle
   Colditz historical society), founded in 1996, has its offices in a
   portion of the administration building in the front castle court.

   As of 2005 portions of the castle are closed off to tourists due to
   renovation. In particular the chapel, portions of the attic, much of
   the interior, the tunnels, and at least one exterior face are
   undergoing refinishing.

Colditz Castle as a mental institution

   For nearly a hundred years, between 1829 and 1924, Colditz was a
   sanitarium, generally reserved for the wealthy and the nobility of
   Germany. The castle thus functioned as a hospital during a long stretch
   of massive upheaval in Germany, from slightly after the Napoleonic Wars
   destroyed the Holy Roman Empire and created the German Confederation,
   throughout the lifespan of the North German Confederation, the complete
   reign of the German Empire, throughout the First World War, and until
   the beginnings of the Weimar Republic. Between 1914 and 1918, the
   castle was home to both psychiatric and tuberculosis patients, 912 of
   whom died of malnutrition.

   Colditz Castle was also home to several notable figures during its time
   as a mental institution, including Ludwig Schumann, the second youngest
   son of the famous composer Robert Schumann, and Ernst Georg August
   Baumgarten, one of the original inventors of the airship.

Colditz Castle as Oflag IVc

   After the outbreak of World War II the castle was converted into a high
   security Prisoner of War camp for officers who had become security or
   escape risks or who were regarded as volksfeindlich, or treasonous
   against the people. Since the castle is situated on a rocky outcropping
   above the Mulde river, the Germans believed it to be an ideal site for
   a high security prison.

   The larger outer courtyard, known as the Kommandantur, had only two
   exits and housed a large German garrison. The prisoners lived in an
   adjacent courtyard in a 90 foot (27 m) tall building. Outside, the flat
   terraces which surrounded the prisoners' accommodation were constantly
   watched by armed sentries and surrounded by barbed wire. Although known
   as Colditz Castle to the locals, its official German designation was
   Oflag IVc and it was under Wehrmacht control.

Population changes

          1939

          The first prisoners arrived in November 1939; they were 140
          Polish officers from the September Campaign who were regarded as
          escape risks. However, later most of them were transferred to
          other Oflags.
          1940

          In October Donald Middleton, Keith Milne, and Howard D. Wardle
          (a Canadian who joined the RAF just before the war) became the
          first British prisoners at Colditz.

          On November 7, 1940, six British RAF officers, the "Laufen Six",
          named after the camp from which they made their first escape,
          arrived: Harry Elliott, Rupert Barry (later Sir Rupert Barry),
          Patrick Reid, Dick Howe, Peter Allen, and Kenneth Lockwood. They
          were soon joined by a handful of British Army officers and later
          by Belgian officers. By Christmas 1940 there were 60 Polish
          officers, 12 Belgians, 50 French, and 30 British, a total of no
          more than 200 with their orderlies.

          1941

          On July 24, 1941, 68 Dutch officers arrived, members of the
          Dutch East Indies Army, who had refused to sign a declaration
          that they would take no part in the war against Germany.
          Afterwards a number of would-be-escapees would borrow Dutch
          greatcoats as their disguise. When the Wehrmacht invaded the
          Netherlands they were short on material for uniforms, so they
          confiscated anything available. The coats in Dutch field grey in
          particular remained unchanged in colour, since it was similar to
          the tone already in use by the Germans, so these greatcoats
          would be nearly identical with very minor alterations.

   Some of the French officers held at Colditz
   Enlarge
   Some of the French officers held at Colditz

          In February 1941, 200 French officers arrived. A number of the
          French demanded that French Jewish officers be segregated from
          them and the camp commander obliged; they were moved to the
          attics. By the end of July 1941, there were more than 500
          officers: over 250 French, 150 Polish, 50 British and
          Commonwealth, 2 Yugoslavian and the 68 Dutch officers who
          arrived in Colditz on July 24.

          1943
          In May 1943, the Wehrmacht High Command decided that Colditz
          should house only Americans and British, so in June the Dutch
          were moved out, followed shortly thereafter by the Poles, the
          Belgians, and the French; with the final French group leaving
          July 12, 1943. By the end of July there were a few Free French
          officers, and 228 British officers, with a contingent consisting
          of Canadians, Australians, New Zealanders, South Africans,
          Irish, and one Indian.

   Polish General Tadeusz Bór-Komorowski.
   Enlarge
   Polish General Tadeusz Bór-Komorowski.

          1944
          On August 23, 1944 Colditz received its first Americans:
          49-year-old Colonel Florimund Duke — the oldest American
          paratrooper of the war, Captain Guy Nunn, and Alfred Suarez.
          They were all counter-intelligence operatives parachuted into
          Hungary to prevent it joining forces with Germany. Population
          was approximately 254 at the start of the early winter that
          year.

          1945
          On January 19, 1945 six French Generals — Lieutenant-General
          Jean Adolphe Louis Robert Flavigny, Major-General Gustave Marie
          Maurice Mesny, Major-General Louis Léon Marie André Buisson,
          Major-General Arsène Marie Paul Vauthier, Brigadier-General
          Albert Joseph Daine, and Brigadier-General René Jacques
          Mortemart de Boisse — were brought from the camp at Königstein
          to Colditz Castle.

          On February 5 Polish General Tadeusz Bór-Komorowski, deputy
          commander of the Armia Krajowa (home army) and responsible for
          the Warsaw Uprising, arrived with his entourage. In March 1945,
          1200 French prisoners were brought to Colditz Castle, with 600
          more being imprisoned in the town below.

The "Prominente" and famous inmates

   Among the more famous inmates were British fighter ace Douglas Bader;
   Patrick Reid, the man who made Colditz famous with his post war books;
   Airey Neave, the first British officer to escape from Colditz; New
   Zealand British Army Captain Charles Upham, the only combat soldier to
   ever receive the Victoria Cross twice; and David Stirling, founder of
   the wartime Special Air Service.

   There were also prisoners called Prominente, relatives of Allied VIPs.
   The first one was Giles Romilly, a civilian journalist who was captured
   in Narvik, Norway who also happened to be a nephew of Winston
   Churchill. Adolf Hitler himself specified that Romilly was to be
   treated with the utmost care and that:
    1. The Kommandant and Security Officer answer for Romilly's security
       with their heads.
    2. His security is to be assured by any and every exceptional measure
       you care to take.

   Members of the Prominente, under a U.S. guard, outside the Hungerberg
   Hotel on May 5, 1945, shortly after their release. L to R: John
   Alexander Elphinstone, Max de Hamel, Michael Alexander, unknown, George
   Lascelles, and John Winant Jr..
   Enlarge
   Members of the Prominente, under a U.S. guard, outside the Hungerberg
   Hotel on May 5, 1945, shortly after their release. L to R: John
   Alexander Elphinstone, Max de Hamel, Michael Alexander, unknown, George
   Lascelles, and John Winant Jr..

   When the end of the war approached, the number of Prominente increased.
   Eventually there were Viscount George Lascelles, nephew to George VI;
   John Alexander Elphinstone, nephew of Queen Elizabeth; Captain George
   Haig, son of WWI field marshal Douglas Haig; Charles Hope, son of
   Victor Hope, the Viceroy of India; Lieutenant John Winant Jr., son of
   John Gilbert Winant, US ambassador to Britain; Tadeusz Bór-Komorowski,
   commander of the Warsaw Uprising; and four German generals. British
   Commando Michael Alexander, claimed to be a nephew of field marshal
   Harold Alexander in order to escape execution, but was merely a distant
   cousin.

   Micky Burn, another famous inmate of Colditz, was a British commando
   captured at Saint-Nazaire. Burn had been a journalist like Romilly
   before the war, working for The Times. Burn had briefly been an admirer
   of the Nazi Party and in 1936 had met Adolf Hitler, who signed his copy
   of Mein Kampf. After the war broke out Burn politically shifted to
   Marxism and gave lectures to prisoners at Colditz, however, due to his
   pre-war interest in Nazi philosophy he was widely regarded with
   distrust and scorn.

   Lord John Francis Arundell, 16th Baron Arundell of Wardour (1907-1944)
   was an aristocrat held at Colditz who, despite his pedigree, was not
   awarded prominente status. Arundell made a habit of exercising in the
   winter snow, a habit which would lead to his contracting tuberculosis
   and to his eventual death in Chester Military Hospital.

   At 1:30am on Friday the 13th, April 1945, while the battles approached
   the area, the Prominente were moved under guard and the cover of
   darkness. The Allies and prisoners became especially concerned that the
   Prominente might be used as hostages, bargaining chips, human shields,
   or that the SS might try to kill them out of spite; they prepared for
   resistance and, if possible, to take over the castle. The Germans moved
   all the Prominente out of the castle, over the protestations of the
   other prisoners. When US troops reached the area, prisoners convinced
   the leader of their guards Obergruppenführer Gottlob Berger to
   surrender in secret, so as to save him from the revenge of the SS. With
   his aid they reached American lines a couple of weeks later. He would
   later receive a lessened sentence after his hearing in 1949 because of
   his actions regarding the Prominente.

The German staff and visitors

   A group of the French orderlies from Colditz Castle poses for a picture
   in the inner courtyard.
   Enlarge
   A group of the French orderlies from Colditz Castle poses for a picture
   in the inner courtyard.

   Keeping the castle running was a difficult task, the Germans maintained
   a larger garrison at the castle than at many of their other prison
   camps. Between the years of 1939 and 1945, more than 70 German officers
   and enlisted men worked in a wide variety of staff positions as well as
   overseeing prisoner's labour.

   There was also a large contingent of civilians and local townspeople
   who would be on castle grounds. Some would be in maintenance (
   electrician, carpenter, plumber, etc...), some in medical roles (
   dentist, doctor, etc...), some would be there in a supervisory role (
   Nazi Party leaders, Swiss Red Cross observers, etc...), others would be
   on grounds merely because they were family members of the military
   officers at the camp.

Life in the camp

   In Colditz, the Wehrmacht followed the Geneva Convention to the letter.
   Would-be escapees were punished with solitary confinement, instead of
   being summarily executed. In principle, the security officers
   recognized that it was the duty of the POWs to try to escape and that
   their own job was to stop them. Prisoners could even form gentlemen's
   agreements with the guards, such as not using borrowed tools for escape
   attempts.

   Most of the guard company was composed of WWI veterans and young
   soldiers not fit for the front. Because Colditz was a high security
   camp, the Germans organized three and then later four Appells ( roll
   calls) a day to count the prisoners. If they discovered someone had
   escaped, they alerted every police and train station within a 40 km (25
   miles) radius, and all the members of the Hitler Youth joined the hunt.

   Due to the number of Red Cross food parcels, prisoners sometimes ate
   better than their guards, who had to rely on Wehrmacht rations.
   Prisoners could use their relative luxuries for trade and, for example,
   exchange their cigarettes for Reichsmark that they hoped could later
   use in their escape attempts. Occasionally this turned to be a mistake
   as several of the bills they received were of the earlier Papiermark
   varieties that were no longer considered valid. There were also other
   currencies in circulation, these included the Registermark, utilized
   for travelling and investments in Germany; the Reisemark, for tourists;
   the Kreditsperrmark, for sales of property belonging to foreigners; the
   Effektensperrmark, arising from the sale of securities in Germany; the
   Reichskreditkassenschein in occupied territories; and the
   Behelfszahlungsmittel (Auxiliary Payment Certificates) for the German
   Armed Forces. The Kreditsperrmark and Effektensperrmark were
   consolidated into the Handelsperrmark in 1939. Due to the massive
   variety of currency types and uses, in several escape attempts,
   escapees with one of these various currencies printed before 1939 were
   told their money was no good — leaving them moneyless and easier to
   recapture.

   Prisoners had to make their own entertainment. In August 1941 the first
   camp Olympics were organized by the Polish prisoners. Events were held
   in football (soccer), volleyball, boxing, and chess, but the closing
   ceremony was interrupted by a German fire drill. "The British came in
   last place in every event cheerfully, to the dismay of the other
   participants who took the competition deadly seriously," according to
   the British inmate John Wilkens in a 1986 interview. Prisoners also
   formed a Polish choir, a Dutch Hawaiian guitar band, and a French
   orchestra.

   The British put on homemade revues, classical plays and farces
   including: Gaslight, Rope, The Man Who Came to Dinner, Pygmalion, and
   The Importance of Being Earnest. Several prisoners even intentionally
   grew their hair long so as to better portray female roles. Prisoner
   Jock Hamilton-Baillie even used to shave his legs, rub them in brown
   shoe polish, and draw a line down the back of his legs in pencil to
   simulate the appearance of silk stockings. This allowed him special
   "bath privileges" in the German guards washroom, since the prisoner's
   showers were unable to get the polish off his legs. Staging these plays
   even gained the prisoners access to "parole tools", tools which were
   used to build the sets and promised not to be used to escape. During
   the summer months, the theater's peak periods, there were new
   productions every two weeks. The biggest success of the theatre however
   would be the Christmas themed Ballet Nonsense which premiered on
   November 16, 1941 and ran until the November 18, 1941 show which
   Hauptmann Priem (the first prison warden of Colditz) attended.

   Another pastime which occupied much of the prisoners' time was the
   production of moonshine alcohol. Initially started by the Polish
   contingent using a recipe of yeast, water, German jam and sugar from
   their Red Cross parcels, and then taken up by other prisoners, it did
   not take long for stills to be secreted all across Colditz (one of
   which remained undiscovered until a tourist trip in 1984). Prisoner
   Michael Farr, whose family ran Hawker's Gin (the sole purveyors of Sloe
   gin with a Royal Warrant), even managed to make a sparkling wine dubbed
   "Château Colditz". Some prisoners would get black teeth or even
   temporary blindness from consuming this beverage — a condition known as
   "jam-happy" — as it contained many impurities. Although the German
   guards despised the drunken prisoners, they generally turned a blind
   eye to the distilling.

   Officers also studied languages, learning from each other, and told
   stories. Most popular of these stories were the embellished retelling
   of BBC broadcasts by Jim Rogers. Since mail was regularly screened by
   censors, and the German newspapers received by prisoners contained much
   Nazi propaganda, the only reliable information prisoners could obtain
   on the progress of the war in Europe was through BBC broadcasts
   received via one of two radios which were secreted in the castle. These
   radios were smuggled in by French prisoner Frédérick Guigues and named
   "Arthur 1" and "Arthur 2". The first radio was quickly discovered due
   to a mole, but the second would remain secreted away until Guigues
   returned and removed it during a tour of the castle in 1965. The radio
   hide would not be permanently exposed until 1992 during repairs to the
   roof. .

   Later the most popular way to pass the time was stoolball, a
   particularly rough version of rugby, where there were two stools at
   either end of the prisoners' courtyard and goals were scored by
   knocking off the goalie who was sitting on the stool. This game served
   as an outlet for pent-up aggression, and also provided noise to cover
   the sounds of tunnel-digging.

   In addition to escape attempts, prisoners also tried to make the life
   of their guards more miserable by resorting to "goon-baiting", making
   nuisances of themselves by harassing the guards. For example, they
   would drop water and excrement bombs on the guards. Douglas Bader even
   encouraged his junior officers to do that. British Flight Lieutenant
   Pete Tunstall especially tried to cause havoc by disturbing the roll
   call even if nobody was trying to escape, so that the guards would not
   become suspicious when somebody was. He went through a total of five
   courts martial and suffered a total of 415 days in solitary
   confinement.

"Thou shalt escape if you possibly can"

   Prisoners contrived a number of methods to escape. They duplicated keys
   to various doors, made copies of maps, forged Ausweise ( identity
   papers), and manufactured their own tools. MI9, a department of the
   British War Office which specialized in escape equipment, communicated
   with the prisoners in code and smuggled them new escape aids disguised
   in care packages from family or from non-existent charities, although
   they never tampered with Red Cross care packages for fear it would
   force the Germans to stop their delivery to all camps. The Germans
   became skilled at intercepting these.

   There was also a form of black market whereby the prisoners used items
   from their Red Cross parcels to buy information and tools from the
   cooperative guards and townsfolk. Since the Germans allowed Douglas
   Bader to visit the town, he took chocolate and other luxuries with him
   for trading. Flight Lieutenant Cenēk Chaloupka traded goods for
   information and even had a girlfriend in the town. David Stirling later
   took control of the black market operations.

   There was only one fatality during the escape attempts: British
   Lieutenant Michael Sinclair in September 1944. The Germans buried him
   in Colditz cemetery with full military honours — his casket was draped
   with a Union Jack flag made by the German guards, and he received a 7
   gun salute. Post-war he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order,
   the only one to receive it for escaping during WWII. He is currently
   buried in grave number 10.1.14 at Berlin War Cemetery in the
   Charlottenburg-Wilmersdorf district of Berlin.

Unsuccessful escapes

   Most of the escape attempts failed. Pat Reid, who later wrote about his
   experiences in Colditz, failed to escape at first and then became an
   "Escape Officer", charged with coordinating the various national groups
   so they would not ruin each other's escape attempts. Escape Officers
   were generally not themselves permitted to escape. Many tried
   unsuccessfully to escape in disguise: Airey Neave twice dressed as a
   guard, French Lieutenant Boulé disguised in drag, British Lieutenant
   Michael Sinclair even dressed as camp Kommandant Rothenberger, when he
   tried to organize a mass escape, and French Lieutenant Perodeau
   disguised as regular camp electrician Willi Pöhnert ("Little Willi"):

   On the night of December 28, 1942, one of the French officers
   deliberately blew out the fuse on the lights in the courtyard. As they
   had anticipated Pöhnert was summoned, and while he was still fixing the
   lights, Lieutenant Perodeau, dressed almost identically to Pöhnert and
   carrying a tool box, walked casually out of the courtyard gate. He
   passed the first guard without incident, but the guard at the main gate
   asked for his token — tokens were issued to each guard and staff member
   upon entry of the camp guardhouse specifically to avoid this type of
   escape — with no hope of bluffing his way out of this, Perodeau
   surrendered.

   Dutch sculptors made two clay heads to stand in for escaping officers
   in the roll call. Later, "ghosts", officers who had faked a successful
   escape and hid in the castle, took the place of escaping prisoners in
   the roll call in order to delay discovery as long as possible.

   Camp guards collected so much escape equipment that they established a
   "Kommandant's Escape Museum". Local photographer Johannes Lange took
   photographs of the would-be escapees in their disguises or re-enacting
   their attempts for the camera. Along with the Lange photographs, one of
   the two sculpted clay heads was displayed proudly in the museum.
   Security officer Reinhold Eggers made them a regular part of Das
   Abwehrblatt, a weekly magazine for the German POW camps.

   There were also several rather inventive escape attempts:

The Mattress

   In late 1940, British officer Peter Allan found out that the Germans
   were moving several mattresses from the castle to another camp and
   decided that would be his way out. He let the French officers moving
   the mattresses know that one would be a little bit heavier. Allan, a
   fluent German speaker due to his schooling in Germany before the war,
   dressed himself up in a Hitlerjugend ( Hitler Youth) uniform, stuffed
   Reichsmark in his pockets, and had himself sewn into one of the
   mattresses. He managed to get himself loaded into the truck, and
   unloaded into an empty house within the town. Cutting himself out of
   the mattress several hours later, when all he could hear was silence,
   he climbed out of the window into the garden and walked down the road
   towards his freedom. Along the 100 mi (161 km) way to Vienna via
   Stuttgart he got a lift with a senior SS officer. Allan recalled that
   ride as the scariest moment of his life, "To be vulgar, I nearly needed
   a new pair of trousers." Allan had been aiming to reach Poland, but
   soon after reaching Vienna he found he was out of money. At this time
   the Americans had not yet entered the war, so Allan decided to ask the
   American embassy for assistance; he was refused. Allan had been on the
   run at this point for nine days; broke, exhausted, and hungry, he fell
   asleep in a park. Upon waking he discovered he could no longer walk due
   to his starvation. Soon after he was picked up and returned to Colditz,
   where he spent the next 3 months in solitary confinement.

The Bed-Sheet Rope

   May 12, 1941 in a scene seemingly straight out of a film, Polish
   officers Lieutenants Miki Surmanowicz and Mietek Chmiel, attempted to
   rappel down a 36 m (120 ft) wall to freedom on a rope constructed out
   of bed sheets. In order to get into position, both men put themselves
   into solitary confinement. After forcing open the door and picking the
   locks, they made their way to the courtyard where they climbed up to a
   narrow ledge. From the ledge they were able to jump to the guard house
   roof, and climb through an open window on the outer wall. Reusing their
   bed sheet rope they lowered themselves to the ground, where they were
   caught by a German guard.

The Canteen Tunnel

   Early in 1941, the British prisoners had gained access to the sewers
   and drains which ran beneath the floors of the castle. Entrance to
   these was from a manhole cover in the floor of the canteen. After
   initial reconnaissance trips, it was decided that the drain should be
   extended, and an exit made in a small grassy area which was overlooked
   from the canteen window. From here, they had planned to climb down the
   hill, and drop down below the steep outside eastern wall of the castle.
   Knowing which sentry would be on duty during the planned night of the
   escape, they pooled their resources and collected 500 Reichsmark for a
   bribe (100 of which were paid up front). This plan took 3 months of
   preparation. On the evening of May 29, 1941, Pat Reid hid in the
   canteen when it was locked up for the night. He removed the bolt from
   the lock on the door, and returned to the courtyard. After the evening
   meeting, the chosen escapers slipped into the canteen unnoticed.

   They entered the tunnel and waited for the signal to proceed. Unknown
   to the prisoners, they had been betrayed by the bribed guard. Waiting
   on the grassy area was Hauptmann Priem and his guard force.

   Pat Reid recalls:

     "I climbed out on to the grass and Rupert Barry, immediately behind
     me, started to follow. My shadow was cast on the wall of the
     Kommandantur, and at that moment I noticed a second shadow beside my
     own. It held a gun. I yelled to Rupert to get back as a voice behind
     me shouted, Hände hoch! Hände hoch!. I turned to face a German
     officer levelling his pistol at me."

   Behind him were 7 British and 4 Polish officers. On his order the
   remaining men backed up the tunnel to evade detection, but the Germans
   were waiting for them outside the canteen. Not wanting to give their
   captors the satisfaction the British burst into laughter as they came
   out, much to the bemusement of the guards.

   Hauptmann Priem ends the story:

     "And the Guard? He kept his 100 Marks; he got extra leave, promotion
     and the War Service Cross."

The French Tunnel

   Nine French officers organized a long-term tunnel-digging project, the
   longest attempted out of Colditz Castle throughout the war. Deciding
   that the exit should be on the steep drop leading down towards the
   recreation area, outside the eastern walls of the castle, they began to
   scout for a possible location for the entrance. The problem was solved
   by Lieutenants Cazaumayo and Paille, who had gained access to the clock
   tower in 1940.

   Their tunnel began at the top of a chapel's clock tower and descended
   8.6 meters (28.2 ft) into the ground using an old dumbwaiter shaft.
   They found that the weights which used to hang down the shaft, and the
   chains, had been removed. This left an empty shaft which extended from
   the clock to the cellars below. After the previous escape attempts of
   Cazaumayo and Paille, the doors (one on each floor) which provided
   access to the tower had been bricked up in order to prevent further
   escape attempts. However, by sealing up the tower the Germans had in
   essence provided a secure location where escape tunnel work could be
   done without notice. The French this time gained access to the tower
   from the attics, descended 35 m to the cellars, and began work on a
   horizontal shaft in June 1941. This shaft work would continue for a
   further eight months.

   The horizontal shaft towards the chapel progressed 4 m (13 ft) before
   they hit rock too hard to dig. They then decided to dig upwards towards
   the chapel floor. From here the tunnel continued underneath the wooden
   floor of the chapel for a distance of 13.5 m (44.3 ft). For this to be
   achieved, seven heavy oak timbers in the floor, measuring 0.5 m (1.3
   ft) square had to be cut through. Homemade saws, assembled out of
   German table knives, were employed for this task. With this completed,
   the tunnel dropped vertically from the far corner of the chapel a
   further 5.2 m (17 ft). The tunnel then proceeded out towards the
   proposed exit with two further descents, separated by shafts in the
   tough stone foundations of the castle. The tunnel now ran a horizontal
   distance of 44 m (144 ft), reaching a final depth of 8.6 m (28.2 ft)
   below the ground.

   Tunnelling continued well into 1942. By then Germans knew that the
   French were digging somewhere, based on the noise of their tunnelling
   reverberating through the castle at night. The French however were smug
   that its entrance was totally undetectable. However, on January 15 the
   Germans eventually searched the sealed off clock tower. Noises were
   heard below, and after lowering a small boy down the shaft three French
   officers were found. After searching the cellar thoroughly, the
   entrance to the tunnel was eventually discovered a mere 2 m (6.5 ft)
   short of completion. The French were convinced that they had been
   betrayed by one of their own countrymen but this was denied by the
   guards who demanded the French pay to repair the damage (estimated at
   12000 Reichsmark).

   The tunnel itself was a major engineering feat. It had electric
   lighting along its whole length spliced off of the chapel's electricity
   supply. Not only did this allow the tunnellers to see what they were
   doing, it was also used as a system with which to signal to them the
   arrival of any sentries. The entrance to the tunnel in the wine cellar
   was concealed by 5 large stones covering a small door, which left
   little trace of any hole. Debris was transported from the working area
   by means of several sacks hoisted up the clock tower and disposed of in
   the castle's attics. The wine cellar was regularly cleaned and redusted
   using dust harvested from the attic, so as to hide the reddish clay
   dust which was not present in the cellar ordinarily.

Successful escapes

   Pat Reid claims in Colditz: The Full Story that there were 31 "home
   runs". It should be noted that he includes prisoners from the hospital
   and prisoners being transported, who were not directly under Colditz
   staff control. Henry Chancellor in Colditz: The Definitive History
   claims 32 escaped but only 15 were "home runs": 1 Belgian, 11 British,
   7 Dutch, 12 French and 1 Polish. The difference is that Reid claims any
   successful escape by an "official" Colditz POW a "home run" where most
   other historians only consider escapes from the castle or castle
   grounds itself as a "home run". Also a subject of debate is whether or
   not Millar's escape should be considered a "home run", but since he is
   listed MIA (unofficially he is assumed deceased), Chancellor does not
   count him as such.

   At the end of May 1943, the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (Armed Forces
   High Command) decided that Colditz should hold only British and
   Commonwealth officers. Because of this decision, all of the Dutch and
   Polish prisoners and most of the French and Belgians were moved to
   other camps in July. Three British officers tried their luck by
   impersonating an equal number of French when they were moved out, but
   they were later returned to Colditz. German security gradually
   increased and by the end of 1943 most of the potential ways of escape
   had been plugged. Several officers tried to escape during transit,
   having first caused themselves to be transferred for that purpose.

   Some officers even went so far as to fake illness and mental
   retardation in order to be repatriated on medical grounds. A member of
   the Royal Army Medical Corps (RAMC), Captain Ion Ferguson, wrote a
   letter to an Irish friend where he suggested that Ireland join the war;
   the letter was stopped by the censors but his wish to be moved
   elsewhere was granted. In Stalag IV D he certified a number of
   prisoners as insane, who were consequently repatriated, and then
   convinced the Germans of his own insanity and returned to Britain the
   same way. Four other British officers claimed symptoms of stomach
   ulcer, insanity, high blood pressure and back injury in order to be
   repatriated. However, there were also officers who went genuinely
   insane.

From Colditz Castle and Grounds

    1. French Lieutenant Alain Le Ray escaped April 11, 1941. He hid in a
       terrace house in a park during a game of soccer. First successful
       Colditz escapee and first to reach neutral Switzerland.
    2. French Lieutenant René Collin escaped May 31, 1941. He climbed into
       the rafters of a pavilion during exercise, hid there until dark and
       slipped away. Made it back to France.
    3. French Lieutenant Pierre Mairesse Lebrun escaped July 2, 1941. He
       was captured trying Collin's method. Later vaulted over a wire in
       the park with the help of an associate. He reached Switzerland in
       eight days on a stolen bicycle.
    4. Dutch Lieutenant Francis Steinmetz escaped August 15, 1941. He hid
       under a manhole cover in the exercise enclosure, emerged after
       nightfall, took a train to Gottmadingen, and reached Switzerland in
       three days.
    5. Dutch Lieutenant E. Hans Larive also escaped August 15, 1941 with
       Steinmetz
    6. Dutch Major C. Giebel escaped September 20, 1941 using the same
       method as Steinmetz.
    7. Dutch Lieutenant O. L. Drijber escaped September 20, 1941 with
       Giebel.
    8. British Lieutenant Airey M. S. Neave escaped January 5, 1942.
       Crawled through a hole in a camp theatre (after a prisoner
       performance) to a guardhouse and marched out dressed as a German
       officer. He reached Switzerland two days later. Neave later joined
       MI9.
    9. Dutch Lieutenant Anthony P. Luteyn escaped January 5, 1942 with
       Neave.
   10. British Lieutenant H. N. Fowler escaped September 9, 1942. Slipped
       with four others through a guard office and a storeroom dressed as
       German officers and Polish orderlies. Only he and Van Doorninck
       reached Switzerland.
   11. Dutch Lieutenant Damiaen Joan van Doorninck escaped September 9,
       1942 with Fowler.
   12. British Capt. Patrick R. Reid escaped October 14, 1942. Slipped
       through POW kitchens into the German yard, into the Kommandantur
       cellar and down to a dry moat through the park. He took four days
       to reach Switzerland.
   13. Canadian Flight Lieutenant Howard D. Wardle (RAF) escaped October
       14, 1942 with Reid.
   14. British Major Ronald B. Littledale escaped October 14, 1942.
       Slipped through POW kitchens into the German yard, into the
       Kommandantur cellar and down to a dry moat through the park. He
       took five days to reach Switzerland.
   15. British Lieutenant-Commander William E. Stephens escaped October
       14, 1942 with Littledale.
   16. British Lieutenant William Millar escaped January, 1944. He broke
       into the German courtyard and hid in a German truck intending to go
       to Czechoslovakia. He never reached home and is listed missing on
       the Bayeux memorial. There is speculation that he was caught and
       executed in Mauthausen concentration camp.

From outside Colditz Castle

    1. French Lieutenant J. Durand-Hornus escaped while on a visit to the
       town dentist December 17, 1941.
    2. French Lieutenant G. de Frondeville escaped while on a visit to the
       town dentist December 17, 1941.
    3. French Lieutenant J. Prot escaped while on a visit to the town
       dentist December 17, 1941.
    4. Polish Lieutenant Kroner was transferred to Koningswartha Hospital
       where he jumped out of the window.
    5. French Lieutenant Boucheron fled from Zeitz Hospital, was
       recaptured, and later escaped from Düsseldorf prison.
    6. French Lieutenant Odry escaped from Ehterhorst Hospital.
    7. French Lieutenant Navelet escaped from Ehterhorst Hospital.
    8. British Captain Louis Rémy escaped from Gnaschwitz military
       hospital. His three companions were captured, but he reached
       Algeciras by boat, and later Britain.
    9. British Squadron Leader Brian Paddon escaped to Sweden via Danzig
       when sent to his previous camp for a court martial.
   10. French Lieutenant Raymond Bouillez escaped from a hospital after an
       unsuccessful attempt to jump from a train.
   11. Dutch Lieutenant J. van Lynden slipped away when the Dutch were
       moved to Stanislau camp.
   12. French Lieutenant A. Darthenay escaped from a hospital at
       Hohnstein-Ernsttal, later joined the French Resistance, and was
       killed by the Gestapo on April 7, 1944.
   13. Indian RAMC Captain Birendra Nath Mazumdar M.D. was the only Indian
       in Colditz. He went on a hunger strike to have himself transferred
       into an Indian-only camp. His wish was granted three weeks later
       and he escaped from that camp to France and reached Switzerland in
       1944 with the aid of the French Resistance.
   14. Royal Navy ERA W. Hammond campaigned for a transfer from Colditz,
       arguing that he was not an officer. He was transferred to Lamsdorf
       prison, escaped from a Breslau work party, and reached England via
       Switzerland in 1943.
   15. Royal Navy ERA D. Lister campaigned for a transfer from Colditz,
       arguing that he was not an officer. He was transferred to Lamsdorf
       prison, escaped from a Breslau work party, and reached England via
       Switzerland in 1943.

The "Colditz Cock" glider

   The only known photo of the original "Cock" glider taken by an unknown
   American GI in April, 1945.
   Enlarge
   The only known photo of the original "Cock" glider taken by an unknown
   American GI in April, 1945.
   A replica of the Colditz Glider as seen at the Imperial War Museum in
   London, England.
   Enlarge
   A replica of the Colditz Glider as seen at the Imperial War Museum in
   London, England.

   In one of the most ambitious escape attempts from Colditz, the idea of
   building a glider was dreamt up by two pilots, Jack Best and Bill
   Goldfinch, who had been sent to Colditz after escaping from another POW
   camp. They were encouraged by two army officers, Tony Rolt and David
   Walker, who had recently arrived in the camp. It would be Tony Rolt who
   would recommend the chapel roof, since he noticed it was obscured from
   the view of the Germans.

   The plan was to construct a two-man glider part by part. The glider was
   assembled by Bill Goldfinch and Jack Best in the lower attic above the
   chapel, and was to be launched from the roof in order to fly across the
   river Mulde, which was about 200 feet (60 m) below. The runway was to
   be constructed from tables and the glider was to be launched using a
   pulley system based on a falling metal bathtub full of concrete, using
   a gravity-assisted acceleration to 30 mph (50 km/h).

   The officers who took part in the project built a false wall, to hide
   the secret space in the attic where they slowly built the glider out of
   stolen pieces of wood. Since the Germans were accustomed to looking
   down for tunnels, not up for secret workshops, they felt rather safe
   from detection. However, they still placed lookouts, and created an
   electric alarm system, to warn the builders of approaching guards.

   Hundreds of ribs had to be constructed, predominantly formed from bed
   slats, but also from every other piece of wood the POW's could
   surreptitiously obtain. The wing spars were constructed from floor
   boards. Control wires were made from electrical wiring in unused
   portions of the castle. A glider expert, Lorne Welch, was asked to
   review the stress diagrams and calculations made by Goldfinch.

   The glider constructed was a lightweight, two-seater, high wing,
   monoplane design. It had a Mooney style rudder and square elevators.
   The wingspan, tip to tip, was 32 ft (9.75 m), and it was 19 ft 9 in (6
   m) from nose to tail. Prison sleeping bags of blue and white checked
   cotton were used to skin the glider, and German ration millet was
   boiled and used to seal the cloth pores. The materials they had to work
   with caused it to weigh a mere 240 lb (109 kg). However the war ended
   before the glider was finished.

   A replica of the Colditz glider was built for the 2000 Channel 4 (UK)
   3-part (150 minute total) "Escape from Colditz" documentary, and flew
   successfully on its first attempt with Best and Goldfinch in tearful
   attendance. It is currently housed at the Imperial War Museum in
   London. The Channel 4 material was edited to 60 minutes and shown in
   the US in 2001 as "Nazi Prison Escape" on the NOVA television series.

           A list of tools used in constructing the Glider Source:

             Side-framed saw

                  o handle of beech bed board
               o frame of iron window bars
               o blade of gramophone spring with 8 teeth / in (3 mm teeth)

          Minute saw for fine work

               o gramophone spring blade, 25 teeth / in (1 mm teeth)

          5/8 in (16 mm) metal drill obtained by bribery

               o Drill bits for making holes made from nails

          A gauge

               o made of beech, with cupboard bolt and gramophone needle

           Large plane, 14 1/2 in (368 mm) long

               o 2 inch blade obtained by bribing a German guard
               o Wooden box (four pieces of beech screwed together)

          Small plane, 8 1/2 in (216 mm) long

               o blade made from a table knife

          Plane, 5 in (127 mm) long

          Square

               o made of beech with gramophone spring blade

          Set of keys including:

               o universal door pick, forged from a bucket handle

Colditz Castle in popular culture

   Colditz Castle has been the inspiration for both television and film
   due to the widely popular retellings by Pat Reid and Airey Neave. This
   started as early as 1955 with the release of The Colditz Story,
   followed by Escape of the Birdmen in 1971, continuing until 2005 with
   the Colditz mini-series. The escape stories of Colditz Castle have
   inspired several board and video games, such as Escape from Colditz.

Suggested reading

   For a reasonably comprehensive list of books about Colditz Castle, its
   history as a POW camp, and many prisoners memoirs see the Suggested
   reading list.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colditz_Castle"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
