   #copyright

Colombo

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Asia

                               Colombo

   Official seal of Colombo
   Seal
   Map of Colombo with its administrative districts
   Map of Colombo with its administrative districts
                   Coordinates: 6°54′0″N, 79°50′0″E
      District    Colombo Division, Colombo District
       Mayor      Uvaiz Mohammad Imitiyaz ( Sri Lanka Freedom Party)
        Area
       - City     14.4 mi²/ 37.31 km²
       - Land     / km²
       - Water    / km²
     Population
    - City (2001) 642,163 (Colombo metropolitan area 2001 census)
      - Density   3,305/km²
       - Metro    2,234,289 (Colombo District)
     Time zone    Sri Lanka Standard Time Zone ( UTC+5:30)
                     Website: http://www.cmc.lk/

   Colombo (කොළඹ in Sinhala; கொழும்பு in Tamil) is the largest city and
   commercial capital of Sri Lanka, located on the west coast adjacent to
   the present administrative capital of Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte. The
   name Colombo is derived from the Sinhala name Kola-amba-thota which
   means "harbour with leafy mango trees". Traveller Ibn Batuta in the
   14th century referred to it as Kalanpu. Today's Colombo is a busy
   vibrant city with a mixture of modern life and colonial ruins.

History

   Since Colombo was a natural harbour, it was known to Romans, Arabs, and
   Chinese traders from more than 2,000 years ago . Arabian Muslims whose
   prime interests were trade, settled in Colombo in the 8th century
   mostly because the port helped their business and controlled much of
   the trade between the Sinhalese kingdoms and the outside world..

Portuguese Era

   The Portuguese first arrived in Sri Lanka in 1505. On their first visit
   they made a treaty with the king of Kandy enabling them to trade in the
   islands crop of cinnamon, which lay along the coastal areas including
   Colombo. They were given full authority of the coast line with the
   promise of guarding the coast against invaders. The Portuguese expelled
   the Muslim inhabitants and built a fort there to protect their spice
   trade. The land between the fortress and the interior was unoccupied
   and covered with trees. The Portuguese were compelled to reinforce the
   garrison to resist attacks by the indigenous leaders Mayadunne, Vidiya
   Bandara and Rajasinghe I. This part of Colombo is still known as Fort
   and houses the presidential palace and the majority of Colombo's five
   star hotels. The area immediately outside Fort is known as Pettah (or
   "pita kotuwa" in Singhalese which means outer fort) and is a commercial
   hub.

Dutch Era

   The Dutch captured the city in 1656 after an epic siege, at the end of
   which a mere 93 Portuguese survivors were given safe conduct out of the
   fort. It served as the capital of the maritime provinces under the
   control of the Dutch East India Company until 1796.
   The historical Wolvendhal church established during the Dutch era in
   the 1749
   Enlarge
   The historical Wolvendhal church established during the Dutch era in
   the 1749
   The VOC (Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie) logo of Dutch East India
   Company on the gates of Wolvendhal church
   Enlarge
   The VOC (Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie) logo of Dutch East India
   Company on the gates of Wolvendhal church

British era

   The British made the city the capital of their crown colony of Ceylon
   in 1802. They were responsible for much of the planning of the present
   city. In some parts of the city tramcar tracks and granite flooring
   laid during the era are still visible.

Post Independence

   This era of colonialism ended peacefully in 1948 when Ceylon gained
   independence from Britain. Because of the tremendous impact on the
   city's inhabitants and the country at large, the changes that resulted
   at the end of the colonial period were drastic. An entire new culture
   took root. Changes in laws and customs, clothing styles, religions and
   proper names were a significant result of the colonial era. These
   cultural changes were followed by the strengthening of the island's
   economy. Even today, the influence of the Portuguese, Dutch and British
   is clearly visible in Colombo’s architecture, names, clothing, food,
   language and attitudes. Buildings from all three regimes stand in their
   glory as reminders of the turbulent past. The city and its people show
   an interesting mix of European clothing and lifestyles together with
   local customs. The city is by far more modern than most others in the
   neighbouring countries and continues to be a blossoming metropolis of
   the East. Its growth and prosperity has been hampered only by the
   effects of the protracted conflict between the Government of Sri Lanka
   and Tamil Tiger rebels in the northeast, which has produced economic
   effects throughout the island.

   Historically, Colombo referred to the area around the Fort and Pettah
   Market which is famous for the variety of products available as well as
   the Khan Clock Tower, a local landmark. At present, it refers to the
   city limits of the Colombo Municipal Council. More often, the name is
   used for the Conurbation known as Greater Colombo, which encompasses
   several Municipal councils. It may also refer to the Colombo District.
   Colombo lost its status as the capital of Sri Lanka in the 1980s, but
   continues to be the island's commercial centre. Despite the official
   capital of Sri Lanka moving to nearby Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte
   (sometimes referred to as the administrative capital), most countries
   maintain their diplomatic missions in Colombo.

Economic history

   In the past the city has included cinnamon and coconut cultivation, but
   mostly throughout the history the city has been a port city. Colombo
   port is one of the busiest ports in Asia.

   Colombo has a history of boom and bust, or at least boom and
   quiescence. Colombo was sent into decline by the aftermath of bomb
   blasts by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE)rebel group.
   However the city remains a regional economic hub and a centre of
   supplies for the rest of the island.

Geography and climate

Geography

   Colombo's geography is a mix of hilly, flat and marshy land. The north
   and the south parts of the city are hilly and the east, and south east
   areas are bordered by marshy land. The city has many canals and the
   Beira Lake in the heart of the city. North and the North-East borders
   of the city flows the Kelani river, the river meets the sea in part of
   the city known as the Modera in Sinhala which literally means Delta.

Climate

   Colombo’s climate is fairly temperate all throughout the year. During
   the March - April the temperature averages around 31 degrees Celsius
   (88 degrees Fahrenheit) maximum. The only major change in the Colombo
   weather occurs during the monsoon seasons from May to August and
   October to January, this is the time of year where heavy rains can be
   expected. Colombo sees little relative diurnal range of temperature,
   although this is more marked in the drier winter months, where minimum
   temperatures average 22 degrees Celsius (72 degrees Fahrenheit).
   Rainfall in the city averages around 2,400 mm a year.
   Seema Malakaya Temple in the Beira Lake in the slave island area
   Enlarge
   Seema Malakaya Temple in the Beira Lake in the slave island area
   Buddha's statue inside the Seema Malakaya Temple
   Enlarge
   Buddha's statue inside the Seema Malakaya Temple

Demographics

   Colombo is a multi-ethnic, multi-cultural city. The population of
   Colombo is a mix of Sinhalese, Moors and Tamils. There are small
   communities of people with Chinese, Portuguese, Dutch, Malay and Indian
   origins living here. Colombo is the most populated city in Sri Lanka.
   According to the census of 2001 the demographics of urban Colombo by
   ethnicity is as follows.

       Ethnicity     Population % Of Total
   Sinhalese         265,657    41.37
   Sri Lankan Tamils 185,672    28.91
   Sri Lankan Moor   153,299    23.87
   Indian Tamils     13,968     2.18
   Malays            11,149     1.74
   Burghers          5,273      0.82
   Sri Lankan Chetty 740        0.12
   Bharatha          471        0.07
   Other             5,934      0.92
   Total             642,163    100

   Source: Census 2001

   Note: The totals are calculated through enumerations made from Colombo
   DS and Thimbirigasyaya DS, also part of Colombo Municipal Council.

Government and politics

   The City Town Hall in Cinnamon Garden area is the mayor's office
   Enlarge
   The City Town Hall in Cinnamon Garden area is the mayor's office

   Colombo is a charter city, with a Mayor Council form of government,
   most of its satellite cities are with urban councils. Colombo's mayor
   and the council members are elected through local government elections
   held once in five years. For the past 50 years the city had been ruled
   by the United National Party.

   The city government provides sewer, road management and waste
   management services, in case of water, electricity and telephone
   utility services the council liases with the water supply and draineage
   board, the Ceylon electricity board and telephone service providers.

   As with most Sri Lankan cities, the magistrate court and the district
   court handles felony crimes — the Municipal Council deals with parking
   tickets, traffic infractions, and misdemeanors. Colombo houses the
   countrys largest jail known as the Magazine Prison. And headquarters of
   the Police, Army, Navy, Air Force and many other judicial offices
   including the Supreme Court are in Colombo. The law enforcement
   agencies also liase with the municipal council but are managed by the
   ministry of interior and ministry of justice of the central government.
   The Supreme Court of Sri Lanka in Colombo
   Enlarge
   The Supreme Court of Sri Lanka in Colombo

Official Vision and mission

Vision

   “Colombo being a model city in Asia, a caring organization looking
   after interests of citizens and users with an efficient quality service
   for creation of safe, healthy and wealthy life.”

Mission

   “Organization achieving excellence in providing citizen centered
   services to the public / customer, optimizing the use of available
   resources through a competent, motivated and dedicated team.”

Economy

   The great majority of Sri Lankan corporations have their head offices
   in Colombo. Some of the industries include chemicals, textiles, glass,
   cement, leather goods, furniture, and jewelry. In the city centre is
   located South Asia's second tallest building - The World Trade Centre.
   The 40 storeyed Twin Tower complex is the centre of important commerial
   establishments, situated in the Fort district, the city's nerve centre.
   Right outside the Fort area is Pettah which is derived from the Sinhala
   word pita which means out or outside as it is outside the Fort.

   Pettah is more crowded than the fort area. Its a place you can buy
   almost anything you want, Pettah's roads are always packed and
   pavements are full of small stalls selling from delicious Sherbats to
   Shirts. Main Street is mostly clothes shops and the cross roads, known
   as First Cross Street etc up to Fifth Cross Street each street has a
   specific business. For example the first mainly sells electronics, the
   second cellular phones and fancy goods. Most of these businesses in
   Pettah are dominated by Muslim traders. At the end of the main street
   further away from Fort is the Sea Street, Sri Lanka's Gold market. This
   mile long street is full of jewellery shops.

   The Colombo Metropolitan Region (CMR) encompasses the country's
   administrative capital Kotte and Colombo. Found within the borders of
   the CMR is 80% of the country’s industrialisation and over 60% of all
   vehicles plying Sri Lankan roads.

Education

   Colombo is home to some of the island's top schools and universities.
   Education is free in Sri Lanka and 10 years of schooling is compulsory
   for everyone. One of the most popular of Colombo's schools is Royal
   College, which is also one of the oldest educational institutions in
   the country with a history of more than 170 years, Ananda College, with
   the largest Buddhist student population, and Zahira College, with the
   largest Muslim student population, and Colombo Hindu College with the
   largest Hindu student populationare also located in Colombo. The latter
   is the oldest Muslim educational institution in the country. Most of
   the schools in the city are managed by the provincial council and the
   prominent schools with many facilities that fall under the national
   schools scheme are managed by the central government.

   The University of Colombo, the only university in the city, has courses
   in many disciplines such as Arts, Science, Medicine, Law, Management
   and Computer Science. The university's school of computing is famous
   for its contributions to the Apache web server software project.

Culture

Landmarks

   The skyline of the Fort area, the twin towers are the World Trade
   Center building and the other tower is the Bank of Ceylon
   Enlarge
   The skyline of the Fort area, the twin towers are the World Trade
   Centre building and the other tower is the Bank of Ceylon

   The two World Trade Centre towers have become the most recognized
   landmarks of the city in recent years. Before these towers were
   completed in 1997, the adjacent Bank of Ceylon tower was the tallest
   structure and the most prominent landmark of the city. Before the
   skyscrapers were built it was the Old Parliament Building that stood
   majestically in the Fort district.

   Even before the parliament was built some claim that the Jami Ul Alfar
   mosque was recognized as the landmark of Colombo by sailors approaching
   the port. The mosque is still one of the most visited tourist sites in
   Colombo.

   The Fort district also has the famous Cargills & Millers complex that
   is protected by a special government law from demolition. This is done
   mainly to preserve the historic beauty of the Fort area.
   The historical Cargills & Millers building standing the test of time
   Enlarge
   The historical Cargills & Millers building standing the test of time

   The Galle Face Green is the city's largest and most elegant promenade.
   Lined with palm trees and adjacent to the coast, this mile-long stretch
   in the heart of the city is a constant beehive of activity. The green
   is especially busy on Fridays and Saturdays. In the evenings it plays
   host to families and children playing sports and flying kites, lovers
   embracing under umbrellas and health enthusiasts taking their daily
   evening walks. There are numerous small food stalls and a small stretch
   of beach to get wet. The green was recently given a make over and since
   then has been even more popular with the local community. The Green
   also frequently hosts numerous international and local concerts and
   performances, such as the recently concluded World Drum Festival.

   Cannons used during wartime in the colonial era are still laid out for
   observance and prestige at the Green, giving a colonial touch to the
   city. The famous colonial styled Galle Face Hotel, known as Asia's
   Emerald on the Green since 1864, is also adjacent to Galle Face Green.
   The Hotel has played host to distinguished guests including the British
   Royal Family and other Royal Guests and Celebrities. Apparently after
   having stayed at the hotel, Princess Alexandra of Denmark had commented
   that "the peacefulness and generosity encountered at the Galle Face
   Hotel cannot be matched". Around the corner from Galle Face are
   prominent coffee bars, chic bars and boutiques.

Annual cultural events and fairs

   The Old Parliament Building the near the Galle Face Green, now the
   Presidential Secretariat
   Enlarge
   The Old Parliament Building the near the Galle Face Green, now the
   Presidential Secretariat

   Colombo's most beautiful festival is the celebration of Buddha's Birth,
   Enlightenment and Death all falling on the same day. In Sinhala this is
   known as Vesak. During this festival, much of the city is decorated
   with lanterns, lights and special displays of light. The festival falls
   in mid May and lasts a week when many Sri Lankans visit the city to see
   the lantern competitions and decorations. During this week people
   distribute, rice, drinks and various other food items for free in
   places what is known as Dunsal which means charity place. These Dunsals
   are popular amongst visitors from the suburbs.

Performing arts

   The Jami Ul Alfar mosque in pettah area one of the oldest mosques in
   Colombo
   Enlarge
   The Jami Ul Alfar mosque in pettah area one of the oldest mosques in
   Colombo

   Colombo has several performing arts centers which are popular for their
   musical and theatrical performances. The most famous performing arts
   centers are the Lionel Wendt Theatre, the Elphinstone and the Tower
   Hall, all of which have a very rich history.

Museums and art collections

   The colonial era All Saints Church in Dam Street area
   Enlarge
   The colonial era All Saints Church in Dam Street area

   The National Museum of Colombo, situated in the Cinnamon Gardens area,
   is one of the biggest tourist attractions in the city. The museum
   houses the jewellery and throne of the last king of the country, Sri
   Wickrama Rajasinghe, who was captured and executed by the English in
   1815. Colombo does not boast a very big art gallery. There is only a
   small collection of Sri Lankan masterpieces at the Art Gallery at Green
   Path.

Nightlife

   The city has comparatively more nightlife than other cities in Sri
   Lanka, boasting numerous casinos, bars, nightclubs and pubs. In Sri
   Lanka alcohol is sold fairly freely, except on full moon Poya Days when
   sales are prohibited. The cessation of hostilities between the
   Government and LTTE rebels in 2002 resulted in an entertainment boom in
   the city and greater economic growth. However in the aftermath of 2005
   Presidential change, a low intensity war commenced between GOSL and
   LTTE centred around north and east provinces. This, as well as several
   bombings or attempted bombings in Colombo, has led to a greater
   military presence in the city.

Sports

   Undoubtedly the most popular sport in Sri Lanka is cricket. The country
   emerged as champions of the 1996 Cricket World Cup. The sport is played
   in parks, playgrounds, beaches and even in the streets of the city.
   Colombo is also the home for two of the country's international cricket
   stadiums, Sinhalese Sports Club and R Premadasa. Rugby is also a
   popular sport at the club and school level.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colombo"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
