   #copyright

Common Eland

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mammals

                  iCommon Eland

                             Conservation status

   Conservation dependent (LR/cd)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom:   Animalia
   Phylum:    Chordata
   Class:     Mammalia
   Order:     Artiodactyla
   Family:    Bovidae
   Subfamily: Bovinae
   Genus:     Taurotragus
   Species:   T. oryx

                                Binomial name

   Taurotragus oryx
   Pallas, 1766
   Enlarge

   The Common Eland, or Southern Eland, (Taurotragus oryx) is a savannah
   and plain antelope found in East and Southern Africa.

   The Common Eland stands around two metres at the shoulder and weighs
   275 kilograms (600 lb) to a tonne (2,200 lb). Females are sometimes
   less than half the weight of adult males. This species and the
   so-called Giant Eland, which are actually about the same size as the
   Common, are the largest of world's "antelopes". Common Eland females
   have a tan coat while the males' coat is a darker tan with a blue tinge
   to it, there may be a single white stripe vertically placed on the
   sides. The males have dense fur on their foreheads and a large dewlap.
   Both sexes have horns, which are about 65 centimetres (26 in) long and
   almost straight. The horns of the female are longer but thinner than
   those of the male.

   Common Eland live on the savannah and eat grass, branches and leaves.
   They are diurnal but tend towards inactivity during the heat of the
   day. Herds are usually between thirty and eighty individuals but are
   known to reach upwards of four hundred. The Common Eland has an unusual
   social life. They come and go, taking advantage of herd life when they
   need to without forming close ties.

   They "are very agile and can easily jump a 1.5 m fence from a standing
   start" (sign from Western Plains Zoo, Dubbo, NSW, Australia).

   Common Eland are sometimes considered part of the genus Tragelaphus but
   it is usually categorised as Taurotragus with the Giant Eland.

Name

   The name "eland" is derived form the Dutch word for elk (or moose).
   When Dutch settlers came to the Cape Province they named the largest
   wild ruminant herbivore they met with the name of the huge Northern
   European herbivore of which they had some vague notions.

   In Dutch the animal is called "eland antilope" to distinguish it from
   the elk.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_Eland"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
