   #copyright

Computer and video games

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Computer & Video games

   A computer game is a computer-controlled game where players interact
   with objects displayed on a screen for the sake of entertainment. A
   video game is essentially the same form of entertainment, but refers
   not only to games played on a personal computer, but also to games run
   by a console or arcade machine. The term "computer game" also includes
   games which display only text (and which can therefore theoretically be
   played on a teletypewriter) or which use other methods, such as sound
   or vibration, as their primary feedback device, or a controller (
   console games), or a combination of any of the above. Also, more
   esoteric devices have been used for input (see also Game controller).
   Usually there are rules and goals, but in more open-ended games the
   player may be free to do whatever they like within the confines of the
   virtual universe.

   The phrase interactive entertainment is the formal reference to
   computer and video games. To avoid ambiguity, game software is referred
   to as "computer and video games" throughout this article, which
   explores properties common to both types of game.

   In common usage, a "computer game" or a " PC game" refers to a game
   that is played on a personal computer. " Console game" refers to one
   that is played on a device specifically designed for the use of such,
   while interfacing with a standard television set. "Video game" (or
   "videogame"), in places where the term is used, has evolved into a
   catchall phrase that encompasses the aforementioned along with any game
   made for any other device, including, but not limited to, mobile
   phones, PDAs, advanced calculators, etc.

Gameplay

   In computer and video gaming, gameplay is a general term that describes
   player interaction with a game. It includes direct interaction, such as
   controls and interface, but also design aspects of the game, such as
   levels and graphics, it also has various game difficulties in which the
   game gets harder or easier.

   Although the use of this term is often disputed, as it is considered
   too vague for the range of concepts it describes, it is currently the
   most commonly used and accepted term for this purpose when describing
   video games.

Genres

   Games, like most other forms of media, may be categorized into genres
   based on gameplay, atmosphere, and various other factors. In fact,
   games are often much easier to classify by genre than films, music, or
   books. Due to gaming's relatively short history, technical limitations,
   and the commercial pressures currently affecting the North American and
   Japanese markets, electronic games are ensconced in a period of extreme
   formalism. Recently, video games have begun to explode in popularity, a
   rise which coincides with an increase in production value, and thus,
   development cost. As gamers come to expect talented voice acting,
   enormous, meticulously-constructed worlds and Hollywood-quality sound
   effects, production costs rise, and owing to the tremendous investment
   required by publishers (who want to maximize profits), most choose to
   make games based upon "tried-and-true" ideas, borrowing heavily from
   previous games and concepts.

   This is most evident in the fact that publishers' tend to establish
   "franchises", which often recycle the same characters, situations,
   conflicts, gameplay mechanics, and themes for any number of sequels.
   Therefore, though many games may combine genres, very few exist outside
   the paradigm of previously established genres, with notable exceptions.

   The most common genres in use today include:
     * Platformer
     * Adventure
     * Role-playing game (RPG)
          + MMORPG
          + MMOSG
     * Sports
     * Racing
     * Action
          + Fighting
          + Shooting
               o First person shooter (FPS)
               o Third person shooter
     * Puzzle
     * Simulation
     * Strategy game
          + Turn-based
          + Real-time (RTS)
     * Stealth-based game

   Most games nowadays are a combination of two or more genres; an action
   role-playing game, for example. There are also number of genres, which
   are mostly unpopular today, that were hybrid forms of other media, such
   as books or movies; the most familiar being interactive fiction and
   interactive movies.

   The increase in the popularity of online gaming has also resulted in
   sub-genres being formed, such as massively multiplayer online
   role-playing game (MMORPG).

Multiplayer video games

   Multiplayer video games are video games that can be played either
   competitively or cooperatively online or by using multiple controllers
   through the console. Historically video games have gone up to four
   players, but since the release of Xbox and Xbox Live it is possible to
   play with up to 16 players either online or with linked Xbox consoles.
   Sega's Dreamcast video game system did a great job of providing games
   for multiple players either competitively or cooperatively. Multiplayer
   gaming can turn video games into a social experience as well as an
   entertaining one.

History of Multiplayer video games

   The Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) allowed for 2 controllers to be
   plugged in simultaneously. Most games on this system used a "take
   turns" approach. Where player 1 (usually blue) would play until a life
   was lost and then player 2 (usually red) would play until the life was
   lost. Contra for NES was a game that allowed simultaneous cooperative
   multiplayer video gaming. The Super Nintendo Entertainment System
   (SNES) allowed for 2 controllers to be plugged in as well and used a
   variety of multiplayer inclusion. The Super Multitap could be purchased
   separately which allowed up to 8 players. The Sony Playstation console
   itself provided for only 2 controller inputs. The "Multi-Tap" adapter
   could be purchased separately and allowed for an additional 4 players,
   with two "Multi-Tap"s bringing the total number of players to 8. The
   Nintendo 64 console provided 4 controller inputs off the bat. This in
   many people's opinions played a great role in the popularity of the
   James Bond game Goldeneye 007, as no extraneous adapters need be
   purchased. The Sega Dreamcast console provided 4 controller inputs. The
   Microsoft Xbox console provided 4 controller inputs. The Sony
   Playstation 2 followed the format of the original if you wanted more
   than 2 player gaming you would need to purchase "Multi-Tap" adapters.
   While many consoles in recent years have allowed four controllers to be
   used simultaneously, the number of games that take advantage of this
   capability has been somewhat limited. Even games that lend themselves
   to a multiplayer experience often don't take advantage of multiplayer
   capabilities.

Systems that allow for multiplayer gaming

     * The Nintendo Entertainment System (NES)
     * The Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES) [8 with adapters]
     * The Sony PlayStation (PS1 or PSone) [5 with one adapter, 8 with two
       adapters]
     * The Nintendo 64 (N64)
     * The Sony PlayStation 2 (PS2) [5 with one adapter, 8 with two
       adapters]
     * The Microsoft Xbox (Xbox)
     * The Nintendo GameCube (GCN)
     * The Microsoft Xbox 360 (Xbox 360)
     * The Sony PlayStation 3 (PS3)
     * The Nintendo Wii (Wii)
     * The Sony PlayStation Portable (PSP)
     * The Nintendo DS (NDS)
     * The Nintendo Game Boy line (GB, GBC, GBA)

Popularity

   The popularity of computer and video games, as a whole, has been
   increasing steadily ever since the 1984-1987 drop-off caused by the
   video game crash of 1983, and the popularity appears to be continuing
   to increase. The average age of the video game player is now 33,
   belying the myth that video games are largely a diversion for
   teenagers.

Sales

   A typical retail display (in Geneva, Switzerland) with a large
   selection of games for several major consoles
   Enlarge
   A typical retail display (in Geneva, Switzerland) with a large
   selection of games for several major consoles

   The three largest markets for computer and video games are the United
   States (largest), Japan (2nd largest) and the United Kingdom (3rd) also
   in that order as the largest producers of video games . Other
   significant markets include Australia, Canada, Spain, Germany, South
   Korea, Mexico, France and Italy. Both India and the China are
   considered emerging markets in the video game industry and sales are
   expected to rise significantly in the coming years.

   Sales of different types of games vary widely between these markets due
   to local preferences. Japanese consumers avoid computer games and
   instead buy console games, with a strong preference for games catering
   to local tastes. In South Korea, computer games are preferred,
   especially MMORPG games and real-time strategy games; there are over
   20,000 PC bang Internet cafes where computer games can be played for an
   hourly charge.

   The NPD Group tracks computer and video game sales in the United
   States. It reported that as of 2004:
     * Console and portable software sales: $6.2 billion, up 8% from 2003
     * Console and portable hardware and accessory sales: $3.7 billion,
       down 35% from 2003
     * PC game sales: $1.1 billion, down 15% from 2006

   These figures are sales in dollars, not units; unit shipments for each
   category were higher than the dollar sales numbers indicate, as more
   software and hardware was sold at reduced prices compared to 2003.

   Retail PC game sales have been declining slightly each year since about
   1998, but this fact should be taken with a grain of salt: the retail
   sales numbers from NPD do not include sales from online downloads, nor
   subscription revenue for games like MMORPGs.

   The game and film industries are also becoming increasingly
   intertwined, with companies like Sony having significant stakes in
   both. A large number of summer blockbuster films spawn a companion
   game, often launching at the same time in order to share the marketing
   costs.

What the player gains

   Perhaps the most visible values of computer and video gaming are simply
   its artistic and entertainment values. As a form of multimedia
   entertainment, modern video games contain a highly unique fusion of 3D
   art, CG effects, architecture, artificial intelligence, sound effects,
   dramatic performances, music, storytelling, and, most importantly,
   interactivity. This interactivity enables the player to explore what
   amounts to a stylized, artistic depiction and simulation of some
   three-dimensional environment (something no other form of entertainment
   can allow) with the actions of the player operating as a single,
   irreducible variable. In this respect, every game scenario will play
   out a slightly different way every time. Even if the game is highly
   scripted, this can still feel like a large amount of freedom to the
   person who is playing the game. Consider, for example, a game such as
   Brothers in Arms: Earned in Blood, where the objective is often to
   eliminate Nazi squads by commanding a group of soldiers from a
   first-person perspective. Many aspects of the game are highly
   controlled — the number of Nazis and the places they originate from do
   not vary, nor does the strength and armament of friendly or enemy
   troops. The maps are meticulously designed in such a way as to provide
   clear paths and cover at key locations. And still, the overall
   strategy, the tactics, and the execution will vary every time. Within
   the rather broad boundaries of the game, the player is able to exercise
   far more freedom and control than in traditional forms of entertainment
   or art.

   A related property is that of emergent behaviour. While many games
   including card games and sports rely on emergent principles, games are
   able to create simulated story worlds where emergent behaviour occurs
   within the context of this world. This also is very appealing to
   players. In discussing the issue, game designer Warren Spector has used
   the term "emergent narrative" to describe how, in a simulated
   environment, storyline can be created simply by "what happens to the
   player."

   In Steven Johnson's book, " Everything Bad Is Good For You," he argues
   that video games in fact demand far more from a player than traditional
   games like Monopoly. In order to experience the game, the player must
   first determine the objectives, as well as how to complete them. They
   must then learn the game controls and how the human-machine interface
   works, including menus and HUDs. Beyond such skills, which after some
   time become quite fundamental and are taken for granted by many gamers,
   video games are based upon the player navigating (and eventually
   mastering) a highly complex system with many variables. This requires a
   strong analytical ability, as well as flexibility and adaptability. To
   emphasize the point, Johnson notes that the strategy guide for Grand
   Theft Auto III is 53,000 words long. He argues that the process of
   learning the boundaries, goals, and controls of a given game is often a
   highly demanding one that calls on many different areas of cognitive
   function. Indeed, most games require a great deal of patience and focus
   from the player, and, contrary to the popular perception that games
   provide instant gratification, games actually delay gratification far
   longer than other forms of entertainment such as film or even many
   books. Some research suggests video games may even increase player's
   attention capacities.

   Multiplayer games, which take advantage of the fact that computer games
   can use the internet, provide players with the opportunity to compete
   with other players from across the globe, something that is also unique
   to electronic gaming. MMORPG's take the concept much further with the
   establishment of vast, online communities existing in persistent,
   virtual worlds. Millions of players around the globe are attracted to
   video gaming simply because it offers such unprecedented ability to
   interact with large numbers of people engaged simultaneously in a
   structured environment where they are all involved in the same activity
   (playing the game).

   Even simple games offer potential benefits to the player. Games like
   Tetris and Pac-man are well-designed games that are easy to pick up but
   difficult to master, in ways not unlike chess or even poker. Despite
   their simplicity, simple games may also feature online capabilities or
   powerful AI. Depending on the game, players can develop and test their
   techniques against an advanced computer player or online against other
   human players.

   More obvious benefits to the player can come in the form education on
   the game's subject matter. For example, a RTS set during the American
   Civil War may feature the use of period armies engaging in historical
   battles, and outwitting an opponent such as Robert E. Lee.

Controversy

   Like related forms of media, computer and video games have been the
   subject of frequent controversy and censorship, due to the depiction of
   graphic violence, sexual themes, advertising, consumption of illegal
   drugs, consumption of alcohol or tobacco, propaganda, or profanity in
   some games. Among others, critics of video games sometimes include
   parents' groups, politicians, organized religion groups, and other
   special interest groups, even though all of these can be found in all
   forms of entertainment and media. Various games have been accused of
   causing addiction to such and even violent behaviour.

   Video game censorship is defined as the use of state or group power to
   control the playing, distribution, purchase, or sale of video games or
   computer games. Video game controversy comes in many forms, and
   censorship is a controversial subject, as well as a popular topic of
   debate. Proponents and opponents of censorship are often very
   passionate about their individual views.

   Historically, this type of controversy and criticism is not unique to
   video games. The same situation has been applied to Comic books, motion
   pictures and to some extent music. Moreover, it appears to be a
   question of age. Since these art forms have been around longer, the
   backlash against them occurred farther in the past, beyond the
   remembrance of today's youth. In both cases, the attempts at censorship
   in the United States were struck down as a violation of First Amendment
   rights, and they have gone on to become fully integrated facets of
   society.

   Games that have sparked notable national controversy in the United
   States include Mortal Kombat, Night Trap, Doom, the Grand Theft Auto
   series and, most notably, Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas' infamous Hot
   Coffee mod fiasco which boosted the game's ESRB rating from M (Mature)
   to AO (Adults Only).

Demographics

   The November 2005 Nielsen Active Gamer study, taking a survey of 2,000
   regular gamers, found that the U.S. games market is diversifying. The
   age group among male players is expanding significantly, into the 25-45
   age group. For casual online puzzle-style and simple mobile cell phone
   games, the gender divide is more or less equal between males and
   females. Females are being significantly attracted to playing certain
   online multi-user video games that offer a more communal experience,
   and a small hardcore group of young females are playing aggressive
   games that are usually thought of as being 'traditionally male' games.
   The most loyal fan-base is reported to be for large role-playing games.

Development

   Video games are made by developers, who used to do this as individuals
   or small teams in the 80's. Now, development commonly requires a large
   team consisting of designers, graphic designers and other artists,
   programmers, sound designers, musicians, and other technicians; all of
   which are managed by producers. The visionary for any game may come
   from any of the roles outlined. Development by committee rarely works.

   With the start of the 21st century we can see a major boom in the
   numbers of game developing teams and studios. This business, although
   tough and risky, proves to be a goldmine for the determined groups.
   Previous industry giants like EA Games, Valve, and Rockstar are slowly
   being displaced by newer studios with smaller budgets yet more
   determined and younger members who have developed a passion for video
   gaming throughout their whole lives. Most of these studios are modding
   existing engines and games until they get enough media attention and
   sponsors to start a new project from scratch. Prime examples of such
   teams are Dimension Studios and Turtle Rock Studios. Both of these
   provide content for already existing games and are making a fortune out
   of it. An older team, Gearbox Software, started out in a similar
   fashion by modding the original Half-Life engine; now it is one of the
   major video game developers.

   Video games are developing fast in all areas, but the problem is of
   cost, and how developers intend to keep the costs low enough to attract
   publisher investment. Most video game console development teams number
   anywhere from 20 to 50 people, with some teams exceeding 100. The
   average team size as well as the average development time of a game
   have grown along with the size of the industry and the technology
   involved in creating games. This has led to regular occurrences of
   missed deadlines and unfinished products; Duke Nukem Forever is the
   quintessential example of these problems. See also: video game industry
   practices.

Game modifications

   Games running on a PC are often designed with end-user modifications in
   mind, and this consequently allows modern computer games to be modified
   by gamers without much difficulty. These mods can add an extra
   dimension of replayability and interest. The Internet provides an
   inexpensive medium to promote and distribute mods, and they have become
   an increasingly important factor in the commercial success of some
   games. Developers such as id, Valve, Crytek and Epic ship their games
   with the very development tools used to make the game in the first
   place, along with documentation to assist mod developers, which allows
   for the kind of success seen by popular mods such as Counter-Strike.

Naming

   Non-gamers use several umbrella terms for console, PC, arcade,
   handheld, and similar games since they do not agree on the best name.
   For many, either "computer game" or "video game" describes these games
   as a whole. Other commonly used terms include "entertainment software,"
   "interactive entertainment media," "electronic interactive
   entertainment," "electronic game," "software game," and "videogame" (as
   one word). Gamers are quite happy to use the vague term "games", or
   "videogame/video game" to distinguish them from board games and card
   games when necessary. In the past, it was common for parents and/or
   elderly people, who were unfamiliar with video games, to refer to all
   of them as "Nintendo games" due to Nintendo's overwhelming popularity
   in the late 80's and 90's (this is an example of a genericized
   trademark). Computer and video games are a subset of interactive media,
   which includes virtual reality, flight and engineering simulation,
   multimedia and the World Wide Web.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_and_video_games"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
