   #copyright

Conakry

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography

   Location of Conakry in Guinea

   Conakry (also Konakry, Malinké Kɔnakiri), population 2,000,000 ( 2002),
   is the capital of Guinea. The city is a port on the Atlantic Ocean.
   Conakry is located at 9°30' North, 13°40' West (9.5, -13.6667).

Attractions

   Conakry's attractions consist of the Ratoma District.

History

   It developed on Tumbo Island at the tip of the Kaloum Peninsula, to
   which it is now joined by an isthmus, the city having long spread on to
   it. The city was essentially founded after Britain ceded the island to
   France in 1887. It became the capital of Guinée Française in about 1904
   and prospered as an export port, particularly after a (now closed)
   railway to Kankan opened.

Conakry today

   People's Palace
   Enlarge
   People's Palace

   Today, the city has grown along the peninsula to form five main
   districts. From the tip in the south west, these are Kaloum (the city
   centre), Dixinn (including the University of Conakry and many
   embassies), Ratoma (known for its nightlife), Matam and finally Matoto,
   home to Gbessia Airport.

   Attractions in the city include the Guinea National Museum, several
   markets, the Guinea Palais du Peuple, Conakry Grand Mosque which was
   built by Sekou Toure, the city's nightlife and the nearby Iles de Los.

   The city is noted for its botanical garden. The Polytechnical Institute
   of Conakry is also located in Conakry.

   The street numbering scheme of Conakry labels all roads with a
   two-letter code for the urban district, followed by a three digit
   number: odd for north-south streets and even for east-west, e.g. KA002
   for a northbound street in the Kaloum district. There are currently no
   working stoplights in Conakry and a good part of the city has
   electrcity only from 6PM to 6AM
   Town Centre
   Enlarge
   Town Centre

Economy

   Conakry is Guinea's largest city and its administrative,
   communications, and economic centre. The city's economy revolves
   largely around the port, which has modern facilities for handling and
   storing cargo, through which alumina and bananas are shipped.
   Manufactures include food products and Housing Materials. An average
   Guinean in Conakry will get a monthly wage of about 225 000 GNF or
   about $45.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conakry"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
