   #copyright

Constantine II of Scotland

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: British History 1500 and
before (including Roman Britain)

   Causantín mac Áeda
   King of Alba
   Reign 900–943
   Born Before 879
   Died 952
   St Andrews
   Buried Iona
   Predecessor Domnall mac Causantín
   Successor Máel Coluim mac Domnaill
   Issue Idulb mac Causantín, one or more other sons, one or more
   daughters
   Father Áed mac Cinaeda

   Causantín mac Áeda ( anglicised Constantine II) (before 879– 952) was
   king of Alba from 900 to 943. He was the son of Áed mac Cináeda and
   first cousin of the previous ruler, Domnall mac Causantín. Causantín
   mac Áeda's reign is the second longest before the Union of the Crowns
   in 1603, exceeded only by William the Lion.

Early Period: the Viking threat

   Prior to his reign, Scotland had been dominated by, and perhaps
   tributary to, the Viking kings of the Irish Sea province in the later
   9th century. During his reign, Causantín faced Viking raids from the
   north and west, and expanding Anglo-Saxon kings of Wessex, while
   establishing the kingdom of Alba in its definitive Gaelicised form.

   The Chronicle of the Kings of Alba records an attack by the Vikings,
   and the plundering of Dunkeld, in the third year of Causantín's reign.
   The following year, the invaders were defeated in Strathearn.

   The Chronicle of the Kings of Alba records that Causantín and bishop
   Cellach

     met at the Hill of Belief near the royal city of Scone [and] pledged
     themselves that the laws and disciplines of the faith, and the laws
     of churches and gospels, should be kept in conformity with the
     Scotti.

   It is supposed that if any single event may be taken to mark the birth
   of the kingdom of Alba, then it should be this.

   In 914, the Annals of Ulster report the defeat of Barid son of Oitir by
   Ragnall grandson of Ivar in the Irish Sea. It in is the period of
   dominance of northern Britain by Ragnall and his cousin Sihtric that
   Causantín is found as an ally of Ealdred of Bernicia and, perhaps, of
   "Queen" Ethelfleda of Mercia. Armies led by Ragnall and his brother
   Sihtric raided throughout northern Britain and Ireland. They attacked
   Chester, Dumbarton and Northumbria. The Uí Ímair - the grandsons of
   Ivar - were the greatest threat to Alba, hence the alliance with the
   Anglo-Saxons of Bernicia and Mercia.

   While two battles of Corbridge are claimed, in 915 and 918, only the
   second is mentioned by the Chronicle of the Kings of Alba and, at some
   length, by the Annals of Ulster and the Fragmentary Annals of Ireland.
   The first battle rests on Symeon of Durham's Historia de Sancto
   Cuthberto. The location in Gaelic sources is vague, Corbridge again
   coming from Symeon.

Later period: the English threat

   After Carham, Ragnall seized control of York. However, in 920, after
   taking direct control of Mercia soon after Ethelfleda's death, Edward
   the Elder forced Ragnall to acknowledge his rule. While neither of the
   kings may have been happy with the compromise of 920, neither did they
   live long enough to break the treaty. Ragnall died in 921, succeeded by
   his cousin Sihtric. Edward died in 924, followed by Ælfweard, who
   reigned for a very short time, succeeded by his half-brother Athelstan.
   Sihtric may have rebelled in 924, but by 926 he had evidently
   acknowledged Athelstan as over-king, adopting Christianity and marrying
   a sister of Athelstan at Tamworth. Within the year Sihtric abandoned
   his new faith and repudiated his unwanted wife. Before Athelstan and he
   could fight, Sihtric died suddenly in 927.

   Athelstan moved quickly, seizing much of Northumbria, and securing the
   submission of Sihtric's brother Gofraid (or Guthfrith), of Ealdred of
   Bernicia, of Causantín, and of Owain of Strathclyde. Sihtric's young
   son Amlaíb Cuaran (Olaf Sihtricsson) fled to Ireland. In less than a
   decade, the kingdom of Wessex had become by far the greatest power in
   Britain and Ireland, and whatever threat the Vikings, or the early Uí
   Ímair, had posed, clearly the main threat to Alba was now to the south.
   As if to prove the point, Athelstan imposed his authority on the kings
   of Wales, Hywel Dda and Idwal Foel among them.

Brunanburh and after

   By the 930s, Causantín, his son-in-law Amlaíb mac Gofraidh (Olaf
   Guthfrithsson), the Uí Ímair king of Dublin, perhaps together with
   Owain of Strathclyde, are found in alliance,certainly directed against
   Athelstan. In 933 or 934, Athelstan led "a great army and fleet" into
   Scotland and laid waste to the country. If this was intended to bring
   about Causantín's submission, it appears to have failed.

   In 937, the battle of Brunanburh was a notable victory for Athelstan
   and his brother Edmund over Causantín, Amlaíb and Owain. It is
   commemorated in an Old English poem. Owain of Strathclyde is supposed
   to have died in the battle, as did a son of Causantín. The report of
   the deaths of Dubucan son of Indrechtaig, Mormaer of Angus, Eochaid son
   of Alpín and of Athelstan follow that for Brunanburh, and may be
   related to the period 937–939.

   For all that Brunanburh was a great victory, it does not appear to have
   been sufficient to make rule by the West Saxon kings popular in the
   Danelaw and Northumbria. On 27 October, 939, at Malmesbury, as the
   Annals of Ulster report: "Athelstan, king of the Saxons, pillar of the
   dignity of the western world, died an untroubled death." Before the end
   of 939, Amlaíb mac Gofraid had seized York without resistance. In 940,
   he gained control of the Danelaw with little fighting, a treaty being
   signed with the new West Saxon king, Athelstan's brother Edmund, at the
   prompting of the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, near Leicester.
   The following year, Amlaíb turned north, on Bernicia, campaigning as
   far as Tyninghame in East Lothian, but he died that year, being
   succeeded by his cousin Amlaíb Cuaran.

Abdication and posterity

   The Chronicle of the Kings of Alba states:

     And in his old age, being decrepit, [Causantín] took the staff [i.e.
     entered a monastery], and served the Lord; and he gave up the
     kingdom to Máel [Coluim] son of Domnall.

   The monastery is assumed to have been that of the Celí Dé at St
   Andrews, probably founded in its Céli Dé form during the reign of
   Causantín. The Chronicle is not done with Causantín however. It states
   that in the seventh year of Maél Coluim's reign:

     [H]e plundered the English as far as the river Tees, and he seized a
     multitude of people and many herds of cattle: and the Scots called
     this the raid of Albidosorum, that is, Nainndisi. But others say
     that Causantín made this raid, asking of the king, Máel Coluim, that
     the kingship should be given to him for a week's time, so that he
     could visit the English. In fact, it was Máel Coluim who made the
     raid, but Causantín incited him, as I have said.

   Causantín's death is recorded by the Chronicle in 952:

     And Causantín died in [Maél Coluim's] 10th year [952], under the
     crown of penitence in good old age.

   As has been said, one of Causantín's sons died at Brunanburh and a
   daughter married Amlaíb mac Gofraidh. Causantín himself may have had a
   Norse or Hiberno-Norse wife as his son Ildulb had a gaelicised Norse
   name. The line of kings descended from Causantín appears to have ended
   with the deaths of his great-grandson Causantín mac Culéin in 997. None
   the less, the kingdom which he had created existed in much the same
   form until the Scotto-Norman reforming kings David I, and his grandsons
   Máel Coluim IV and William the Lion, brought about a new form of
   Scottish kingship in the 12th century.
   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constantine_II_of_Scotland"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
