   #copyright

Convention on the Rights of the Child

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Animal & Human Rights


                                                                         -
                                                                         -

                                      Convention on the Rights of the Child
              Opened for signature                     20 November 1989 in -
                Entered into force                         September 2, 1990
   Conditions for entry into force   20 ratifications or accessions (Article
                                                                         49)
                           Parties 193 (only 2 non-parties: USA and Somalia)

   The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, often
   referred to as "CRC", is an international convention setting out the
   civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of children. It
   is monitored by the United Nations' Committee on the Rights of the
   Child which is composed of members from countries around the world.

   Governments of countries that have ratified the "CRC" are required to
   report to, and appear before, the United Nations Committee on the
   Rights of the Child periodically to be examined on their progress with
   regards to the advancement of the implementation of the "CRC" and the
   status of child rights in their country. Their reports and the
   committee's written views and concerns are available on the committee's
   website.

   Most member nation states (countries) of the United Nations have
   ratified it, either partly or completely. Two notable exceptions are
   Somalia and the United States . The United Nations General Assembly
   agreed to adopt the Convention into international law on November 20,
   1989; it came into force on September 2, 1990, after it was ratified by
   the required number of nations. The Convention generally defines a
   child as any person under the age of 18, unless an earlier age of
   majority is recognized by a country's law.

   The Convention acknowledges that every child has certain basic rights,
   including the right to life, his or her own name and identity, to be
   raised by his or her parents within a family or cultural grouping and
   have a relationship with both parents, even if they are separated.

   The Convention obliges states to allow parents to exercise their
   parental responsibilities. The Convention also acknowledges that
   children have the right to express their opinions and to have those
   opinions heard and acted upon when appropriate, to be protected from
   abuse or exploitation, to have their privacy protected and requires
   that their lives not be subject to excessive interference.

   The Convention also obliges signatory states to provide separate legal
   representation for a child in any judicial dispute concerning their
   care and asks that the child's viewpoint be heard in such cases. The
   Convention forbids capital punishment for children.

   The Convention is child-centric and deals with the child-specific needs
   and rights. It requires that states act in the best interests of the
   child. This approach is different from the common law approach found in
   many countries that had previously treated children and wives as
   possessions or chattels, ownership of which was often argued over in
   family disputes. In many jurisdictions, properly implementing the
   Convention requires an overhaul of child custody and guardianship laws,
   or, at the very least, a creative approach within the existing laws.

   The Convention also has two Optional Protocols, adopted by the General
   Assembly in May 2000 and applicable to those states that have signed
   and ratified them: The Optional protocol on the involvement of children
   in armed conflict and the Optional protocol on the sale of children,
   child prostitution and child pornography.

State Parties and Signatories

   According to UNICEF, 193 states are party to the Convention , almost
   all the members of the United Nations.

U.S. status

   The United States and Somalia have signed the Convention, but never
   completed their ratification processes. On February 16, 1995, Madeleine
   Albright, at the time the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, signed
   the Convention. President Bill Clinton chose to submit the Convention
   to the Senate for ratification by a two-thirds majority; nevertheless,
   this never happened.

   The United States has had particular difficulties in ratifying the
   "CRC" mainly due to strong opposition by conservatives to the treaty.
   The administration of president George W. Bush has explicitly stated
   its opposition to the treaty:

          "The Convention on the Rights of the Child may be a positive
          tool for promoting child welfare for those countries that have
          adopted it. But we believe the text goes too far when it asserts
          entitlements based on economic, social and cultural rights. ...
          The human rights-based approach ... poses significant problems
          as used in this text."

Canada status

   Canada has ratified the "CRC" but has not fully implemented the
   Convention in Canadian domestic laws. The Canadian Children's Rights
   Council has a full section with related parliamentary references on the
   implementation of the "CRC" in Canada.

   Youth criminal laws in Canada underwent major changes resulting in the
   Youth Criminal Justice Act (YCJA) which went into effect on April 1,
   2003.

   In 1989, the Canadian House of Commons voted unanimously to pass a
   non-binding resolution to end child poverty by the year 2000. However,
   the child poverty rate did not change between 1989 and 2000; 16% of
   Canadian children still live in poverty.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convention_on_the_Rights_of_the_Child"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
