   #copyright

Cotswolds

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

   The village of Bibury features Cotswold stone cottages
   Enlarge
   The village of Bibury features Cotswold stone cottages

   The Cotswolds is a range of hills in central England, sometimes called
   the "Heart of England", a hilly area reaching over 300 m or 1000 feet.
   The area has been designated as the Cotswolds Area of Outstanding
   Natural Beauty. The highest point in the Cotswolds is Cleeve Hill at
   330m/1083ft.

   The Cotswolds lie within the current ceremonial counties of
   Oxfordshire, Gloucestershire, Wiltshire, Somerset, Warwickshire, and
   Worcestershire. The county of Gloucestershire forms the largest area of
   the Cotswolds.

Description

   The spine of the Cotswolds runs southwest to northeast through six
   counties (see note above), particularly Gloucestershire, Oxfordshire,
   and southern Warwickshire. The northern and western edges of the
   Cotswolds are marked by steep escarpments down to the Severn valley and
   the Avon. This escarpment or scarp feature (sometimes called the
   Cotswold Edge) is a result of the uplifting (tilting) of the limestone
   layer, exposing its broken edge. This is a cuesta, in geological terms.
   The dip slope is to the southeast. On the eastern boundary lies the
   city of Oxford and on the west is Stroud. To the south the middle
   reaches of the Thames Valley and towns such as Cirencester, Lechlade,
   Tetbury, Beverston and Fairford are often considered to mark the
   southern limit of this region. However, key features of the area,
   especially the characteristic uplift of the Cotswold Edge, can be
   clearly seen as far south as Bath and towns such as Chipping Sodbury
   and Marshfield share elements of Cotswold character.

   The area is characterised by attractive small towns and villages built
   of the underlying Cotswold stone (a yellow oolitic limestone). This
   limestone is rich in fossils, in particular fossilised sea urchins. In
   the Middle Ages, the wool trade made the Cotswolds prosperous; hence
   the Speaker of the British House of Lords sits on the Woolsack showing
   where the Medieval wealth of the country came from. Some of this money
   was put into the building of churches so the area has a number of
   large, handsome Cotswold stone " wool churches". The area remains
   affluent and has attracted wealthy people who own second homes in the
   area or have chosen to retire to the Cotswolds.
   Corsham is a small town in the southwestern Cotswolds
   Enlarge
   Corsham is a small town in the southwestern Cotswolds

   Typical Cotswold towns are Bourton-on-the-Water, Broadway, Burford,
   Chipping Norton, Cirencester, Moreton-in-Marsh, Stow-on-the-Wold and
   Winchcombe. The village of Chipping Campden is notable for being the
   home of the Arts and Crafts movement, founded by William Morris at the
   end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th centuries. William Morris
   lived occasionally in Broadway Tower a folly now part of a country
   park. Chipping Campden is also known for the annual Cotswold Games, a
   celebration of sports and games dating back to the early 17th century.

Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty

   The Cotswolds were designated as an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty
   in 1966, with an expansion on 21 December 1990 to 1,990 square
   kilometres. In 1991 all AONBs were measured again using modern methods.
   The official area of the Cotswolds AONB increased to 2,038 square
   kilometres. In 2000 the government confirmed that AONBs had the same
   landscape quality and status as National Parks. 2006 is the 40th
   anniversary of The AONB.

   The largest of 40 AONBs in England and Wales, the Cotswolds AONB
   stretches from the border regions of South Warwickshire and
   Worcestershire, through West Oxfordshire and Gloucestershire and takes
   in parts of West Wiltshire and Bath and North East Somerset in the
   South.

   The Cotswold Way is a long-distance footpath (approx 103 miles) running
   the length of the AONB, mainly on the edge of the Cotswold escarpement
   with good views over the Severn Valley and the Vale of Evesham.

   The Cotswold Voluntary Wardens Service was established in 1968 to help
   conserve and enhance the area. There are now over 300 Wardens. In 2005
   they gave over 36,000 hours of their time.

Noteworthy historical structures

     * Beverston Castle
     * Calcot Manor
     * Chavenage House
     * Chedworth Roman Villa
     * Cirencester Abbey
     * Malmesbury Abbey
     * Owlpen Manor
     * Sudeley Castle
     * Tetbury Market House

Transport

   The Cotswolds is ringed by the M5, M40 and M4 motorways, giving easy
   car access to the area. The main non-motorway roads through the area
   are the A46: Bath — Stroud — Cheltenham; the A419: Swindon —
   Cirencester — Stroud; the A429: Cirencester — Stow on the Wold —
   Moreton-in-Marsh; and the A40: Oxford — Burford — Cheltenham. These all
   roughly follow the routes of ancient roads, some laid down by the
   Romans, such as Ermin Street and the Fosse Way.

   The area is bounded by two major rail routes: in the south by the main
   Bristol-Bath-London High Speed line and in the west by the
   Bristol-Birmingham main line. In addition, the Golden Valley Line runs
   from Swindon to Gloucester, carrying high speed and local services.

   Main line, high speed rail services to the big cities are reached via
   stations such as Bath, Swindon, Oxford, Cheltenham and Worcester. High
   speed services to London are also available from smaller stations at
   Kemble near Cirencester, Kingham Station near Stow on the Wold and
   Moreton-in-Marsh station.

   Cheltenham is a hub for National Express coach services. Local bus
   services across the area do exist, but are infrequent. The best source
   of information is the local tourist offices.

Note on counties

   Between 1974 and 1995 parts of the AONB fell within the newly formed
   administrative and ceremonial County of Avon. After 1995 Avon was
   divided between four administrative unitary authorities with 'shadow
   county' status, the relevant ones for the AONB being South
   Gloucestershire and Bath and North-East Somerset. For ceremonial
   purposes these counties are returned to their pre-1974 lord
   lieutenancies.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cotswolds"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
