   #copyright

Coventry

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

                                 City of Coventry
                                     Coventry
                                              Shown within West Midlands
                                                               Geography
                      Status:           Metropolitan borough, City (1345)
                      Region:                               West Midlands
           Ceremonial County:                               West Midlands
           Historic Counties: Warwickshire, County of the City of Coventry
                        Area:
                      - Total                                Ranked 246th
                                                                98.64 km²
                   Admin. HQ:                                    Coventry
              Grid reference:                                    SP333790
                    ONS code:                                        00CQ
                                                            Demographics
                  Population:
          - Total (2005 est.)
                    - Density                       Ranked 16th
                                                                  304,200
                                                              3,084 / km²
                   Ethnicity:                      78.0% White
                                                            11.3% S.Asian
                                                         7.8% Afro-Carib.
                                                                Politics
                              Image:Coventry-coa.png
                                                  Coventry City Council
                                             http://www.coventry.gov.uk/
                  Leadership:                            Leader & Cabinet
                   Executive:                                Conservative

   The Precinct in Coventry city centre. The spire of the ruined cathedral
   is visible in the background.
   Enlarge
   The Precinct in Coventry city centre. The spire of the ruined cathedral
   is visible in the background.

   Coventry is a city and metropolitan borough, in the West Midlands
   region of England, UK. With a population of 305,000 (2006 estimate)
   Coventry is the eighth largest city in England and the eleventh largest
   in the UK. It is also the second largest city in the English Midlands
   by population, with residents and those born in the city styling
   themselves "Coventrians" or in the vernacular "Cov Kids". It is
   situated 95 miles (153 km) northwest of London and 19 miles (30 km)
   east of Birmingham and is notable for being further from the coast than
   any other British city.

   Coventry is famous for its involvement in the British motor industry
   (see Coventry motor companies), its Cathedral and the legendary
   exploits of Lady Godiva. Over the years Coventry has developed an
   international reputation as Europe's major city of peace and
   reconciliation and holds an annual Peace Month. Coventry has two
   universities: Coventry University and the University of Warwick.

History

   Coventry is traditionally believed to have been established in the year
   1043 with the founding of a Benedictine Abbey by Leofric, Earl of
   Mercia and his wife Lady Godiva. Current evidence suggests that this
   abbey was probably in existence by 1022, therefore Leofric and Godiva
   most likely endowed it around 1043. In time, a market was established
   at the abbey gates and the settlement expanded.

   By the 14th century Coventry had become an important centre of the
   cloth trade, and throughout the Middle Ages was one of the largest and
   most important cities in England. Coventry was granted city status in
   1345, and later became a county in its own right.

   Hostile attitudes of the cityfolk towards Royalist prisoners held in
   Coventry during the English Civil War are believed to have originated
   the phrase "sent to Coventry", which in Britain means "to be
   ostracised".

   In the late 19th century Coventry became a major centre of bicycle
   manufacture, with the industry being pioneered by Rover. By the early
   20th century bicycle manufacture had evolved into motor manufacture,
   and Coventry became a major centre of the British motor industry.

   Coventry suffered severe bomb damage during World War II, most
   notoriously from a massive German air raid (the " Coventry Blitz") on
   14 November 1940. This destroyed most of the historic city centre and
   Coventry's historic Cathedral. Aside from London and Plymouth, Coventry
   suffered more damage than any other British city during the Luftwaffe
   attacks, with huge firestorms devastating most of the city centre. The
   city was targeted due to its high concentration of armaments, munitions
   and engine plants which contributed greatly to the British war effort.
   Following the raids, the majority of Coventry's historic buildings
   could not be saved as they were in ruinous states or were deemed unsafe
   for any future use.

   In the postwar years Coventry was largely rebuilt under the general
   direction of the Gibson Plan, gaining a new pedestrianised shopping
   precinct (the first of its kind in Europe) and the much-celebrated new
   St Michael's Cathedral in 1962 (incorporating the world's largest
   tapestry).

   Coventry's motor industry boomed in during the 1950s and 1960s. But
   during the 1970s the British motor industry underwent decline and
   Coventry suffered badly as a result. By the early 1980s Coventry had
   one of the highest unemployment rates in the country. In recent years
   the city has recovered with newer industries locating there. Although
   the motor industry continues to decline.
   View of Coventry from Baginton
   Enlarge
   View of Coventry from Baginton

Suburbs

   Suburbs of Coventry

          Allesley, Ball Hill, Bell Green, Binley, Bishopsgate Green,
          Canley, Cannon Park, Cannon Hill, Chapelfields, Cheylesmore,
          Coundon, Earlsdon, Eastern Green, Edgwick, Ernesford Grange,
          Finham, Foleshill, Hillfields, Holbrooks, Keresley, Longford,
          Mount Nod, Radford, Spon End, Stoke, Stoke Heath, Stoke
          Aldermoor, Styvechale, Tile Hill, Walsgrave, Westwood Heath,
          Whitley, Whoberley, Willenhall, Wood End, Wyken.

Places of interest

   St. Michael's Cathedral is Coventry's best-known landmark and visitor
   attraction. The original 14th century cathedral was largely destroyed
   by German bombing during World War Two, leaving only the outer walls
   and spire. The new Coventry Cathedral was opened in 1962 next to the
   ruins of the old. It was designed by Basil Spence and contains the
   tapestry Christ in Glory by Graham Sutherland and the bronze statue St.
   Michael's Victory over the Devil by Jacob Epstein. Benjamin Britten's
   War Requiem, regarded by some as his masterpiece, was written for the
   opening of the new Cathedral.

   The spire of the ruined cathedral forms one of the Three Spires which
   have dominated the city skyline since the 14th century, the others
   being those of Christ Church (of which only the spire survives) and
   Holy Trinity Church (which is still in use).

   Another major visitor attraction in Coventry city centre is the
   free-to-enter Coventry Transport Museum, which has the largest
   collection of British-made road vehicles in the world. The most notable
   exhibits are the world speed record-breaking cars, Thrust2 and
   ThrustSSC. The museum received a major refurbishment in 2004 which
   included the creation of a striking new entrance as part of the city's
   Phoenix Initiative project. The revamp saw the museum exceed its
   projected five-year visitor numbers within the first year alone, and it
   was a finalist for the 2005 Gulbenkian Prize.

   The Herbert Art Gallery and Museum is a major art gallery in the city
   centre. About 4 miles from the city centre and just outside Coventry in
   Baginton is the Lunt Fort, a reconstructed Roman fort. The Midland Air
   Museum is situated just outside Baginton in Warwickshire on land
   adjacent to Coventry Airport.

   The city's main Police Station in Little Park Street also hosts a
   museum of Coventry's Police Force. The museum, based underground, is
   split into two sections - one representing the history of the city's
   Police Force, and the other compiling some of the more unusual,
   interesting and grisly cases from the force's history. The museum is
   funded from charity donations - viewings can be made by appointment.

   Major improvements continue to regenerate the city centre. The Phoenix
   Initiative reached the final shortlist for the 2004 RIBA Stirling Prize
   and has now won a total of 16 separate awards. Further major
   developments are potentially afoot, particularly the Swanswell Project,
   which is intended to deepen Swanswell Pool and link it to Coventry
   Canal Basin, coupled with the creation of an urban marina and a wide
   Parisian-style boulevard. A possible second phase of the Phoenix
   Initiative is also in the offing, although both of these plans are
   still on the drawing-board.

   Coventry City Football Club have also recently started playing at their
   new home, The Ricoh Arena, a 32,000 capacity stadium in the Foleshill
   area of the city. The old stadium has now been demolished to make way
   for new housing.
   The Council House, Coventry
   Enlarge
   The Council House, Coventry
   Two of Coventry's "three spires".
   Enlarge
   Two of Coventry's "three spires".
   The "Whittle Arch" outside the Transport Museum, built to commemorate
   Frank Whittle.
   Enlarge
   The "Whittle Arch" outside the Transport Museum, built to commemorate
   Frank Whittle.
   The ruins of the old Cathedral
   Enlarge
   The ruins of the old Cathedral

Education

   Coventry has two universities; Coventry University situated on a modern
   city centre campus and the University of Warwick, which lies 5 km (3
   miles) to the south of the city centre on the border with Warwickshire.
   The University of Warwick is one of only five universities never to
   have been rated outside the top ten in terms of teaching excellence and
   research.

   Many of the secondary schools in and around Coventry are specialist
   colleges, such as Finham Park School, which is a Mathematics and IT
   college and now a teacher training school and The Coventry Blue Coat
   Church of England School which has recently become a specialist college
   of Music, one of only a few in the country. Bishop Ullathorne RC School
   became a specialist college in Humanities in 2006. Woodlands School in
   Coventry is now also a sports college, which has a newly built sport
   centre. On the North of the City you can find Exhall Grange School and
   Science College. Ernesford Grange School, in the South East, is a
   specialist science college. Pattison College, a private school opened
   in 1949, specialises in the performing arts.

   The Coventry School Foundation is comprised of independent schools King
   Henry VIII and Bablake together with Coventry Preparatory School.

   The Woodlands School, which is an all boys' school, and Tile Hill Wood
   Girls School are the only single-sex schools left in Coventry. However,
   their sixth forms have been joined to form the "West Coventry 6th
   Form", whose lessons take place in mixed classes on both sites.

Arts and culture

     * During the early 19th century Coventry was well known to the famous
       author George Eliot who was born near Nuneaton. The city was the
       model for her famous novel Middlemarch (1871).

     * The Coventry Carol is named after the city of Coventry. It was a
       carol performed in the play The Pageant of The Shearman and
       Tailors, written in the 15th century as one of the Coventry Cycle
       Mystery Plays. These plays depicted the nativity story, the lyrics
       of the Coventry Carol referring to the Annuciation to the Massacre
       of the Innocents, which was the basis of the Pageant of the
       Shearmen and Tailors. These plays were traditionally performed on
       the steps of the (old) Cathedral, and the plays are believed to
       have been performed for both Richard III in 1484 and Henry VII in
       1584.

     * During the late- 1970s and early- 1980s, Coventry was the centre of
       the Two Tone musical phenomenon, with bands such as The Specials
       and The Selecter coming from the city, spawning several major hit
       singles and albums. The Specials achieved three UK #1 hit singles
       between 1979 - 1981, namely "Too Much Too Young", "Rat Race" and
       "Ghost Town". Notable Selecter singles included "On My Radio" and
       "Three Minute Hero".
     * Today Coventry is recognised for its range of music events
       including one of the UK's foremost international jazz programmes,
       The Coventry Jazz Festival, and the award-winning Godiva Festival.
       On the Saturday of the Godiva Festival, a carnival parade also
       starts in the city centre and makes its way to the War Memorial
       Park where the festival is held.
     * In the film The Italian Job, the famous scene of Mini Coopers being
       driven at speed through Rome's catacombs was actually filmed in
       Coventry, using what were then the country's biggest sewer pipes.
       More recently various locations in Coventry have been used in the
       BAFTA nominated film "Bouncer" starring Ray Winstone, All In The
       Game, also starring Ray Winstone (Ricoh Arena), the medical TV
       series Angels (Walsgrave Hospital), the BBC sitcom Keeping Up
       Appearances (Stoke Aldermoor and Binley Woods districts) and in
       August 2006 scenes from the forthcoming series of Doctor Who were
       filmed in the grounds of Bonds Hospital.

Venues

   Theatre, art and music venues in Coventry include:
     * The Warwick Arts Centre: situated at the University of Warwick,
       Warwick Arts Centre comprises an art gallery, a theatre, a concert
       hall and a cinema. It is the second largest arts centre in the UK,
       after London's Barbican.

     * The Belgrade Theatre: one of the largest producing theatres in
       Britain, the 866 seat Belgrade was the first civic theatre to be
       opened in the UK following World War II.

     * Also currently being built is the Belgrade Plaza.

     * The Ricoh Arena : located 5.5 km (3.5 miles) north of the city
       centre, the 32,000 capacity Coventry City FC stadium is also used
       to hold major rock concerts for some of the world's biggest acts,
       including the Red Hot Chili Peppers and Bon Jovi. The adjacent
       Ricoh Exhibition Hall is a 6,000-seater events venue for hosting a
       multitude of other acts.

     * The War Memorial Park, which holds various festivals including the
       Godiva Festival, every year.

     * The Butts Park Arena, home of Coventry Rugby Football Club, holds
       music concerts occasionally.

Sport

   Sporting teams include Coventry City (Football), Coventry Rugby Club (
   Rugby Union), Coventry Blaze ( Ice Hockey), Coventry Bears ( Rugby
   League), Coventry Godiva Harriers (Athletics), Coventry Bees (
   Speedway), Coventry Crusaders (Basketball) and Coventry Cassidy Jets
   (American Football).

   In football, Coventry City won the FA Cup on 16 May 1987 in what is
   considered to be one of the best finals in the competition's history.

   In 2003, Coventry Blaze won the British National League and Playoffs.

   2005 was a good year for sport in Coventry. Not only did it become the
   first city in the UK to host the International Children's Games, and ,
   but 3 of the city sports team won significant honours. The Blaze won
   the treble consisting of Elite League, playoff and Challenge Cup, the
   Jets won the BAFL Division 2 championship and were undefeated all
   season, while the Bees won the Elite League playoffs. Coventry City FC
   finished a respectable 8th place (of 24) in the Football Championship
   for the 2005-2006 season, narrowly missing out on the Premiership
   playoff places.

Famous Coventrians

   Statue of Lady Godiva
   Enlarge
   Statue of Lady Godiva
   Statue commemorating James Starley
   Enlarge
   Statue commemorating James Starley

   Arguably Coventry's most famous resident was Lady Godiva, who according
   to legend, rode through the city naked on horseback, in protest at high
   taxes being waged on the cityfolk by her husband Leofric, Earl of
   Mercia. According to the legend, the residents of the city were asked
   to look away as she rode, but one man didn't and was allegedly struck
   blind, he became known as Peeping Tom thus originating the term. There
   is a statue of her in the city centre, which used to stand out in the
   open but is now somewhat unthoughtfully situated under the
   much-maligned Cathedral Lanes shopping centre canopy (see right). There
   is also a bust of Peeping Tom looking out from a bridge that crosses
   one branch of the shopping precinct.

   Other famous people from Coventry include Frank Whittle the inventor of
   the jet engine, the poet and novelist Philip Larkin, the actors Nigel
   Hawthorne and Clive Owen, the record producer Pete Waterman, the
   athlete and former 5,000m world-record holder David Moorcroft, Ian
   Bell, the Ashes winning cricketer and the 2003 Rugby Union World Cup
   winners Neil Back and Danny Grewcock. Jerry Dammers writer of the song
   " Free Nelson Mandela" and the driving-force behind The Specials, Terry
   Hall, lead singer with The Specials, Fun Boy Three and The Colourfield
   (and a celebrated solo artist in his own right), George Coles who
   starred in The Caucasian Chalk Circle, Hazel O'Connor, a rock singer of
   the 1980s-1990s, Paul King (lead singer of the mid-80s band King),
   Clint Mansell (lead singer of the 1990s indie band Pop Will Eat
   Itself), Julianne Regan (lead singer of the 80's-90s band All About
   Eve), Jason John (aka Jason Herbert) of the 1990s boy band Big Fun, Lee
   Dorrian, (a founder member of Napalm Death and later Cathedral - both
   well known bands in the grindcore / death metal and doom metal scenes
   respectively), and Bolt Thrower, (another band well known in the death
   metal scene).

   In the 19th century the inventor James Starley and his nephew J.K.
   Starley lived in the city, and were both instrumental in the
   development of the bicycle, and for starting the British bicycle
   industry. J.K Starley was also responsible for founding Rover. A statue
   near Warwick Row commemorates James Starley.

   The late politician Mo Mowlam who was famous for being a Northern
   Ireland secretary grew up in Coventry. Joseph Paxton, the designer of
   the Crystal Palace, was a Member of Parliament for the city from 1854
   to 1865.

   Two Tone ska bands The Specials and The Selecter are both from Coventry
   – one of The Specials' best known hits, Ghost Town is often thought to
   written about the city. Other bands from the city which found success
   include The Primitives, Fun Boy Three, The Colourfield, King and The
   Flys.

   2004 Olympics 4x100m relay gold medallist Marlon Devonish is also from
   Coventry, and in November of the same year he was awarded with an MBE.
   He also appeared at the opening ceremony of the International
   Children's Games held in 2005.

   Sky Sports presenter Richard Keys, who has presented more than 1,000
   football matches making him British television's most presented
   anchorman.

   West End theatre producer and entertainment entrepreneur Dominic
   Madden, responsible for the re-development of the Elephant and Castle
   theatre into The Coronet music venue.

   The city's list of more infamous individuals includes:
     * Porn star Debee Ashby, who achieved notoriety during 1983 when she
       appeared nude with her mother in an adult magazine.
     * Nazi Colin Jordan who led the National Socialist Movement during
       the 1960s.

Economy

   Coventry's skyline
   Enlarge
   Coventry's skyline

   This is a chart of trend of regional gross value added of Coventry at
   current basic prices published (pp.240-253) by Office for National
   Statistics with figures in millions of British Pounds Sterling.
   Year Regional Gross Value Added Agriculture Industry Services
   1995 3,407                      3           1,530    1,874
   2000 4,590                      3           1,873    2,714
   2003 5,103                      2           1,529    3,572
    1. ^ Components may not sum to totals due to rounding
    2. ^ includes hunting and forestry
    3. ^ includes energy and construction
    4. ^ includes financial intermediation services indirectly measured

   Coventry has long been a centre of motor and cycle manufacturing,
   dating back from 1896, the car and cycle industry has been a strong
   centre point for this town. Starting out with some less familiar names
   such as Coventry Motette, Great Horseless Carriage Co, Swift and more
   familiar names like Humber, Riley and Daimler and the Triumph
   motorcycle having its origins in 1902 in a Coventry factory. Although
   the motor industry has declined, the Jaguar company has its
   headquarters in the city, and a large Peugeot car factory is located in
   Ryton just outside the city, although this is set to close in 2007. The
   famous London black cab taxis are also produced in Coventry by LTI.

   Coventry's main industries include: cars, electronic equipment, machine
   tools, agricultural machinery, man-made fibres, aerospace components
   and telecommunications equipment. In recent years the city has moved
   away from manufacturing industries towards business services, finance,
   research, design and development, creative industries as well as
   logistics and leisure.

Transport

   Coventry Canal viewed from Foleshill Rd
   Enlarge
   Coventry Canal viewed from Foleshill Rd

   Coventry is near the M6, M69 and M40 motorways. It is also served by
   the A45 and A46 roads.

   For rail, Coventry railway station is served by the West Coast Main
   Line, and has regular rail services between London and Birmingham (and
   stations beyond). It is also served by railway lines to Nuneaton via
   Bedworth. There is a line linking it to Leamington Spa and onwards to
   the south coast. Coventry also has 2 Suburban Rail stations in Canley
   and in Tile Hill.

   Bus services in Coventry are operated by Travel West Midlands (under
   the name Travel Coventry), Stagecoach and Mike de Courcey Travel.

   The nearest major airports are Birmingham International Airport, some
   17 km (11 miles) to the west of the city and Coventry Airport in
   Baginton, from which Thomsonfly operates commercial scheduled flights
   to more than 20 European destinations, located 8 km (5 miles) south of
   the city centre.

   The Coventry Canal terminates near the city centre at Coventry Canal
   Basin and is navigable for 61 km (38 miles) to Fradley Junction in
   Staffordshire.

Waste management

   Incineration plant, Coventry
   Enlarge
   Incineration plant, Coventry

   Coventry has a large incineration plant which burns rubbish from both
   Coventry and Solihull and in the process produces electricity for the
   National Grid and some hot water that is used locally. In addition some
   rubbish is landfilled.

   Coventry City Council is assisting recycling, in line with national
   trends:
     * many areas of Coventry have kerb-side paper and garden-green
       rubbish collection
     * a wide range of rubbish materials can be taken by car to the
       recycling depot, which is adjacent to the incineration unit
     * there are many recycling points throughout the City for paper,
       glass bottles and metal cans

Politics

   Traditionally a part of Warwickshire (although it was a county in its
   own right for 400 years), Coventry became an independent county borough
   in 1889. It later became a metropolitan district of the West Midlands
   county under the Local Government Act (1974), even though it was
   entirely separate to the Birmingham conurbation area (this is why
   Coventry appears to unnaturally "jut out" into Warwickshire on
   political maps of the UK). In 1986 the West Midlands County Council was
   abolished and Coventry became administered as an effective unitary
   authority in its own right.

   Coventry is still strongly associated with its traditional county,
   Warwickshire. This may be because of its geographical location, forming
   a large protrusion into the county.

   Coventry is administered by Coventry City Council. The city is divided
   up into 18 Wards each with three councillors. Coventry has long been
   considered a stronghold or source of safe seats for the Labour Party.
   The city council was for years described as a "one party state", but is
   currently Conservative-controlled since the local elections on 4 May
   2006, although the Conservative group held the administration on the
   casting vote of the Lord Mayor since June 2004. A notable politician
   serving with Coventry City Council is former Militant Labour MP Dave
   Nellist who now represents the Socialist Party (England and Wales).

   The leader of the controlling Conservative group is Ken Taylor who
   holds the post of Leader of the Council.

   The leader of the opposition Labour group is John Mutton.

   Certain local services are provided by West Midlands wide agencies
   including the West Midlands Police, the West Midlands Fire Service and
   the West Midlands Passenger Transport Executive (Centro) which is
   responsible for public transport.

   In 2006 Coventry and Warwickshire Ambulance Service was merged with the
   West Midlands Ambulance Service. The Warwickshire and Northamptonshire
   Air Ambulance service is based in Coventry, at Baginton Airport.

   Coventry is represented in Parliament by three MPs all of whom are
   Labour. These are:
     * Bob Ainsworth - ( Coventry North East)
     * Jim Cunningham - ( Coventry South)
     * Geoffrey Robinson - ( Coventry North West)

   At the Annual Meeting of the City Council on Thursday, 18 May 2006,
   Councillor Shabbir Ahmed and Mrs Rakizen-ul-Nisa were inaugurated as
   the Lord Mayor and Lady Mayoress of Coventry for 2006 / 2007. The Lord
   Mayor was born in the village of Tehsil Kahuta in the Rawalpindi
   District of Pakistan. Upon arriving in the UK in 1966, he settled
   initially in Burton-on-Trent until his training in joinery was
   completed. Later he followed his family to Coventry and completed a
   Management Course at the University of Warwick. Councillor Ahmed is the
   city's first Muslim Lord Mayor, and the first Conservative Muslim Lord
   Mayor in Britain.

   Ken Taylor (Conservative) has served as Leader of Coventry City Council
   since 2004.

   The Bishop of Coventry since 1998 has been the Rt Revd Colin Bennetts.

Closest cities, towns and villages

Cities

     * Birmingham (30 km / 19 miles)
     * Leicester (38 km / 24 miles)
     * Lichfield (48 km / 30 miles)
     * Wolverhampton (59 km / 37 miles)

Towns

     * Bedworth (10 km / 6 miles)
     * Kenilworth (10 km / 6 miles)
     * Nuneaton (13 km / 8 miles)
     * Leamington Spa (16 km / 10 miles)
     * Warwick (19 km / 12 miles)
     * Rugby (19 km / 12 miles)
     * Hinckley (19 km / 12 miles)
     * Atherstone (20 km / 12.5 miles)
     * Solihull (21 km / 13 miles)
     * Southam (21 km / 13 miles)
     * Stratford-upon-Avon (32 km / 20 miles)
     * Tamworth (32 km / 20 miles)

Villages

     * Baginton, about 4 miles south
     * Neal's Green/ Ash Green - about 4 miles north
     * Burton Green, about 4 miles west
     * Binley Woods, about 5 miles southeast
     * Stoneleigh, 5 miles south
     * Ryton-on-Dunsmore, about 5.5 miles southeast
     * Hawkesbury, about 5.5 miles north
     * Ansty, about 6 miles north east
     * Corley, about 6 miles northwest
     * Bulkington, about 6 miles northeast
     * Brandon, about 6 miles southeast
     * Shilton, about 7 miles northheast
     * Berkswell, about 7 miles west
     * Balsall Common, about 7 miles west
     * Fillongley, about 7 miles north
     * Wolston, about 7 miles southeast
     * Brinklow, about 7 miles east
     * Bubbenhall, about 7 miles southeast
     * Meridon, about 8 miles west
     * Bramcote, about 8 miles northeast
     * Stretton-on-Dunsmore, about 10 miles southeast
     * Wolvey, about 10 miles northeast

   Coventry is approximately latitudinal with the towns of Aberystwyth
   (west Wales), Kettering (Northamptonshire), Ely (Cambridgeshire) and
   Diss (Norfolk).

Postcodes

   Postcodes covering the city of Coventry and its immediate suburbs are
   CV1 to CV6 inclusive. CV7 to CV37 postcodes cover almost the entirety
   of Warwickshire outside of Coventry, aside from the areas around the
   towns of Coleshill and Alcester in western Warwickshire.

Twin cities

   Coventry was the first ever city to "twin" with another city and hence
   began the now common worldwide practice of twinning. It started after
   World War II when Coventry twinned with Dresden as an act of peace and
   reconciliation, both cities having been heavily bombed during the war.
   Each twin city country is represented in a specific ward of the city
   and in each ward has a peace garden dedicated to that twin city.

   Coventry is now twinned with 26 places across the world:
   Flag City Country Year Twinned Ward
   Australia Parkes, New South Wales Australia 1956
   Austria Graz Austria 1957 Binley & Willenhall
   Bosnia and Herzegovina Sarajevo Bosnia Herzegovina 1957
   Canada Cornwall, Ontario Canada 1972
   Granby, Quebec 1963
   Windsor, Ontario 1963
   People's Republic of China Jinan China 1983
   Czech Republic Lidice Czech Republic 1947
   Ostrava 1959
   France Caen France 1957
   Saint-Etienne 1955
   Germany Dresden Germany 1959 Lower Stoke
   Kiel 1947
   Hungary Dunaujvaros Hungary 1962
   Kecskemet 1962
   Italy Bologna Italy 1960
   Jamaica Kingston Jamaica 1962
   Netherlands Arnhem Netherlands 1958
   Poland Warsaw Poland 1957
   Republic of Ireland Cork Republic of Ireland 1958
   Romania Galaţi Romania 1962
   Russia Volgograd Russia 1944
   Serbia Belgrade Serbia 1957
   United States Coventry, Connecticut USA 1962
   Coventry, New York 1972
   Coventry, Rhode Island 1971

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coventry"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
