   #copyright

Craters of the Moon National Monument and Preserve

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: North American Geography


   This is a featured article. Click here for more information.
    Craters of the Moon National Monument and Preserve
   IUCN Category III ( Natural Monument)
   Craters of the Moon National Monument and Preserve
   Location:       Idaho, USA
   Nearest city:   Arco, Idaho
   Coordinates:    43°25′0″N, 113°31′0″W
   Area:           714,727 acres (2,892.41 km²)
   Established:    Monument: May 2, 1924
                   Preserve: August 21, 2002
   Visitation:     183,111 (in 2004)
   Governing body: National Park Service and BLM

   Craters of the Moon National Monument and Preserve is a national
   monument and national preserve located in the Snake River Plain in
   central Idaho near Arco, Idaho. The features in this protected area are
   volcanic and represent one of the best preserved flood basalt areas in
   the continental United States.

   The Monument was established on May 2, 1924. In November 2000, a
   Presidential proclamation greatly expanded the Monument area. The
   National Park Service portions of the expanded Monument were designated
   as Craters of the Moon National Preserve in August 2002. The area is
   managed cooperatively by the National Park Service and the Bureau of
   Land Management (BLM).

   The Monument and Preserve encompass three major lava fields and about
   400 mi² (1,000 km²) of sagebrush steppe grasslands to cover a total
   area of 1117 mi² (2,892 km²). All three lava fields lie along the Great
   Rift of Idaho, with some of the best examples of open rift cracks in
   the world, including the deepest known on Earth) at 800 feet (240 m).
   There are excellent examples of almost every variety of basaltic lava
   as well as tree molds (cavities left by lava-incinerated trees), lava
   tubes (a type of cave), and many other volcanic features.

Geography and geologic setting

   Craters of the Moon within Idaho
   Enlarge
   Craters of the Moon within Idaho

   The Craters of the Moon Lava Field spreads across 618 square miles
   (1,601 km²) and is the largest mostly Holocene-aged basaltic lava field
   in the lower 48 U.S. states. The Monument and Preserve contain more
   than 25 volcanic cones including outstanding examples of spatter cones.
   Sixty distinct lava flows form the Craters of the Moon Lava Field
   ranging in age from 15,000 to just 2,000 years old. The Kings Bowl and
   Wapi lava fields, both about 2,200 years old, are part of the National
   Preserve.

   Craters of the Moon Lava Field reaches southeastward from the Pioneer
   Mountains. This lava field is the largest of several large and recent
   beds of lava that erupted from the 53 mile (85 km) long, south-east to
   north-west trending, Great Rift volcanic zone; a line of weakness in
   the Earth's crust created by Basin and Range rifting. Together with
   fields from other fissures they make up the Lava Beds of Idaho, which
   in turn are located within the much larger Snake River Plain volcanic
   province (the Great Rift almost extends across the entire Snake River
   Plain).

   The rugged landscape remains remote and undeveloped with only one paved
   road across the northern end. Located in south-central Idaho midway
   between Boise and Yellowstone National Park, the monument includes
   53,545 acres (216.69 km²) in the Developed Area (the extent of the
   national monument before the preserve was added) and the visitor centre
   is 5900 feet (1800 m) above sea level. Combined U.S. Highway 20- 26- 93
   cuts through the north-western part of the monument and provides access
   to it.
   Craters of the Moon from U.S. 20-26-93
   Enlarge
   Craters of the Moon from U.S. 20-26-93

   Total average precipitation in the Craters of the Moon area is between
   15 to 20 inches (400 to 500 mm) per year and most of that is lost in
   cracks in the basalt, only to emerge later in springs and seeps in the
   walls of the Snake River Canyon. Older lava fields on the plain have
   been invaded by drought-resistant plants such as sagebrush while
   younger fields, such as Craters of the Moon, only have a seasonal and
   very sparse cover of vegetation. In fact from a distance this cover
   disappears almost entirely, giving an impression of utter black
   desolation. Repeated lava flows over the last 15,000 years has raised
   the land surface enough to expose it to the prevailing southwesterly
   winds, which help to keep the area dry. Together these conditions make
   life on the lava field difficult.

History

Pre to early history

   Paleo- Native Americans were in the area about 12,000 years ago but did
   not leave much archaeological evidence. Northern Shoshone created
   trails through the Craters of the Moon Lava Field during their Summer
   migrations from the Snake River to the Camas Praire, west of the lava
   field. Stone windbreaks at Indian Tunnel were used to protect campsites
   from the dry summer wind and are among the most obvious signs of their
   temporary presence (no evidence exists for permanent habitation by any
   Native American group). A hunting and gathering culture, the Northern
   Shoshone pursued Wapiti, bears, American Bison, cougars, and Bighorn
   Sheep – all large game who no longer range the area. The most recent
   eruptions ended about 2,100 years ago and were likely witnessed by the
   Shoshone people. Shoshone legend speaks of a serpent on a mountain who,
   angered by lightning, coiled around and squeezed the mountain until
   liquid rock flowed, fire shot from cracks, and the mountain exploded.

   Caucasian fur trappers avoided the lava field area below the Pioneer
   Mountains by following Indian trails. Early Caucasian pioneers who
   sought gold, affordable farm land to raise crops, or cheap ranch land
   to range cattle also avoided the lava fields and considered them
   useless. It seems that nobody stayed for long.

Goodale's Cutoff

   Big Southern Butte was used as a landmark by pioneers.
   Enlarge
   Big Southern Butte was used as a landmark by pioneers.

   Pioneers traveling in wagon trains on the Oregon Trail in the 1850s and
   1860s later used Indian trails that skirted the lava flows in what
   today is the northern part of the monument as part of an alternate
   route called Goodale's Cutoff. The cutoff was created to reduce the
   possibility of ambush by Shoshone warriors along the Snake River such
   as the one that occurred at Massacre Rocks (which today is memorialized
   in Idaho's Massacre Rocks State Park).

   After gold was discovered in the Salmon River area of Idaho a group of
   emigrants persuaded an Illinois-born trapper and trader named Tim
   Goodale to lead them through the cutoff. A large wagon train left in
   July 1862 and met up with more wagons at Craters of the Moon Lava
   Field. Numbering 795 men and 300 women and children, the unusually
   large group was relatively unmolested during its journey and named the
   cutoff for their guide. Improvements to the cutoff such as adding a
   ferry to cross the Snake River made it into a popular alternate route
   of the Oregon Trail.

Exploration and early study

   In 1879, two Arco cattlemen named Arthur Ferris and J.W. Powell became
   the first known people to explore the lava fields. They were
   investigating its possible use for grazing and watering cattle but
   found the area to be unsuitable and left.

   United States Army Captain and western explorer B.L.E. Bonneville
   visited the lava fields and other places in the West in the 19th
   century and wrote about his experiences in his diaries. Washington
   Irving later used Bonneville's diaries to write the Adventures of
   Captain Bonneville, saying this unnamed lava field is a place "where
   nothing meets the eye but a desolate and awful waste, where no grass
   grows nor water runs, and where nothing is to be seen but lava."

   In 1901 and 1903, Israel Russell became the first geologist to study
   this area while surveying it for the United States Geological Survey
   (USGS). In 1910, geologist Samuel Paisley continued Russell's work and
   later became the monument's first custodian. Others followed and in
   time much of the mystery surrounding this and the other Lava Beds of
   Idaho was lifted.

   The few Caucasians who visited the area in the 19th century created
   local legends that it looked like the surface of the Moon. Geologists
   Harold T. Sterns coined the name "Craters of the Moon" in 1923 while
   trying to convince the National Park Service to recommend protection of
   the area in a national monument.

Limbert's expedition

   The black soil on Inferno Cone exhibits the properties Limbert wrote
   about.
   Enlarge
   The black soil on Inferno Cone exhibits the properties Limbert wrote
   about.

   Robert Limbert, a sometime taxidermist, tanner and furrier from Boise,
   Idaho, explored the area, which he described as "practically unknown
   and unexplored, " in the 1920s after hearing stories from fur trappers
   about "strange things they had seen while ranging the region."

   Limbert wrote: "I had made two trips into the northern end, covering
   practically the same region as that traversed by a Geological Survey
   party in 1901. My first was a hiking and camping trip with Ad Santel
   (the wrestler), Dr. Dresser, and Albert Jones; the second was with Wes
   Watson and Era Martin (ranchers living about four miles [6 km] from the
   northern edge). The peculiar features seen on those trips led me to
   take a third across the region in the hope that even more interesting
   phenomena might be encountered."

   Limbert set out on his third and most ambitious foray to the area in
   1924, this time with W.C. Cole and an Airedale Terrier to accompany
   him. Starting from Minidoka, Idaho, they explored what is now the
   monument area from south to north passing Two Point Butte, Echo Crater,
   Big Craters, North Crater Flow, and out of the lava field through the
   Yellowstone Park and Lincoln Highway (now known as the Old Arco-Carey
   Road). Taking the dog along was a mistake, Limbert wrote, "for after
   three days' travel his feet were worn and bleeding."

   A series of newspaper and magazine articles authored by Limbert were
   later published about this and previous treks, increasing public
   awareness of the area. The most famous of these was an article that
   appeared in a 1924 issue of National Geographic where he called the
   area "Craters of the Moon," helping to solidify the use of that name.
   In the article he had this to say about the cobalt blue of the Blue
   Dragon Flows:

          "It is the play of light at sunset across this lava that charms
          the spectator. It becomes a twisted, wavy sea. In the moonlight
          its glazed surface has a silvery sheen. With changing conditions
          of light and air, it varies also, even while one stands and
          watches. It is a place of colour and silence..."

Protection and later history

   Management sections. Together the NPS Developed Area and NPS Wilderness
   Area made up the 1970 to 2000 extent of the Monument.
   Enlarge
   Management sections. Together the NPS Developed Area and NPS Wilderness
   Area made up the 1970 to 2000 extent of the Monument.

   In large part due to Limbert's work, Craters of the Moon National
   Monument was proclaimed on May 2, 1924 by U.S. President Calvin
   Coolidge to "preserve the unusual and weird volcanic formations." The
   Craters Inn and several cabins were built in 1927 for convenience of
   visitors. The Mission 66 Program initiated construction of today's road
   system, visitor centre, shop, campround and comfort station in 1956 and
   in 1959 the Craters of the Moon Natural History Association was formed
   to assist the monument in educational activities. The addition of an
   island of vegetation completely surrounded by lava known as Carey
   Kipuka ( air photo) increased the size of the monument by 5360 acres
   (22 km²) in 1962.

   Since then the monument has been enlarged and on October 23, 1970 the
   United States Congress set aside a large part of it, 43,243 acres
   (175.00 km²) as Craters of the Moon National Wilderness, protecting
   that part under the National Wilderness Preservation System.

   Much later NASA visited the real Moon through the Apollo program and
   found that its surface does not closely resemble this part of Idaho.
   NASA astronauts discovered that real Moon craters were almost all
   created by impacting meteorites while their namesakes on Earth were
   created by volcanic eruptions. One thing is very similar between the
   two places; they are both desolate. Apollo astronauts, as a matter of
   fact, performed part of their training at Craters of the Moon Lava
   Field. There they learned how to look for and collect good rock
   specimens in an unfamiliar and harsh environment.

   For many years, geologists, biologists and environmentalists have
   advocated for expansion of the monument and its transformation into a
   national park. Part of that goal was reached in 2000 when the monument
   was expanded 13-fold from 53,545 acres (216.69 km²) to its current size
   in order to encompass the entire Great Rift zone and its three lava
   fields. The entire addition is called the Backcountry Area while the
   two older parts are called the Developed Area and Wilderness Area.
   Opposition by cattle interests and hunters to a simple expansion plan
   led to a compromise of having the addition be a national preserve
   (which allows uses not ordinarily permitted in national parks and
   monuments in the U.S.) Craters of the Moon National Monument and
   Preserve is co-managed by the National Park Service and the Bureau of
   Land Management.

Geology

   LANDSAT satellite photo showing the entire Great Rift volcanic zone and
   its three lava fields.
   Enlarge
   LANDSAT satellite photo showing the entire Great Rift volcanic zone and
   its three lava fields.

   Ample evidence has prompted geologists to theorize that the Snake River
   Plain is a volcanic province that was created by a series of
   cataclysmic caldera-forming eruptions which started about 15 million
   years ago (see supervolcano). A migrating hotspot thought to now exist
   under Yellowstone National Park has been implicated (see Yellowstone
   Caldera). This hot spot was under the Craters of the Moon area some 10
   to 11 million years ago (meaning Craters of the Moon once looked like
   Yellowstone does today and Yellowstone will one day look much like
   Craters of the Moon does now) but 'moved' as the North American Plate
   migrated northwestward (actually the hot spot stays in the same place
   while the overlying continent of North America moves). Pressure from
   the hot spot heaves the land surface up, creating fault-block
   mountains. After the hot spot passes the pressure is released and the
   land subsides (this is in addition to caldera-created subsidence).

   Leftover heat from this hot spot was later liberated by Basin and Range
   associated rifting and created the many overlapping lava flows that
   make up the Lava Beds of Idaho. The largest rift zone is the
   appropriately named Great Rift and it is from this fissure system that
   Craters of the Moon, Kings Bowl, and Wapi lava fields were created.

   In spite of its fresh appearance, and according to Mel Kuntz and other
   USGS geologists, the oldest flows in the Craters of the Moon Lava Field
   are 15,000 years old and the youngest erupted about 2000 years ago.
   Nevertheless the volcanic fissures at Craters of the Moon are
   considered to be dormant, not extinct and are expected to erupt
   sometime during the next thousand years. There are eight major eruptive
   periods recognized in the Craters of the Moon Lava Field. Each period
   lasted about 1000 years or less and were separated by relatively quiet
   periods that lasted between a 500 to as long as 3000 years. Individual
   lava flows were up to 30 miles (50 km) long (the Blue Dragon Flow is
   the longest).
   Kings Bowl and Great Rift from air. King's Bowl is a phreatic explosion
   pit 280 feet (85 m) long, 100 feet (30 m) wide, and 100 feet (30 m)
   deep, caused by lava coming in contact with groundwater producing a
   steam explosion 2,200 years ago. (NPS photo)
   Enlarge
   Kings Bowl and Great Rift from air. King's Bowl is a phreatic explosion
   pit 280 feet (85 m) long, 100 feet (30 m) wide, and 100 feet (30 m)
   deep, caused by lava coming in contact with groundwater producing a
   steam explosion 2,200 years ago. (NPS photo)

   Kings Bowl Lava Field erupted during a single fissure eruption on the
   southern part of the Great Rift about 2,250 years ago. This eruption
   probably lasted only a few hours to a few days. The field preserves
   explosion pits, lava lakes, squeeze-ups, basalt mounds, and an ash
   blanket. Wapi Lava Field probably formed from a fissure eruption
   simultaneously with the eruption of the Kings Bowl field. With more
   prolonged activity over a period of months to a few years, the Wapi
   field formed a low shield volcano. The Bear Trap lava tube, located
   between the Craters of the Moon and the Wapi lava fields, is a cave
   system more than 15 miles (25 km) long. The lava tube is remarkable for
   its length and for the number of well preserved lava-cave features,
   such as lava stalactites and curbs, the latter marking high stands of
   the flowing lava forever frozen on the lava tube walls. The lava tubes
   and pit craters of the monument are known for their unusual
   preservation of winter ice and snow into the hot summer months, due to
   shielding from the sun and the insulating properties of the basalt.
   Cinder crags from North Crater on the North Crater Flow
   Enlarge
   Cinder crags from North Crater on the North Crater Flow

   A typical eruption along the Great Rift and similar basaltic rift
   systems in the world starts with a curtain of very fluid lava shooting
   up along a segment of the rift. As the eruption continues pressure and
   heat decrease and the chemistry of the lava becomes slightly more
   silica rich. The curtain of lava responds by breaking apart into
   separate vents. Various types of volcanos may form at these vents;
   gas-rich pulverized lava creates cinder cones (such as Inferno Cone –
   stop 4) and pasty lava blobs form spatter cones (such as Spatter Cones
   – stop 5). Later stages of an eruption push lava streams out through
   the side or bottom of cinder cones (usually ending the life of the
   cinder cone; North Crater, Watchmen, and Sheep Trail Butte are notable
   exceptions). This will sometimes breach part of the cone and carry it
   away as large and craggy blocks of cinder (as seen at North Crater Flow
   – stop 2 – and Devils Orchard – stop 3). Solid crust forms over lava
   streams and lava tubes (a type of cave) are created when lava vacates
   its course (great examples can be seen at the Cave Area – stop 7).

   Geologists feared that a large earthquake that shook Borah Peak,
   Idaho's tallest mountain, in 1983 would restart volcanic activity at
   Craters of the Moon, though this proved not to be the case. Geologists
   predict that the area will experience its next eruption some time in
   the next 900 years with the most likely period in the next 100 years.

   NOTE: Eruptions were dated using paleomagnetic and radiocarbon methods,
   which together give dates that are considered accurate to within 100
   years. Both tests were conducted in 1980 by using charred vegetation
   directly below individual flows (for the radiocarbon test), and from
   rock core samples (for the paleomagnetic work).

Biology

   Golden-mantled Ground Squirrel at Devil's Orchard
   Enlarge
   Golden-mantled Ground Squirrel at Devil's Orchard

   Years of cataloging by biologists and park rangers have recorded 375
   species of plants, 2000 insects, 8 reptiles, 169 birds, 48 mammals, and
   even one amphibian (the Western Toad). Brown Bears once roamed this
   lava field but have long ago become locally extinct. Mule Deer,
   Bobcats, Great horned owls, Prairie Falcons, Golden-mantled Ground
   Squirrels are some examples. Traditional livestock grazing continues
   within the grass/shrublands administered by the BLM.

Conditions

   This scoria field shows typical conditions at Craters of the Moon.
   Enlarge
   This scoria field shows typical conditions at Craters of the Moon.

   All plants and animals that live in and around Craters of the Moon are
   under great environmental stress due to constant dry winds and heat
   absorbing black lavas that tend to quickly sap water from living
   things. Summer soil temperatures often exceed 150 °F (65 °C) and plant
   cover is generally less than 5% on cinder cones and about 15% over the
   entire monument. Adaptation is therefore the secret to survival in this
   semi-arid harsh climate.

   Water is usually only found deep inside holes at the bottom of blow-out
   craters. The black soil on and around cinder cones does not hold
   moisture for long, making it difficult for plants to establish
   themselves. Soil particles first develop from direct rock decomposition
   by lichens and typically collect in crevices in lava flows.
   Successively more complex plants then colonize the microhabitat created
   by the increasingly productive soil.

   The shaded north slopes of cinder cones provide more protection from
   direct sunlight and prevailing southwesterly winds and also have a more
   persistent snow cover (an important water source in early spring).
   These parts of cinder cones are therefore colonized by plants first.

Plants

   Monkeyflowers
   Enlarge
   Monkeyflowers

   Wildflowers add a bit of colour to the dark and barren landscape from
   early May to late September (most are gone by late August). Moisture
   from snowmelt along with some rainfall in late spring kick-starts the
   germination of annual plants, including wildflowers. Most of these
   plants complete their entire life cycle in the few months each year
   that moisture levels are good. The onset of summer decreases the number
   of wildflowers and by autumn only the tiny yellow flowers of sagebrush
   and rabbitbrush remain. Some wildflowers that grow in the area;
     * Arrow-leaved Balsamroot
     * Bitterroot
     * Blazing Star
     * Desert Parsley
     * Dwarf Monkeyflower
     * Paintbrush
     * Scorpionweed
     * Scabland Penstemon
     * Wild Onion

   When wildflowers are not in bloom, most of the vegetation is found in
   semi-hidden pockets and consists of pine trees, cedars, junipers, and
   sagebrush. Strategies used by plants to cope with the adverse
   conditions include;
     * Drought tolerance by physiological adaptations such as the ability
       to survive extreme dehydration or the ability to extract water from
       very dry soil. Sagebrush and Antelope Briterbrush are examples.
     * Drought avoidance by having small, hairy, or succulent leaves to
       minimize moisture loss or otherwise conserve water. Hairs on
       scorpionweed, the succulent parts of the Pricklypear Cactus, and
       the small leaves of the Wire Lettuce are all local examples.

   Syringa sp. in North Crater lava flow crack
   Enlarge
   Syringa sp. in North Crater lava flow crack
     * Drought escape by growing in small crevices or near persistent
       water supplies, or by staying dormant for about 95% of the year.
       Mosses and ferns in the area grow near constant water sources such
       as natural potholes and seeps from ice caves. Scabland Penstemon,
       Fernleaf Fleabane, and Gland Cinquefoil grow in shallow crevices.
       Syringa, Bush Rockspirea, Tansybush, and even Limber Pine grow in
       large crevices. While Dwarf Monkeyflowers carry out their entire
       life cycle during the short wet part of the year and survive in
       seed form the rest of the time.

   A common plant seen on the lava field is the Dwarf Buckweat ( photo), a
   4 inch (100 mm) tall flowering plant with a 3 foot (1 m) wide root
   system. The root system monopolizes soil moisture in its immediate
   area, resulting in individual plants that are evenly spaced.
   Consequently, many visitors have asked park rangers if the buckwheat
   were systematically planted.

   Gaps were sometimes left unmolested by lava but were nonetheless
   completely surrounded by it. These literal islands of habitat are
   called kipukas, a Hawaiian name used for older land surrounded by
   younger lava. Carey Kipuka is one such area in the southernmost part of
   the monument and is used as a benchmark to measure how plant cover has
   changed in less pristine parts of southern Idaho.

Mule Deer

   In May 1980 wildlife researcher Brad Griffith of the University of
   Idaho started a three year study to mark and count the Mule Deer in the
   monument. The National Park Service was concerned that the local herd
   might grow so large that it would damage its habitat. Griffith found
   that this group of Mule Deer has developed a totally unique drought
   evasion strategy for its species.

   The deer arrive in the southern part of the pre-2000 extent of the
   monument mid-April each year once winter snows have melted away enough
   to allow for foraging. He found that by late summer plants in the area
   have already matured and dried to the point that they can no longer
   provide enough moisture to sustain the deer. In late July after about
   12 days above 80 °F (27 °C) and warm nights above 50 °F (10 °C) the
   herd migrates 5 to 10 miles (8 to 16 km) north to the Pioneer Mountains
   to obtain water from free-flowing streams and shade themselves in aspen
   and Douglas-fir groves. Rain in late September prompts the herd to
   return to the monument to feed on bitterbrush until snow in November
   triggers them to migrate back to their winter range. This herd,
   therefore, has a dual summer range. It is also very productive with one
   of the highest fawn survival rates of any herd in the species.

   Afternoon winds usually die down in the evening, prompting behavioural
   modifications in the herd. The deer avoid the dry wind by being more
   active at night when the wind is not blowing. In 1991 there was a
   three-year average of 420 Mule Deer.

Recreational Activities

   Craters of the Moon Loop Drive map
   Enlarge
   Craters of the Moon Loop Drive map

   A series of fissure vents, cinder cones, spatter cones, rafted blocks,
   and overlapping lava flows are accessible from the 7 mile (11 km) long
   Loop Drive. Wildflowers, shrubs, trees, and wild animals can be seen by
   hiking on one of the many trails in the monument or by just pulling
   over into one of the turn-offs. More rugged hiking opportunities are
   available in the Craters of the Moon Wilderness Area and Backcountry
   Area the roadless southern and major part of the monument.

   Ranger-led walks are available in summer and cover different topics
   such as wildlife, flowers, plants, or geology. Self-guiding tours and
   displays are available year-round and are easily accessible from the
   Loop Drive.
    1. The Visitor Centre is located near the monument's only entrance.
       Various displays and publications along with a short film about the
       geology of the area help to orient visitors.
    2. A less than 1/4 mile (400 m) long paved trail at North Crater Flow
       ( photo) goes through the Blue Dragon Lava Flow, which formed about
       2200 years ago, making it one of the youngest lava flows on the
       Craters of the Moon Lava Field. This lava is named for the
       purplish-blue tint that tiny pieces of obsidian (volcanic glass) on
       its surface exhibit. Good examples of pahoehoe (roppy), aa
       (jagged), and some block lava are readily visible along with large
       rafted crater wall fragments. A steep 1/2 mile (800 m) long trail
       continues on to the North Crater overlook on top of the 440 foot
       (134 m) tall, 2300 year old cinder cone. The rafted crater wall
       fragments seen on the flow trail were once part of this cinder cone
       but were torn away when the volcano's lava-filled crater was
       breached. A 1.5 mile (2.4 km) long trail includes the 1/2 mile (800
       m) long overlook trail but continues on through the crater and to
       the Big Craters/Spatter Cones parking lot (see below).
    3. Devils Orchard ( photo) is a group of lava transported cinder cone
       fragments (also called monoliths or cinder crags) that stand in
       cinders. Like the blocks at stop 2 they were once part of the North
       Crater cinder cone but broke off during an eruption of lava. A 1/2
       mile (800 m) log paved loop trial through the formations and trees
       of the "orchard" is available. The interpretive displays on the
       trail emphasize human impacts to the area.

                Craters of the Moon National Monument from Inferno Cone
                Viewpoint

                Enlarge
                Craters of the Moon National Monument from Inferno Cone
                Viewpoint

    4. Inferno Cone Viewpoint is located on top of Inferno Cone cinder
       cone. A short but steep trail up the cinder cone leads to an
       overlook of the entire monument. From there the Spatter Cones can
       be seen just to the south along with a large part of the Great
       Rift. In the distance is the 800 foot (240 m) tall approximately
       6000 year old Big Cinder Butte, one of the world's largest, purely
       basaltic, cinder cones. Further away are the Pioneer Mountains
       (behind the Visitor Centre) and beyond the monument are the White
       Knob Mountains, the Lost River Range, and the Lemhi Range.
    5. Big Craters and Spatter Cones ( photo) sit directly along the local
       part of the Great Rift fissure. Spatter cones are created by
       accumulations of pasty gas-poor lava as they erupt from a vent. Big
       Craters is a cinder cone complex located less than 1/4 mile (400 m)
       up a steep foot trail.
    6. Tree Molds ( photo) is an area within the Craters of the Moon
       Wilderness where lava flows overran part of a forest. The trees
       were incinerated but as some of them burned they released enough
       water to cool the lava to form a cast. Some of these casts survived
       the eruption and mark the exact location and shape of the burning
       trees in the lava. Both holes and horizontal molds were left, some
       still showing shapes indicative of bark. The actual Tree Molds area
       is located a mile (1.6 km) from the Tree Molds parking lot and
       picnic area off a moderately difficult wilderness trail. This trail
       continues past the Tree Molds and 3 miles (5 km) further into the
       wilderness area before gradually disappearing near Echo Crater. A
       pull off on the spur road leading to the Tree Molds area presents
       the Lava Cascades, a frozen river of Blue Dragon Flow lava that
       temporarily pooled in the Big Sink.
    7. Cave Area is the final stop on Loop Drive and, as the name
       indicates, has a collection of lava tube caves. Formed from the
       Blue Dragon Flow, the caves are located a half mile (800 m) from
       the parking lot and include,

               o Dewdrop Cave,
               o Boy Scout Cave,
               o Beauty Cave,
               o Surprise Cave, and
               o Indian Tunnel.

          The caves are open to visitors but flashlights are needed except
          in Indian Tunnel and some form of head protection is highly
          recommended when exploring any of the caves. Lava tubes are
          created when the sides and surface of a lava flow hardens. If
          the fluid interior flows away a cave is left behind.

   Craters of the Moon Campground has 52 sites – none of which can be
   reserved in advance. Camping facilities are basic but do include water,
   restrooms, charcoal grills, and trash containers. National Park Service
   rangers present evening programs at the campground amphitheater in the
   summer.

   Backcountry hiking is available in the 68 square mile (180 km²) Craters
   of the Moon Wilderness and the much larger Backcountry Area beyond
   (added in 2000). Only two trails enter the wilderness area and even
   those stop after a few miles or kilometers. From there most hikers
   follow the Great Rift and explore its series of seldom-visited volcanic
   features. All overnight backcountry hikes require registration with a
   ranger. No drinking water is available in the backcountry and the dry
   climate quickly dehydrates hikers. Avoiding summer heat and winter cold
   are therefore recommended by rangers. Pets, camp fires, and all
   mechanized vehicles, including bicycles, are not allowed in the
   wilderness area.
   North Crater in winter (NPS photo)
   Enlarge
   North Crater in winter (NPS photo)

   Skiing is allowed on the Loop Drive after it is closed to traffic in
   late November due to snow drifts. Typically there are 18 inches (46 cm)
   of snow by January and 3 feet (90 cm) by March. Cross-country skiing
   off of Loop Drive is allowed but may be dangerous due to sharp lava and
   hidden holes under the snow. Blizzards and other inclement weather may
   occur.

Nearby protected areas

     * Yellowstone National Park is world famous for its geysers, mudpots,
       Yellowstone Canyon, waterfalls, and wildlife such as the American
       Bison and reintroduced wolves.
     * Grand Teton National Park includes the steep, glacially-carved
       Teton Range, tectonically-created Jackson Hole valley, and a string
       of moraine-impounded lakes.
     * Nez Perce National Historical Park has 24 archaeological sites in
       north-central Idaho of the Nez Perce culture.
     * Hagerman Fossil Beds National Monument protects Pliocene-aged
       fossil sites along the Snake River.
     * City of Rocks National Reserve contains various monoliths, spires,
       and domes used by the Northern Shoshone and white emigrants on the
       California Trail. Rock climbing is a popular activity in the
       reserve.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Craters_of_the_Moon_National_Monument_and_
   Preserve"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
