   #copyright

Cricket

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Sports


   This is a featured article. Click here for more information.
   A cricket match in progress. The lighter strip is the cricket pitch.
   The men wearing black trousers on the far right are the umpires.
   Enlarge
   A cricket match in progress. The lighter strip is the cricket pitch.
   The men wearing black trousers on the far right are the umpires.

   Cricket is a team sport played between two teams of eleven players
   each. It is a bat-and-ball game played on a roughly oval grass field,
   in the centre of which is a flat strip of ground 20.12  m (22  yards)
   long, called a pitch. At each end of the pitch is a set of wooden
   stumps, called a wicket. Note that, rather confusingly, the pitch
   itself is also often referred to as the wicket. A player from the
   fielding team (the bowler) propels a hard, fist-sized cork-centred
   leather ball from one wicket towards the other. The ball usually
   bounces once before reaching a player from the opposing team (the
   batsman), who defends the wicket from the ball with a wooden cricket
   bat. The batsman may then run between the wickets, exchanging ends with
   another batsman (the "non-striker"), who has been standing in an
   inactive role near the bowler's wicket, to score runs. The remainder of
   the bowlers' team stand in various positions around the oval as
   fielders.

   Cricket has been an established team sport for several centuries. It
   originated in its modern form in England and is popular mainly in the
   present and former members of the Commonwealth. In some countries in
   South Asia, including India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka,
   cricket is by far the most popular sport. Cricket is also a major sport
   in England and Wales, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Zimbabwe
   and the English-speaking countries of the Caribbean, which are
   collectively known in cricketing parlance as the West Indies. There are
   also well established amateur club competitions in countries as diverse
   as the Netherlands, Kenya, Nepal, and Argentina (see also:
   International Cricket Council).

   The length of the game — certain test matches can last six or more
   hours a day, for up to five days — the many intervals for lunch and tea
   and the abundance of specialised terminology are notable aspects that
   can often confuse those not familiar with the cricket.

   The sport is followed with passion in many different parts of the
   world. It has even occasionally given rise to diplomatic outrage, the
   most notorious being the Basil D'Oliveira affair which led to the
   banning of South Africa from sporting events. Other examples include
   the Bodyline series played between England and Australia in the early
   1930s, an event that almost meant diplomatic ties were severed with
   England or the 1981 underarm bowling incident involving Australia and
   New Zealand.

Summary

   The aim of the batsmen is to score as many runs as possible. A run is
   scored when both batsmen successfully move to their respective opposite
   ends of the wicket (the batsmen will usually only attempt to score runs
   after the striker has hit the ball, but this is not necessary). The aim
   of the bowler's team is to get each batsman out (this is a wicket, or a
   dismissal). Dismissals are achieved in a variety of ways. The most
   direct way is for the bowler to evade the batsman's guard and
   successfully hit his stumps with the ball, dislodging the bails on top.
   While the batsmen are attempting a run, the fielders will attempt to
   knock the bails off either set of stumps with the ball before the
   batsman nearest to that set of stumps passes the crease with his bat.
   Other ways for the fielding side to dismiss a batsman include catching
   a struck ball before it touches the ground. Once the batsmen are not
   attempting to score any more runs, the ball is "dead" and is bowled
   again (each attempt at bowling the ball is a ball or a delivery).

   Once out, a batsman is replaced by the next batsman in the team's
   lineup. The innings (singular) of the batting team will end when the
   tenth batsman is given out, since there always must be two batsmen on
   the field. When this happens, the team is said to be all out. At the
   end of an innings, the two teams exchange roles, the fielding team
   becoming the batting team.

   The game is divided into overs of six (legal) balls. At the end of an
   over, the batting and bowling ends will be swapped, and the bowler
   replaced by another member of the fielding side. The fielding positions
   and the two umpires also change positions at this time.

   The winning team will be the team that scores the most runs at the end
   of a match. Different varieties of the game have different restrictions
   on the number of overs, the number of innings, and the number of balls
   in each. A draw is not an uncommon result and can occur if the team
   that is last to bat fails to match the required total of runs, or the
   bowling team fails to take 10 wickets, before a specified time limit.
   A cricket ball used in Test matches. The white stitching is known as
   the seam. As One-Day games are often played under floodlights, a white
   ball is used to aid visibility.
   Enlarge
   A cricket ball used in Test matches. The white stitching is known as
   the seam.
   As One-Day games are often played under floodlights, a white ball is
   used to aid visibility.
   A Cricket bat, back and front sides
   Enlarge
   A Cricket bat, back and front sides
   Children playing cricket on a makeshift pitch in a park. It is common
   in many countries for people to play cricket on such pitches.
   Enlarge
   Children playing cricket on a makeshift pitch in a park. It is common
   in many countries for people to play cricket on such pitches.

Results

   If the team that bats last has all of its batsmen dismissed before it
   can reach the run total of the opposing team, it is said to have lost
   by (n) runs (where (n) is the difference between the two run totals).
   If however, the team that bats last exceeds the opposing team's run
   total before its batsmen are dismissed, it is said to have won by (n)
   wickets, where (n) is the difference between the number of wickets
   conceded and 10.

   If, in a two-innings-a-side match, one team's combined first and second
   innings total fails to reach its opponent's first innings total, there
   is no need for the opposing team to bat again and it is said to have
   won by an innings and (n) runs, where (n) is the difference between the
   two teams' totals.

   If all the batsmen of the team batting last are dismissed with the
   scores exactly equal then the match is a tie; ties are very rare in
   cricket, particularly in matches of two innings a side. If the time
   allotted for the match expires before either side can win, then the
   game is a draw.

   If the match has only a single innings per side, then a maximum number
   of deliveries for each innings is often imposed. In this case the side
   scoring more runs wins regardless of the number of wickets lost, so
   that a draw cannot occur. If this kind of match is temporarily
   interrupted by bad weather, then a complex mathematical formula known
   as the Duckworth-Lewis method is often used to recalculate a new target
   score. A one-day match can be declared a No-Result if fewer than a
   previously agreed number of overs have been bowled by either team, in
   circumstances that make normal resumption of play impossible - for
   example, an extended period of bad weather.

Laws of cricket

   The game is played in accordance with 42 laws of cricket, which have
   been developed by the Marylebone Cricket Club in discussion with the
   main cricketing nations. Teams may agree to alter some of the rules for
   particular games. Other rules supplement the main laws and change them
   to deal with different circumstances. In particular, there are a number
   of modifications to the playing structure and fielding position rules
   that apply to one innings games that are restricted to a set number of
   fair deliveries.

Players and officials

Players

   A team consists of eleven players. Depending on his primary skills, a
   player may be classified as a specialist batsman or bowler. A balanced
   team usually has five or six specialist batsmen and four or five
   specialist bowlers. Teams nearly always include a specialist
   wicket-keeper because of the importance of this fielding position.

   A player who excels in both batting and bowling is known as an
   all-rounder. One who excels as a batsman and wicket-keeper is known as
   a wicket-keeper/batsman, sometimes regarded as a type of all-rounder.
   True all-rounders are rare and valuable players; most players focus on
   either their batting or their bowling.

Umpires

   Two on-field umpires preside over a match. One umpire (the field
   umpire) will stand behind the wicket at the end from which the ball is
   bowled, and adjudicate on most decisions. The other (the square leg
   umpire) will stand near the fielding position called square leg, which
   offers a side view of the batsman, and assist on decisions for which he
   has a better view. In some professional matches, they may refer a
   decision to an off-field third umpire, who has the assistance of
   television replays. In international matches an off-field match referee
   ensures that play is within the laws of cricket and the spirit of the
   game.

Scorers

   Two scorers are appointed, and most often one scorer is provided by
   each team. The laws of cricket specify that the official scorers are to
   record all runs scored, wickets taken and (where appropriate) overs
   bowled. They are to acknowledge signals from the umpire, and to check
   the accuracy of the score regularly both with each other and, at
   playing intervals, with the umpires. In practice scorers also keep
   track of other matters, such as bowlers' analyses, the rate at which
   the teams bowl their overs, and team statistics such as averages and
   records. In international and national cricket competitions, the media
   often require notification of records and statistics, so unofficial
   scorers often keep tally for broadcast commentators and newspaper
   journalists. The official scorers occasionally make mistakes, but
   unlike umpires' mistakes these can be corrected after the event.

The playing field

   A standard cricket ground, showing the cricket pitch (brown),
   close-infield (light green) within 15 yards (13.7 m) of the striking
   batsman, infield (medium green) inside the white 30 yard (27.4 m)
   circle, and outfield (dark green), with sight screens beyond the
   boundary at either end.
   Enlarge
   A standard cricket ground, showing the cricket pitch (brown),
   close-infield (light green) within 15 yards (13.7 m) of the striking
   batsman, infield (medium green) inside the white 30 yard (27.4 m)
   circle, and outfield (dark green), with sight screens beyond the
   boundary at either end.
   A wicket consists of three stumps, upright wooden stakes that are
   hammered into the ground, topped with two wooden crosspieces, known as
   the bails.
   Enlarge
   A wicket consists of three stumps, upright wooden stakes that are
   hammered into the ground, topped with two wooden crosspieces, known as
   the bails.
   The standard fielding positions in cricket for a right-handed batsman;
   the positions are reversed for a left-handed batsman. The spots are
   only indicative, as fielders may stand in any part of the ground. Only
   nine fielders are available in addition to the bowler and wicketkeeper,
   so there are always many unprotected areas.
   Enlarge
   The standard fielding positions in cricket for a right-handed batsman;
   the positions are reversed for a left-handed batsman. The spots are
   only indicative, as fielders may stand in any part of the ground. Only
   nine fielders are available in addition to the bowler and wicketkeeper,
   so there are always many unprotected areas.
   A perspective view of the cricket pitch from the bowler's end. The
   bowler runs in past one side of the wicket at the bowler's end, either
   'over' the wicket or 'round' the wicket.
   Enlarge
   A perspective view of the cricket pitch from the bowler's end. The
   bowler runs in past one side of the wicket at the bowler's end, either
   'over' the wicket or 'round' the wicket.
   The Cricket pitch dimensions
   Enlarge
   The Cricket pitch dimensions

   The cricket field consists of a large circular or oval-shaped grassy
   ground. There are no fixed dimensions for the field but its diameter
   usually varies between 450  feet (137 m) to 500 feet (150 m). On most
   grounds, a rope demarcates the perimeter of the field and is known as
   the boundary.

The pitch

   Most of the action takes place in the centre of this ground, on a
   rectangular clay strip usually with short grass called the pitch. The
   pitch measures 10 × 66 feet (3.05 × 20.12 m).

   At each end of the pitch three upright wooden stakes, called the
   stumps, are hammered into the ground. Two wooden crosspieces, known as
   the bails, sit in grooves atop the stumps, linking each to its
   neighbour. Each set of three stumps and two bails is collectively known
   as a wicket. One end of the pitch is designated the batting end where
   the batsman stands and the other is designated the bowling end where
   the bowler runs in to bowl. The area of the field on the side of the
   line joining the wickets where the batsman holds his bat (the
   right-hand side for a right-handed batsman, the left for a left-hander)
   is known as the off side, the other as the leg side or on side.

   Lines drawn or painted on the pitch are known as creases. Creases are
   used to adjudicate the dismissals of batsmen and to determine whether a
   delivery is legal.

Parts of the field

   For a one-innings match played over a set number of fair deliveries,
   there are two additional field markings. A painted oval is made by
   drawing a semicircle of 30 yards (27.4 m) radius from the centre of
   each wicket with respect to the breadth of the pitch and joining them
   with lines parallel, 30 yards (27.4 m) to the length of the pitch. This
   line, commonly known as the circle, divides the field into an infield
   and outfield. Two circles of radius 15  yards (13.7 m), centred on each
   wicket and often marked by dots, define the close-infield. The infield,
   outfield, and the close-infield are used to enforce fielding
   restrictions.

Placements of players

   The team batting always has two batsmen on the field. One batsman,
   known as the striker, faces and plays the balls bowled by the bowler.
   His partner stands at the bowling end and is known as the non-striker.

   The fielding team has all eleven of its players on the ground, and at
   any particular time, one of these will be the bowler. The player
   designated as bowler must change after every over. The wicket-keeper,
   who generally acts in that role for the whole match, stands or crouches
   behind the wicket at the batting end. The captain of the fielding team
   spreads his remaining nine players — the fielders — around the ground
   to cover most of the area. Their placement may vary dramatically
   depending on strategy. Each position on the field has a unique label.

Match structure

The toss

   The two opposing captains toss a coin before the match, and the captain
   winning the toss chooses either to bat or bowl first. This decision
   will be based on whether the team's bowlers are likely to gain
   immediate advantage from the pitch and weather conditions (these can
   vary significantly), or whether it is more likely that the pitch will
   deteriorate and make batting more difficult later in the game.

Overs

   Each innings is divided into overs, each consisting of six consecutive
   legal (see "Extras" for details) deliveries bowled by the same bowler.
   After completing an over, the bowler must take up a fielding position
   and let another player take over the bowling.

   After every over, the batting and bowling ends are swapped, and the
   field positions are adjusted. The umpires swap so the umpire at the
   bowler's end moves to square leg, and the umpire at square leg moves to
   the new bowler's end.

End of an innings

   An innings is completed if:
    1. Ten out of eleven batsmen are 'out' (dismissed) — the team are all
       out.
    2. The team has only one batsman left who can bat (the others being
       incapacitated either through injury, illness or absence) — again,
       the team are all out.
    3. The team batting last reaches the score required to win the match.
    4. The predetermined number of overs are bowled (in a one-day match
       only, usually 50 overs).
    5. A captain declares his team's innings closed (this does not apply
       to one-day limited over matches).

Playing time

   Typically, two innings matches are played over three to five days with
   at least six hours of cricket being played each day. One innings
   matches are usually played over one day for six hours or more. There
   are formal intervals on each day for lunch and tea, and shorter breaks
   for drinks, where necessary. There is also a short interval between
   innings.

   The game is only played in dry weather. Additionally, as in
   professional cricket it is common for balls to be bowled at over 90
   mph (144  km/h), the game needs to be played in daylight that is good
   enough for a batsman to be able to see the ball. Play is therefore
   halted during rain (but not usually drizzle) and when there is bad
   light. Some one-day games are now played under floodlights, but, apart
   from a few experimental games in Australia, floodlights are not used in
   longer games. Professional cricket is usually played outdoors. These
   requirements mean that in England, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa
   and Zimbabwe the game is usually played in the summer. In the West
   Indies, India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh games are played in
   the winter. In these countries the hurricane and monsoon season
   coincides with their summers.

Batting and scoring runs

Batting

   The directions in which a right-handed batsman intends to send the ball
   when playing various cricketing shots.
   Enlarge
   The directions in which a right-handed batsman intends to send the ball
   when playing various cricketing shots.

   Batsmen strike the ball from the batting crease, with the flat surface
   of a wooden bat. If the batsman hits the ball with his bat, it is
   called a shot (or stroke). If the ball brushes the side of the bat it
   is called an edge or snick. Shots are named according to the style of
   swing and the direction aimed. As part of the team's strategy, he may
   bat defensively, blocking the ball downwards, or aggressively, hitting
   the ball hard to empty spaces in order to score runs. There is no
   requirement to run if the ball is struck.

   If the batsman manages to hit the ball over the boundary ropes, he
   automatically scores runs. A ball that crosses the boundary on the full
   (without touching the ground) automatically scores six runs. A ball
   that crosses the boundary after having touched the ground automatically
   scores four runs.

   Batsmen come in to bat in a batting order, decided by the team captain.
   The first two positions, the "openers", face the most hostile bowling,
   from fast bowlers at their freshest and with a new ball. After that,
   the team typically bats in descending order of batting skill, the first
   five or six batsmen usually being the best in the team. Then follow the
   all-rounders—bowlers or wicket-keepers who can bat decently—and finally
   the pure bowlers who rarely score well. This order may be changed at
   any time during the course of the game for strategic reasons.

Run scoring

   To score a run, a striker must hit the ball and run to the opposite end
   of the pitch, while his non-striking partner runs to his end. To
   register a run, both runners must touch the ground behind the popping
   crease with either their bats or their bodies (the batsmen carry their
   bats as they run). If the striker hits the ball well enough, the
   batsmen may double back to score two or more runs. This is known as
   running between wickets. However, no rule requires the batsman to run
   upon striking the ball. If the batsmen score an odd number of runs,
   then they will have swapped ends and their roles as striker and
   non-striker will be reversed for the next ball, unless the most recent
   ball marks the end of an over.

   If a fielder knocks the bails off the stumps with the ball while no
   batsman is grounded behind the nearest popping crease, the nearest
   batsman is run out. If the ball goes over the boundary, then four runs
   are scored, or six if the ball has not bounced.

Extras

   Every run scored by the batsmen contributes to the team's total. A
   team's total also includes a number of runs which are unaccredited to
   any batsmen. These runs are known as extras, apart from in Australia
   where they are also called sundries. Extras consist of byes, leg byes,
   no balls, wides and penalty runs. The former two are runs that can be
   scored if the batsman misses making contact with bat and ball, and the
   latter two are types of fouls committed by the bowler. For serious
   infractions such as tampering with the ball, deliberate time-wasting,
   and damaging the pitch, the umpires may award penalty extras to the
   opposition; in each case five runs. Five penalty runs are also awarded
   if a fielder uses anything other than his body to field the ball, or if
   the ball hits a protective helmet left on the field by the fielding
   team. A team need not be batting in order to receive penalty extras.

Bowling and dismissals

Bowling

   Darren Gough of England bowling
   Enlarge
   Darren Gough of England bowling

   A bowler delivers the ball toward the batsmen, using what is known as a
   bowling action: the elbow may be held at any angle and may bend
   further, but may not straighten out during the action. If the elbow
   straightens, it is an illegal throw and the delivery is called a
   no-ball. Under new cricketing law, after consultation with health
   experts, the bowler is allowed to straighten his arm 15 degrees or
   less; if the bowler straightens his arm more than 15 degrees it is
   called a "no ball". This new law came in to prevent injury to bowlers.

   Usually, the bowler pitches the ball so that it bounces before reaching
   the batsman. Some part of the bowler's front foot in the delivery
   stride (that is, the stride when the ball is released) must be behind
   the popping crease to avoid a no-ball (although the bowler's front foot
   does not have to be grounded). The ball must also be delivered so it is
   within the batsman's reach; otherwise it is termed a wide. A wide
   cannot be called if the batsman hits the ball. A wide or no-ball
   results in an extra run being added to the batting team's score, and an
   extra ball being bowled in the over.

   The bowler's primary goal is to take wickets; that is, to get a batsman
   out or dismissed. If a bowler can dismiss the more accomplished batsmen
   on the opposing team he reduces the opportunity for them to score, as
   it exposes the less skilful non-specialist batsmen. The bowler's next
   task is to limit the numbers of runs scored per over bowled. This is
   known as the Economy rate. There are two main kinds of bowlers: pace
   bowlers, who attempt to bowl the ball too quickly for the batsman to
   properly react, and spin bowlers who bowl slower balls that bounce and
   curve in unpredictable ways.

Dismissal of a batsman

   There are ten ways for a batsman to be dismissed. Once a batsman is
   dismissed, he leaves the field to be replaced by another player from
   the batting team until ten batsmen are out and the innings is over.

   Many modes of dismissal require the wicket to be "put down". The wicket
   is put down if a bail is dislodged from the top of the stumps; or if a
   stump is struck out of the ground either by the ball, or by a fielder
   using his hand which is holding the ball. Of the following ten modes of
   dismissal, the first six are common, while the last four are
   technicalities which rarely occur. Briefly, the ten modes are:
    1. Caught — When a fielder catches the ball before the ball bounces
       and after the batsman has struck it with the bat or it has come
       into contact with the batsman's glove while it is in contact with
       the bat handle. The bowler and catcher are both credited with the
       dismissal. ( Law 32)
    2. Bowled — When a delivered ball hits the stumps at the batsman's
       end, and dislodges one or both of the bails. This happens
       regardless of whether the batsman has edged the ball onto the
       stumps or not. The bowler is credited with the dismissal. ( Law 30)
    3. Leg before wicket (LBW) — When a delivered ball misses the bat and
       strikes the batsman's leg or pad, and the umpire judges that the
       ball would otherwise have struck the stumps. The laws of cricket
       stipulate certain exceptions in favour of the batsman; for
       instance, a batsman should not be given out LBW if the place where
       the ball bounced on the pitch is to the leg-side of the area
       strictly between the two wickets. The purpose of this rule is to
       prevent the batsman from unfairly using his pads to obstruct the
       passage of the ball without striking it. The bowler is credited
       with the dismissal.
    4. Run out — When a fielder, bowler or wicket-keeper removes one or
       both of the bails with the ball by hitting the stumps whilst a
       batsman is still running between the two ends. The ball can either
       hit the stumps directly or the fielder's hand with the ball inside
       it can be used to dislodge the bails. Such a dismissal is not
       officially credited to any player, although the identities of the
       fielder or fielders involved is often noted in brackets on the
       scorecard.
    5. Stumped — When the batsman leaves his crease in playing a delivery,
       voluntarily or involuntarily, but the ball goes to the
       wicket-keeper who uses it to remove one or both of the bails
       through hitting the bail(s) or the wicket before the batsman has
       remade his ground. The bowler and wicket-keeper are both credited.
       This generally requires the keeper to be standing within arm's
       length of the wicket, which is done mainly to spin bowling. ( Law
       39)
    6. Hit wicket — When the batsman accidentally knocks the stumps with
       either the body or the bat, causing one or both of the bails to be
       dislodged, either in playing a shot or in taking off for the first
       run. The bowler is credited with the dismissal. ( Law 35)
    7. Handled the ball — When the batsman deliberately handles the ball
       without the permission of the fielding team. No player is credited
       with the dismissal. ( Law 33)
    8. Hit the ball twice — When the batsman deliberately strikes the ball
       a second time, except for the sole purpose of guarding his wicket.
       No player is credited with the dismissal. ( Law 34)
    9. Obstructing the field — When a batsman deliberately hinders a
       fielder from attempting to field the ball. No player is credited
       with the dismissal. ( Law 37)
   10. Timed out — When a new batsman takes more than three minutes to
       take his position in the field to replace a dismissed batsman (If
       the delay is protracted, the umpires may cause the match to be
       forfeited). This rule prevents the batting team using time limits
       of the game to unfair advantage. No player is credited with the
       dismissal. ( Law 31)

   Additionally, a batsman may leave the field without being dismissed.
   For instance, if he is injured or taken ill, this is known as retired
   hurt or retired ill. The batsman is not out; he may return to bat later
   in the same innings if sufficiently recovered. Also, an unimpaired
   batsman may retire, in which case he is treated as being dismissed
   retired out; no player is credited with the dismissal.

   An individual cannot be out — 'bowled', 'caught', 'leg before wicket',
   'stumped', or 'hit wicket' off a no ball. He cannot be out — 'bowled',
   'caught', 'leg before wicket', or 'hit the ball twice' off a wide.

   Some of these modes of dismissal can take place without the bowler
   bowling a delivery. The batsman who is not on strike may be run out by
   the bowler if he leaves his crease before the bowler bowls, and a
   batsman can be out obstructing the field or retired out at any time.
   Timed out by its nature is a dismissal without a delivery. With all
   other modes of dismissal, only one batsman can be dismissed per ball
   bowled. Obstructing the field, Handled the ball, Timed Out and Hit the
   ball twice dismissals are extremely rare.

Fielding and wicket-keeping

   A pair of wicket-keeping gloves. The webbing which helps the
   wicket-keeper to catch the ball can be seen between the thumb and index
   fingers.
   Enlarge
   A pair of wicket-keeping gloves. The webbing which helps the
   wicket-keeper to catch the ball can be seen between the thumb and index
   fingers.

   Fielders assist the bowlers in preventing batsmen from scoring too many
   runs. They do this in two ways: by taking catches to dismiss a batsman,
   and by intercepting hit balls and returning them to the pitch to
   attempt run-outs to restrict the scoring of runs.

   The wicket-keeper is a specialist fielder who stands behind the
   batsman's wicket throughout the game. His primary job is to gather
   deliveries that the batsman fails to hit, to prevent them running into
   the outfield, which would enable batsmen to score byes. To this end, he
   wears special gloves (he is the only fielder allowed to do so) and pads
   to cover his lower legs. Due to his position directly behind the
   striker, the wicket-keeper has a good chance of getting a batsman out
   caught off a fine edge from the bat; thicker edges are typically
   handled by the "slips" fieldsmen. The wicket-keeper is also the only
   person who can get a batsman out stumped. The umpire may call no-ball
   if the wicket-keeper positions any part of his body or equipment in
   front of the line of the popping crease before the ball is bowled.

Other roles

Captain

   The captain's acumen in deciding the strategy is crucial to the team's
   success. The captain makes a number of important decisions, including
   setting field positions, alternating the bowlers and taking the toss.
   The captain's job on the team is very important but can be rather
   stressful at times. Much blame is placed on a captain when his team
   loses. However, it is considered an honour to be in such a privileged
   position and much praise is given to the captain when his team wins.
   The burden of the captain's duties can interfere with his quality of
   play considerably, slightly, or not at all, depending on how well he
   deals with the stress of his position.

A runner

   In the event of a batsman being fit to bat but too injured to run, he
   may ask the umpire and the fielding captain for a runner. The runner
   chosen must, if possible, be a player who has already been given out.
   After a batsman hits the ball, the runner's only task is to run between
   the wickets in place of the injured batsman. The runner is required to
   wear and carry exactly the same equipment as the batsman he is running
   for.

Substitutes

   In all forms of cricket, if a player gets injured or becomes ill during
   a match, a substitute is allowed to field instead of him; though he
   cannot bowl, bat, or act as a captain or wicket-keeper. Here the
   substitute is a temporary role and leaves the field once the injured
   player is fit to return.

   For 9 months from July 2005, the ICC trialled the concept of a Super
   Sub in One-day International (ODI) cricket and some other limited overs
   competitions. A single full substitution was allowed, with the replaced
   player not allowed to return to the game. It was discontinued from
   March 2006.

History

   Sir Donald Bradman, Australian cricket Legend.
   Enlarge
   Sir Donald Bradman, Australian cricket Legend.

   A basic form of cricket can be traced back to the 13th century, but it
   may have existed even earlier than that. The game seems to have
   originated among children of the farming and metalworking communities
   in the Weald between Kent and Sussex. Written evidence exists of a game
   known as creag being played by Prince Edward, the son of Edward I
   (Longshanks), at Newenden, Kent in 1300.

   In 1598, a court case referred to a sport called kreckett being played
   at the Royal Grammar School, Guildford around 1550. The Oxford English
   Dictionary gives this as the first recorded instance of cricket in the
   English language.

   A number of words are thought to be possible sources for the term
   cricket. The name may derive from a term for the cricket bat: old
   French criquet (meaning a kind of club) or Flemish krick(e) (meaning a
   stick) or in Old English crycc (meaning a crutch or staff). (The latter
   is problematic, since Old English 'cc' was palatal in pronunciation in
   the south and the west midlands, roughly ch, which is how crycc leads
   to crych and thence crutch; the 'k' sound would be possible in the
   north, however.) Alternatively, the French criquet apparently derives
   from the Flemish word krickstoel, which is a long low stool on which
   one kneels in church and which resembles the long low wicket with two
   stumps used in early cricket.

   During the 17th century, numerous references indicate the growth of
   cricket in the south-east of England. By the end of the century, it had
   become an organised activity being played for high stakes and it is
   likely that the first professionals appeared in that period. We know
   that a great cricket match with eleven players a side was played for
   high stakes in Sussex in 1697 and this is the earliest reference we
   have to cricket in terms of such importance.

   The game underwent major development in the 18th Century and had become
   the national sport of England by the end of the century. Betting played
   a major part in that development and rich patrons began forming their
   own "select XIs". Cricket was prominent in London as early as 1707 and
   large crowds flocked to matches on the Artillery Ground in Finsbury.
   The Hambledon Club was founded in the 1760s but its team was already
   playing first-class matches in 1756. For the next 20 years until the
   formation of MCC and the opening of Lord's in 1787, Hambledon was the
   game's greatest club and its focal point. MCC quickly became the
   sport's premier club and the custodian of the Laws of Cricket.

   The 19th Century saw underarm replaced by first roundarm and then
   overarm bowling. Both developments were accompanied by major
   controversy. The concept of a "champion county" arose in the 1820s and
   then, starting with Sussex CCC in 1839, county clubs were founded and
   these ultimately formed a County Championship.

   In 1859, a team of England players went on the first overseas tour (to
   North America) and 18 years later another England team took part in the
   first-ever Test match at the Melbourne Cricket Ground against
   Australia.

   The legendary W G Grace started his long career in 1864. It can fairly
   be said that he revolutionised the sport and did much to ensure its
   massive popularity.

   The last two decades before the First World War have been called the
   "Golden Age of Cricket". It is almost certainly a nostalgic idea based
   on the sense of loss brought about by the war, but even so the period
   did produce some great players and memorable matches, especially as
   organised competition at county and Test level developed.

   The inter-war years were dominated by one player: Don Bradman,
   statistically the greatest batsman of all time. It was the
   determination of the England team to overcome his incredible skill that
   brought about the infamous Bodyline series in 1932/33.

   Cricket entered an epochal era in 1963, when English counties modified
   the rules to provide a variant match form that produced a certain
   result: games with a restricted number of overs per side. This gained
   widespread popularity and resulted in the birth of One-day
   International (ODI) matches in 1971. The governing International
   Cricket Council quickly adopted the new form and held the first ODI
   Cricket World Cup in 1975. Since then, ODI matches have gained mass
   spectatorship, at the expense of the longer form of the game and to the
   consternation of fans who prefer the longer form of the game.

   As of the early 2000s, however, the longer form of cricket is
   experiencing a growing resurgence in popularity but a new limited overs
   phenomenon, Twenty20, has made an immediate impact.

Forms of cricket

   There are many different types and grades of cricket; those played
   professionally at an international level are Test cricket, one-day
   cricket and Twenty20.

Test cricket

   Test cricket is a form of international cricket started in 1877 during
   the 1876/77 English cricket team's tour of Australia. The first Test
   match began on 15 March 1877 and had a timeless format with four balls
   per over. It ended on 19 March 1877 with Australia winning by 45 runs.

   The Test cricket series between England and Australia is called The
   Ashes, with the titular trophy being a tiny fragile urn, reputed to
   hold the ashes of a bail or cricket ball used during the second Test
   series between the two countries. The tiny urn was presented to the
   English Cricket Captain, Ivo Bligh, by a group of Melbourne women,
   following the Test Series win by the England Cricket Team, during the
   England Cricket Team's Tour of Australia in 1882/83. The actual trophy
   is a cut glass replica. The original urn is considered priceless and
   remains in England, except for special occasions when it may travel on
   display for promotional purposes, as is the case with the 2006 Ashes
   Series where it toured Australia's capital city museums.

   Other trophies contested in Test Cricket are the Basil D'Oliveira
   trophy (for a series between England and South Africa played in South
   Africa), the Wisden trophy (England - West Indies), The Frank Worrell
   trophy (Australia - West Indies), the Trans-Tasman trophy (Australia -
   New Zealand), the Border- Gavaskar trophy (Australia - India) and the
   Sir Vivian Richards trophy (South Africa - West Indies).

   Since then, over 1,800 Test matches have been played and the number of
   Test playing nations has increased to ten with Bangladesh, the most
   recent nation elevated to Test status, making its debut in 2000. Test
   matches are two innings per side, usually played over five consecutive
   days. Tests that are not finished within the allotted time are drawn.

One-day cricket

   Limited overs matches, also known as one day cricket or instant
   cricket, were introduced in the English domestic season of 1963 due to
   the growing demands for a shorter and more dramatic form of cricket to
   stem the decline in attendances. One-day, single-innings, matches often
   took place before this, but the innovation was the limiting of each
   side's innings to an agreed number of overs (nowadays usually 50). The
   idea was taken up in the international arena in 1971, during England's
   tour of Australia, when a match was played on the scheduled fifth day
   of the rained-off third Test. The one-day game has since become a
   crowd-pleaser and TV-audience-generator across the globe, hastened in
   part by the success of the inaugural World Cup in 1975. The
   abbreviations ODI (One-day International) or sometimes LOI (Limited
   Overs International) are used for international matches of this type.
   Important one-day matches, international and domestic, often have two
   days set aside, the second day being a "reserve" day to allow more
   chance of the game being completed if a result is not possible on the
   first day (for instance if play is prevented or interrupted by rain).
   Innovations have included the introduction of coloured clothing,
   distinct tournaments, and "day-night" matches (where play extends into
   the night under floodlights); together with frequent nail-biting
   finishes and the impossibility of either side opting to play for a
   draw, these have seen ODI cricket gain many supporters.

Twenty20 Cricket

   Twenty20 Cricket was first played in English domestic cricket in 2003
   to popularise first-class cricket and attract more spectators to the
   game. Now it has spread to many other countries. A "Twenty20 Game"
   consists 20 overs per each side, a free-hit after a no-ball is bowled,
   short boundaries, batting-friendly pitches, and other rules designed to
   attract crowds that would not usually wish to sit through the slower
   paced one day games or test matches. The first men's Twenty20
   international was between Australia and New Zealand in 2005, the first
   women's Twenty20 international having been between England and New
   Zealand in 2004.The ICC announced after its Executive Board meeting in
   March this year that beginning from 2007 to 2015, the Twenty20 World
   Championship would be held on an annual basis and the first ever
   Twenty20 World Championship in South Africa in probably May-June.

First-class matches

   A first-class match is generally defined as a high-level international
   or domestic match that takes place over at least three days on natural
   (as opposed to artificial) turf. First-class games are two innings per
   side. Like Test matches, if the game is not completed over the allotted
   time then it is drawn. Games where the teams have only one innings each
   are not first-class (including one-day internationals).

   A two-innings match of at least three days duration is granted
   first-class status only if both teams have first-class status. For
   example, Test matches, other games between two Test nations, games
   between two domestic teams deemed first-class in countries holding full
   membership of the ICC, and games between a Test nation's national side
   (or a team drawn from a national touring squad) and a first-class
   domestic team from a Test nation, are usually deemed to be first class.
   Matches between Kenya, one of the leading associate members of the ICC,
   and another team adjudjed first-class are usually granted first-class
   status, but domestic matches in Kenya are not.

   Among cricket statisticians, first class cricket is variously deemed to
   have started in 1660, 1772, 1801, 1815 or 1864. This ongoing
   controversy is described in the main article.

Other forms of cricket

   At all levels, the rules of cricket are often modified. At
   international or first-class levels this is usually in order to make
   the game more commercially attractive. More or less formal domestic
   club cricket matches are usually played over one to two days, either
   two innings per side or one innings per side with limited overs. At
   lower levels the rules are often changed simply to make the game
   playable with limited resources, or to render it more convenient and
   enjoyable for the participants. Variants of the sport are played in
   areas as diverse as sandy beaches and ice floes. Families and teenagers
   play backyard cricket in suburban yards or driveways, and the teeming
   cities of India and Pakistan play host to countless games of 'Gully
   Cricket' or 'Tapeball' on their streets. Tennis balls and homemade bats
   are often used, and a variety of objects may serve as wickets.
   Sometimes the rules are also improvised: for instance it is sometimes
   agreed that fielders can catch the ball with one hand after one bounce
   and claim a wicket, or if only a few people are available then everyone
   may field while the players take it in turns to bat and bowl.

   In Kwik cricket, the bowler does not have to wait for the batsman to be
   ready before a delivery, leading to a faster, more exhausting game
   designed to appeal to children, which is often used in English schools'
   PE lessons. Another modification to increase the pace of the game is
   the "Tipsy Run" rule, in which the batter must run when the ball
   touches the bat, even if it the contact is unintentional or minor. This
   rule, seen only in impromptu games, speeds the match up by disable the
   batsmens ability to block the ball. Indoor cricket is played in a
   netted, indoor arena.

International structure

   ICC member nations. Orange are the (highest level) Test playing
   nations; green are the associate member nations; and purple are the
   affiliate member nations.
   Enlarge
   ICC member nations. Orange are the (highest level) Test playing
   nations; green are the associate member nations; and purple are the
   affiliate member nations.

   The International Cricket Council (ICC) is the international governing
   body for cricket. It is headquartered in Dubai and includes
   representatives of each of the ten Test-playing nations, as well as an
   elected panel representing non-Test-playing nations.

   Each nation has a national cricket board which regulates cricket
   matches played in their country. The cricket board also selects the
   national squad and organises home and away tours for the national team.

   Nations playing cricket are separated into three tiers depending on the
   level of cricket infrastructure in that country. At the highest level
   are the Test-playing nations. They qualify automatically for the
   quadrennial World Cup matches. A rung lower are the Associate Member
   nations. The lowermost rung consists of the Affiliate Member nations.

   See also: Non-Test teams to have played ODI matches.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cricket"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
