   #copyright

Crimson-collared Tanager

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

            iCrimson-collared Tanager
   Adult, northern subspecies
   Adult, northern subspecies

                             Conservation status

   Least Concern (LC)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Aves
   Order:   Passeriformes
   Family:  Thraupidae
   Genus:   Ramphocelus
   Species: R. sanguinolentus

                                Binomial name

   Ramphocelus sanguinolentus
   ( Lesson, 1831)

   The Crimson-collared Tanager, Ramphocelus sanguinolentus, is a rather
   small Mesoamerican songbird.

   Crimson-collared Tanagers average 19–20 cm (7.5–8 in) long. The adult
   plumage is black with a red collar covering the nape, neck, and breast
   (remarkably similar to the pattern of the male Crimson-collared
   Grosbeak). All tail coverts are also red. The bill is striking pale
   blue and the legs are blue-gray. Females average slightly duller than
   males, but are sometimes indistinguishable. Juvenile birds are similar
   except that the hood is dull red, the black areas are tinged with
   brown, and the breast is mottled red and black. Young birds also have a
   duller bill colour.

   Vocalizations are high-pitched and sibilant. There are several calls;
   one rendered as ssi-p is given both when perched and in flight. The
   song is jerky and consists of two-to-four-note phrases separated by
   pauses, tueee-teew, chu-chee-wee-chu, teweee.

   The Crimson-collared Tanager ranges from southern Veracruz and northern
   Oaxaca in Mexico through the Atlantic slope of Central America (Howell
   and Webb 1994) to the highlands of western Panama (Hill 2006). It
   inhabits the edges of humid evergreen forests and second growth, where
   it is often seen in pairs at middle to upper levels. The nest is a cup
   built of such materials as moss, rootlets and strips of large leaves
   such as banana or Heliconia, and is placed at middle height in a tree
   at a forest edge. The female usually lays two eggs, pale blue with
   blackish spots.

   This species is sometimes placed in a genus of its own as
   Phlogothraupis sanguinolenta (e.g., Howell and Webb 1994), and a
   genetic study suggests that it is less closely related to the other
   Ramphocelus tanagers than they are to each other (Hackett 1996).
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crimson-collared_Tanager"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
