   #copyright

Crown Jewels of the United Kingdom

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: British History; Politics
and government

          The "Crown Jewels" or "Honours" of Scotland are treated
          separately. This article refers to the Crown Jewels of England,
          and those added since the Union of the Crowns in 1603.

   Coronation Chair and Regalia of England
   Enlarge
   Coronation Chair and Regalia of England

   The collective term Crown Jewels denotes the regalia and vestments worn
   by the sovereign of the United Kingdom during the coronation ceremony
   and at various other state functions. The term refers to the following
   objects: the crowns, sceptres (with either the cross or the dove),
   orbs, swords, rings, spurs, colobium sindonis, dalmatic, armill, and
   the royal robe or pall, as well as several other objects connected with
   the ceremony itself.

   Many of these descend directly from the pre- Reformation period and
   have a religious and sacral connotation. The vestures donned by the
   sovereign following the unction, for instance, closely resemble the alb
   and dalmatic worn by bishops, although the contention that they are
   meant to confer upon the sovereign an ecclesiastical character is in
   disrepute among Christian scholars.

   The oldest set of Crown Jewels dating from the Anglo-Saxon period were
   lost by John of England near The Wash in 1216. A replacement set were
   made shortly afterwards which were later joined by the addition of
   Welsh prince Llywelyn's coronet in 1284. This replacement set was
   stolen from Westminster Abbey in 1303 although most, if not all, were
   recovered days later from the window of a London jeweller's shop with
   dire consequences for the owner.

   Oliver Cromwell melted down most of the Crown Jewels of his time after
   the establishment of the Commonwealth in 1649. Upon the Restoration of
   Charles II of England most of the regalia were replaced. The only
   pieces to survive from before the Civil War are three swords and a
   spoon.

   The Crown Jewels are considered to be the most valuable and one of the
   largest jewellery collections in existence.

Crowns

   The collection of Crown Jewels contains various crowns, some of which
   are used by every Sovereign, others being made personally for
   Sovereigns or for Queens Consort. Typically the crown of a King has a
   slightly pointed arched top, while that of a Queen has a slightly bowed
   top.

   St. Edward's Crown was made in 1661. Made of gold, its design consists
   of four crosses pattee and four fleurs-de-lis, with two arches on top.
   Surmounting the arches is a jewelled cross pattee. The Crown includes
   444 semi-precious stones. It is used through most of the coronation
   ceremony. Queen Elizabeth II opted to use a stylised representation of
   this crown in images of the Royal Coat of Arms of the United Kingdom.

   The Imperial State Crown was made in 1937 for King George VI, and was
   similar to the one made in 1838 for Queen Victoria. The present Crown
   is made of gold and includes four crosses pattee and four
   fleurs-de-lis, with two arches on top, surmounted by a cross pattee.
   The Crown includes many jewels: 2,868 diamonds, 273 pearls, 17
   sapphires, 11 emeralds, and five rubies. Among the stones are several
   famous ones, including the Black Prince's Ruby (actually a spinel) and
   the Cullinan II diamond, also known as the Lesser Star of Africa. It is
   worn after the conclusion of the Coronation ceremony when the monarch
   leaves Westminster Abbey, and also at the annual State Opening of
   Parliament.

   The Imperial Crown of India was created when King George V visited
   Delhi as Emperor of India. In order to prevent the pawning of the Crown
   Jewels, British law prohibited the removal of a Crown Jewel from the
   country. Thus, a new crown was made. Set with more than 6,000 diamonds,
   it was one of the heaviest crowns in the collection. It has since not
   been used.

   The George IV State Diadem was made in 1820 for the coronation of King
   George IV, and was worn during the coronation processions of Queen
   Victoria and Queen Elizabeth II.

   Queens consort, that is, wives of Kings, traditionally wore the Crown
   of Mary of Modena, queen of King James II. By the beginning of the 20th
   century that small crown was in a decrepit state. A new European-style
   crown, flatter and with more arches than was traditional in British
   crowns, was manufactured for Queen Alexandra, consort of King Edward
   VII. A new crown, more akin to traditional British crowns, was
   manufactured for Queen Mary, consort of King George V, who was crowned
   in 1911. The final new consort's crown in the 20th century was
   manufactured for Queen Elizabeth, consort of King George VI, who along
   with her husband was crowned in 1937. All three consorts' crowns in
   turn included the famous Koh-i-Noor diamond. This latter Crown of Queen
   Elizabeth was also worn, minus its arches, by the by-then Queen
   Elizabeth the Queen Mother during Elizabeth II's coronation. It rested
   on top of the Queen Mother's coffin during her funeral in 2002.

Mary of Modena's Crowns

   State Diadem—Worn by her on the way to her coronation and worn in such
   a way by Queens Consort down to the nineteenth century.

   Coronation Crown—The crown with which she was actually crowned. Now in
   the Museum of London.

   State Crown—Worn for the procession out of the Abbey and put to various
   other uses subsequently.

   Almost by definition, every Monarch of England or Britain wore a crown.

The Orb and Sceptres

   Image:Sceptre with the Cross.jpg
   Sceptre with the Cross and the Cullinan I diamond

   Two Sceptres used by the Sovereign form a part of the regalia:

   The Sceptre with the Cross was made in 1661, and is so called because
   it is surmounted by a cross. In 1905, it was redesigned to incorporate
   the Cullinan I, also known as the Great Star of Africa, which at over
   530 carats (106 g) is the second largest cut diamond in the world after
   The Golden Jubilee. During the coronation, the monarch bears the
   Sceptre with the Cross in the right hand.

   The Sceptre with the Dove was also made in 1661, and atop it is a dove
   symbolising the Holy Ghost. While the Sceptre with the Cross is borne
   in the right hand, the Sceptre with the Dove is borne in the left. At
   the same time as the Sovereign holds both Sceptres, he or she is
   crowned with St. Edward's Crown.

   The Sovereign's Orb, a type of globus cruciger, is a hollow golden
   sphere made in 1661. There is a band of jewels running along the
   centre, and a half-band on the top hemisphere. Surmounting the orb is a
   jewelled Cross representing the Sovereign's role as Defender of the
   Faith. For a part of the coronation, it is borne in the Sovereign's
   left hand.

Swords

   Five Swords are used during the coronation.

   The Jewelled Sword of Offering was made for the Coronation of King
   George IV. Its jewels are in the shapes of the floral symbols of the
   United Kingdom: the rose for England, the thistle for Scotland, and the
   shamrock for Ireland. It is the only sword actually presented to the
   Sovereign during the Coronation; the others are merely borne in front
   of the Sovereign.

   The Sword of State is the largest sword in the collection, and is borne
   in front of the Monarch by the Lord Great Chamberlain both at the
   coronation and at the State Opening of Parliament.

   The other three swords used are the Sword of Spiritual Justice, the
   Sword of Temporal Justice, and the Sword of Mercy. The latter has a
   blunt point and is known as Curtana.

Other Elements

   The Ring was made for William IV's coronation in 1831. Previously, each
   Sovereign received a new ring to symbolise their "marriage" to the
   nation, though no new rings have been used since 1831.

   When the Sovereign is anointed by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
   anointing oil is poured from the Ampulla into the Anointing Spoon. The
   Ampulla is a hollow gold vessel shaped like an eagle, and the Spoon is
   a silver-gilt spoon set with pearls. Both were spared when Cromwell
   ordered the destruction of the new regalia; the Spoon, probably dating
   from the thirteenth century, is thus the oldest element of the Regalia.

   The Armills are gold bracelets said to symbolise sincerity and wisdom.
   Upon Queen Elizabeth II's coronation, a new set of gold armills was
   produced and presented on the behalf of various Commonwealth
   governments, namely: the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New
   Zealand, South Africa, Pakistan, Ceylon, and Southern Rhodesia.

The Tower of London

   The Crown Jewels have been kept at the Tower of London since 1303 after
   they were stolen from Westminster Abbey. It is thought that most, if
   not all, were recovered shortly afterwards. After the coronation of
   Charles II, they were locked away and shown for a viewing fee paid to a
   custodian. However, this arrangement ended when Colonel Thomas Blood
   stole the Crown Jewels after having bound and gagged the custodian.
   Thereafter, the Crown Jewels were kept in a part of the Tower known as
   Jewel House, where armed guards defend them. They were temporarily
   taken out of the Tower in the Second World War. It was reported that
   they were secretly kept in the basement vaults of the Sun Life
   Insurance company in Montreal, Canada, during World War II, along with
   the gold bullion of the Bank of England. However it has also been said
   that they were kept in the Round Tower of Windsor Castle, or the Fort
   Knox Bullion Depository. The Windsor Castle suggestion is the most
   probably, since by ancient custom the Crown is not supposed to leave
   the country, and in any event the risk of transporting the Crown Jewels
   broad would have outwayed any advantage.

Trivia

   The Crown Jewels were featured in the movie Ernest Rides Again. The
   jewels were residing in a barrel on a giant Revolutionary War cannon
   named Goliath. The inept Ernest had to try to protect the jewels from
   scheming criminals.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crown_Jewels_of_the_United_Kingdom"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
