   #copyright

Cultural identity

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Culture and Diversity

   Cultural identity is the (feeling of) identity of a group or culture,
   or of an individual as far as he is influenced by his belonging to a
   group or culture. Cultural identity is similar to and has overlaps
   with, but is not synonymous with, identity politics.

Description

   There are modern questions of culture that are transfered into
   questions of identity. Various cultural studies and social theory
   investigate the question of cultural identity. In recent decades, a new
   form of identification and with pieces broken off from the individual
   as a coherent whole subject. Cultural identity remarks upon: place,
   gender, race, history, nationality, sexual orientation, religious
   beliefs and ethnicity.

   Some critics of cultural identity argue that the preservation of
   cultural identity, being based upon difference, is a divisive force in
   society, and that cosmopolitanism gives individuals a greater sense of
   shared citizenship. That is not to say that cultural identity must
   always be divisive. When considering practical association in
   international society, states may share an inherent part of their 'make
   up' that gives common ground, and alternate means of identifying with
   each other. Examples can be taken from both old and contemporary world
   order. In the old world order European states shared a high level of
   cultural homogenity, due to their common history of 'frequently violent
   relationships, and Greco-Roman cultural origins' Brown also argues that
   the Western invention of the nation-state has proven to be an appealing
   and homogenising factor to many cultures.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cultural_identity"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
