   #copyright

Cyclone Rosita

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Natural Disasters; Storms

   CAPTION: Severe Tropical Cyclone Rosita

   Category 5 cyclone ( Australian scale)
   Category 4 cyclone ( SSHS)
   Tropical Cyclone Rosita near peak intensity
   Tropical Cyclone Rosita near peak intensity
     __________________________________________________________________

   Formed April 15, 2000
   Dissipated April 21, 2000
   Highest
   winds
   230  km/h (145  mph) (1-minute sustained)
   290  km/h (180  mph) (gusts)
   Lowest pressure 930  hPa ( mbar)
   Damage Unknown
   Fatalities 0
   Areas
   affected Northern Western Australia (especially Broome)
   Part of the
   1999-00 Southern Hemisphere tropical cyclone season

   Severe Tropical Cyclone Rosita was a tropical cyclone that affected
   northern Australia from April 15 through April 21, 2000. Rosita was one
   of the most intense tropical cyclones to hit the west Kimberley coast
   in the last hundred years. Crossing the coast as a Category 5 about 40
   kilometres (25 miles) south of Broome on 20 April, Rosita caused severe
   damage in the Eco Beach resort and the vegetation around Broome. Its
   region of very destructive winds (gusts exceeding 170 km/h) passed
   south of Broome by only 15 kilometres (9 miles). Cyclone Rosita was the
   first cyclone to directly hit Broome since Cyclone Lindsay in March
   1985.

Storm history

   Storm path
   Enlarge
   Storm path

   A weak low in the Timor Sea formed on 14 April, initially moving west
   south-west and turned southward during 16 April and 17 April. The low
   slowly strengthened and was named Rosita on 17 April, while located
   approximately 670 km (415 miles) to the north of Port Hedland at about
   6 p.m. WST (1000 UTC). On the morning of 18 April, a ship reported a
   relatively high pressure of 997 hPa while passing very close to the
   centre of Cyclone Rosita, however, near- storm-force winds were
   reported.

   Rosita then entered a very favourable environment which allowed rapid
   development to occur. On 19 April, Rosita turned to the east-southeast
   and intensified rapidly to a Category 5 severe cyclone, with an
   estimated central pressure of 930 hPa. Wind gusts near the centre were
   estimated of about 290 km/h (180 mph). Rosita turned slightly to the
   southeast, crossing the coast at peak intensity, 40 kilometres (25
   miles) south of Broome at around 1 a.m. WST on 20 April (1700 UTC April
   19). Cyclone Rosita was a small cyclone, but nevertheless was very
   intense and powerful. Its radius of gale-force winds was just half the
   average for cyclones in Australia, and its core of very destructive
   winds extended just 25 kilometres (16 miles) from its centre. This
   meant that Rosita’s region of very destructive winds missed Broome by
   only 15 kilometres (9 miles) to the south. Once over land, Rosita
   accelerated to speeds of up to 30 km/h (19 mph) into the Great Sandy
   Desert, only weakening gradually. Rosita passed close to the community
   of Balgo Hills at around 10 p.m. WST (1400 UTC) on 20 April, about 700
   kilometres (435 miles) from the coast. Rosita was still estimated to be
   at Category 1 intensity when it passed near the community. Rosita’s
   remnants continued to bring flooding rains to central Australia.

Preparations

   The Bureau of Meteorology predicted Rosita to hit near Broome at around
   midnight WST on April 20 (1600 UTC April 19). Towns around the area
   were warned to prepare for one of the most powerful cyclones ever to
   threaten Australia. Very destructive winds with gusts to 260 km/h near
   the cyclone's centre were expected. Residents of coastal towns were
   warned to expect dangerous storm tides – local emergency officials said
   an 8 metre (26 foot)-high tide was expected at that night. Tourists in
   the area were warned not to try to reach Broome. Chevron Australia said
   a tanker due to arrive on 18 April was asked to delay its arrival till
   22 April because of the cyclone. Iron ore miners in Port Hedland and
   Dampier monitored Rosita's approach.

   Blue Alert warnings, which indicate that a cyclone may affect the
   warning area within 48 hours, were issued for Cyclone Rosita on the
   morning on 19 April. They were upgraded to a Yellow Alert – an
   indication that a cyclone appears inevitable to affect the warning area
   in 12 hours – at 1 pm, then to a Red Alert – meaning the cyclone is
   imminent – at 8 pm. In general, residents were well informed of the
   warnings through the radio. Residents from the low-lying downtown areas
   evacuated to homes in more elevated locations. Two of the three
   available evacuation shelters were opened and co-ordinated by the
   Department of Family and Children's Services. 280 people took shelter
   in schools, while 78 residents from Bidyadanga were evacuated to Port
   Hedland or Broome. The people that stayed in the settlement sheltered
   in the church and family homes. Staff and guests at the Eco Beach
   tourist resort received warnings from Rosita early on 19 April and made
   a timely return to Broome before the cyclone hit.

Impact

   The largest impact occurred near the core of very destructive winds
   about 40 km (25 miles) south of Broome. The main homestead on the
   Thangoo station, 28 km (17 miles) to the south-southeast of Broome,
   received only minor structural damage, however the station was in the
   region of the dangerous storm surge. Reports from the Thangoo station,
   situated 2.5 km (1.6 miles) inland from coastal mangroves, showed that
   the station’s front gate had debris laid up to the second shoreline,
   about a metre (3.3 ft) above mean ground level. Another station
   homestead, 7 km (4 miles) west, was covered by coastal dunes but
   escaped major damage to its structure.

   The most severe structural damage occurred near Cape Villaret, 40 km
   (25 miles) south-southwest of Broome. The Eco-beach tourist resort and
   the Yardoogarra station were devastated. The area around the homestead
   was totally devastated. A caravan parked nearby was blown away and
   crumbled, and a semi trailer was blown to its side. The vegetation,
   which used to be very lush, was stripped of all leaves by the
   destructive winds which carried airborne salt and sand. The damage to
   the vegetation seemed to be worse than the tree damage seen in Exmouth
   caused by Cyclone Vance in March 1999. About 60 km (37 miles) of
   fencing was pushed over, all windmills were destroyed, and about 200
   head of cattle were lost, mostly due to drowning from the storm surge.
   However, the path of destruction to the vegetation was estimated to be
   just 15 to 20 km wide, reflecting Rosita's small size.

   The Eco Beach tourist resort was only built to resist wind gusts of
   Category 3 strength. Only about 10 of the 40 accommodation huts were
   left standing. Some of the huts were removed from their concrete
   foundations, and were carried by the winds and smashed into other
   buildings. Showing how strong Rosita's winds were, a sea container
   weighing 2.5 tonnes (5500 lb) and filled with 2 to 3 tonnes (4400 to
   6600 lb) of equipment was blown 700 m (0.4 mile) across sand dunes. The
   magnitude of the devastation to the vegetation in this area resembled a
   place being destroyed by bushfires.

   In the town of Broome, the maximum wind gust recorded was 153 km/h (95
   mph), recorded at the Broome aerodrome, as well as recording 163.8 mm
   (6.45 in) of rain for the 24 hours up to 9 a.m. WST (0100 UTC) on 20
   April. Vegetation in this area were badly damaged, particularly the
   African Mahogany trees which were either snapped off or uprooted. Parts
   of Cable Beach were severely eroded. An area which used to be covered
   with sand was completely covered by rocks. The eastern side of Roebuck
   Bay had evidence of severe erosion of the coastal terrain. At Broome's
   only banana plantation, almost all crops were completely lost, with 10
   out of 18,000 plants left surviving. Fortunately, most buildings in the
   town of Broome remained unharmed, although power supplies were cut to
   many parts of Broome for several days.

   Some damages to trees and property were reported in the community of
   Balgo Hills, located in the Great Sandy Desert approximately 700 km
   (435 miles) inland from the coast.

Aftermath

   The extended period of power outage was a major problem for the
   residents in Broome. Residents had to wait for days for the power
   supply to be restored. As the main transmission lines are all above
   ground, Broome is particularly vulnerable to power outages during
   cyclones. The majority of residential properties had power restored
   back on 30 April, 11 days after Rosita struck. Many properties suffered
   water damage to circuits, and these homes had to be inspected before
   power could be restored. Television and radio were limited to
   transmissions from Perth, and this proved difficult to access
   information about any available supplies in the town. People had
   difficulties purchasing food and supplies because supermarkets were
   closed or had no power. However, power was restored a few days after
   the cyclone hit.

   The Western Australia State Emergency Service (SES) was responsible for
   responses relating to the damage from Rosita. SES workers worked to
   help the community recover, tarping damaged roofs and clearing debris
   from roads and around houses where it limited access from residents.
   Most work involved clearing vegetation from power lines to enable
   Western Power to begin repairs. Volunteers from other Western
   Australian cities and towns such as Perth, Bunbury, Karratha, Derby and
   Tom Price had arrived to assist with requests for help. During the
   recovery period, the SES earned huge public respect, and residents were
   pleased with the quick response of the SES.

   The damage from Rosita made a large impact on the tourist industry. The
   time of impact happened just before the Easter and ANZAC Day Holiday
   period. Easter is considered to be the beginning of the tourist season,
   so it is usually expected that there will be an increase of visitors
   into Broome at this time. Many visitors delayed or cancelled their
   trips, and some cut short their holiday. Car hire companies that had
   been booked out for the holiday period had people returning vehicles
   early.

   The impact of Rosita has alerted residents to prepare for any cyclones
   that may threaten the town in the future. Many people were surprised
   that Cyclone Rosita was going to hit, as cyclones are rare in Broome,
   and many thought the cyclone season was already over. However, many
   residents also thought that the cyclone's impact strengthened the
   community as a whole and "brought people closer together".

Retirement

   The name Rosita was removed from the official list of tropical cyclone
   names set out by the Tropical Cyclone Warning Centre in Perth. It was
   replaced with the name Robyn.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyclone_Rosita"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
