   #copyright

Cyprus

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; European
Countries

              Κυπριακή Δημοκρατία  ( Greek)
   Kypriakí Dhimokratía
   Kıbrıs Cumhuriyeti  ( Turkish)
   Republic of Cyprus

   Flag of Cyprus Coat of arms of Cyprus
   Flag           Coat of arms
   Motto: none
   Anthem: Ύμνος εις την Ελευθερίαν
   Transliteration: Imnos is tin Eleftherian
   (English: Hymn to Freedom)^1
   Location of Cyprus
   Capital
   (and largest city) Nicosia
                      35°08′N 33°28′E
   Official languages Greek, Turkish
   Government         Republic
    - President       Tassos Papadopoulos
      Independence    From United Kingdom
    - Date            16 August 1960
    Accession to EU   May 1, 2004
                                   Area
    - Total           9,251 km² ( 167th)
                      3,572 sq mi
    - Water (%)       negligible
                                Population
    - 2005 estimate   835,000^2 ( 157th)
    - 2001 census     689,565
    - Density         90/km² ( 105th)
                      233/sq mi
       GDP ( PPP)     2005 estimate
    - Total           $ 17.49 billion ( 115th)
    - Per capita      $ 21,232 ( 32nd)
      HDI  (2004)     0.903 (high) ( 29th)
        Currency      Cyprus Pound ( CYP)
       Time zone      EET ( UTC+2)
    - Summer ( DST)   EEST ( UTC+3)
      Internet TLD    .cy^3
      Calling code    +357
   ^1 "Ymnos pros tin Eleutherian" is also used as the national anthem of
   Greece.
   ^2 UN population estimate for entire island including
   Turkish-controlled areas.
   ^3 The .eu domain is also used, shared with other European Union member
   states.

          Not to be confused with Cypress.

   Cyprus ( Greek: Κύπρος, Kýpros; Turkish: Kıbrıs), officially the
   Republic of Cyprus ( Greek: Κυπριακή Δημοκρατία, Kypriakí Dhimokratía;
   Turkish: Kıbrıs Cumhuriyeti), is a Eurasian island nation in the
   eastern part of the Mediterranean Sea south of the Anatolian peninsula
   (Asia Minor) or modern-day Turkey. It is the third largest island in
   the Mediterranean Sea. The Republic of Cyprus is divided into six
   districts : Lefkosia (the capital), Ammochostos, Keryneia, Larnaka,
   Lemesos, and Pafos. A former British colony, the Republic of Cyprus
   gained independence in 1960 while the United Kingdom retained two
   Sovereign Base Areas. Following years of intercomunnal violence, Turkey
   launched an invasion of the island in 1974 in response to an Athens
   engineered coup aimed uniting the island with Greece. The invasion led
   to the internal displacement of thousands of Greek and Turkish Cypriots
   and the creation of the de-facto Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus,
   separated from the south by the United Nations-controlled Green Line
   and is recognised only by Turkey. The Republic of Cyprus has been a
   member state of the European Union since 1 May 2004.

Etymology

   The name Cyprus has a somewhat uncertain etymology. One suggestion is
   that it comes from the Greek word for the cypress tree ( Cupressus
   sempervirens), κυπάρισσος (kypárissos) or even from the Greek name of
   the henna plant ( Lawsonia alba), κύπρος (kýpros). Another school
   suggests that it stems from the Eteocypriot word for copper. Dossin,
   for example, suggests that it has roots to the Sumerian word for copper
   (zubar) or even the word for bronze (kubar), due to the large deposits
   of copper ore found on the island. Through overseas trade, the island
   has already given its name to the Classical Latin word for the metal,
   which appears in the phrase aes Cyprium, "metal of Cyprus", later
   shortened to Cuprum.

History

Prehistoric and ancient Cyprus

   Ruins of ancient Salamis, near Famagusta.
   Enlarge
   Ruins of ancient Salamis, near Famagusta.
   Petra tou Romiou, near Paphos.
   Enlarge
   Petra tou Romiou, near Paphos.

   There are only small traces of the Stone Age, but the Bronze Age was
   characterized by a well-developed and clearly marked civilization. The
   people quickly learned to work the rich copper mines of the island. The
   Mycenæan civilization seems to have reached Cyprus at around 1600 BC
   and several Greek and Phœnician settlements that belong to the Iron Age
   can be found on the island. Cyprus came into contact with Egypt about
   1500 BC and became an important trade partner for them.

   Around 1200 BC, the Sea Peoples began to arrive as settlers to Cyprus,
   a process that lasted for more than a century. This migration is
   remembered in many sagas concerning how some of the Greek heroes that
   participated in the Trojan War came to settle in Cyprus. The newcomers
   brought with them their language, new technology and introduced a new
   outlook for visual arts. The Phœnicians arrived at the island in the
   early first millennium BC. In those times, Cyprus supplied the Greeks
   with timber for their fleets.

   In the sixth century BC, Amasis of Egypt conquered Cyprus, which soon
   fell under the rule of the Persians when Cambyses conquered Egypt. In
   the Persian Empire, Cyprus formed part of the fifth satrapy and in
   addition to tribute it had to supply the Persians with ships and crews.
   In their new fate, the Greeks of Cyprus had as companions the Greeks of
   Ionia (west coast of Anatolia) with whom they forged closer ties. When
   the Ionian Greeks revolted against Persia (499 BC), the Cypriots,
   except for the city of Amathus, joined in led by Onesilos who dethroned
   his brother, the king of Salamis, for not wanting to fight for
   independence. The Persians reacted quickly, sending a considerable
   force against Onesilos. The Persians finally won despite Ionian help.

   After their defeat, the Greeks mounted various expeditions in order to
   liberate Cyprus from Persian rule, but all their efforts bore only
   temporary results. Eventually, Alexander the Great (356-323 BC) took
   the island from the Persians. Later, the Ptolemies of Egypt controlled
   it; finally Rome annexed it in 58-57 BC. No doubt the most important
   event that occurred in Roman Cyprus was the visit by Apostles Paul and
   Barnabas accompanied by St Mark who came to the island at the outset of
   their first missionary journey in 45 AD. After their arrival at Salamis
   they proceeded to Paphos where they converted the Roman Governor
   Sergius Paulus to Christianity making Cyprus the first country in the
   world governed by a Christian ruler.

Cyprus in ancient myth

   Cyprus is the legendary birthplace of the goddess of beauty and love,
   the beautiful Aphrodite (also known as Kypris or the Cyprian).
   According to Hesiod's Theogony, the goddess emerged fully grown from
   the sea where the severed genitals of the god Uranus were cast by his
   son, Kronos, causing the sea to foam (Greek: Aphros). Her birth was
   famously depicted by the artist Botticelli in The Birth of Venus. The
   legendary site of Aphrodite's birth is at 'Petra tou Romiou' (or
   'Aphrodite's Rock'), a large sea stack close to the coastal cliffs near
   Paphos. Throughout ancient history, Cyprus was a flourishing centre for
   the cultic worship of Aphrodite.

Post-classical and modern Cyprus

   Cyprus became part of the Byzantine Empire after the partitioning of
   the Roman Empire in 395, and remained so for almost eight hundred
   years, [punctuated by a?] brief period of Arab domination and
   influence.

   After the rule of the rebellious Byzantine Emperor Isaac Comnenus, King
   Richard I of England captured the island in 1191 during the Third
   Crusade. On May 6, 1191, Richard's fleet arrived in the port of Lemesos
   and took the city. When Isaac arrived to stop the Crusaders he
   discovered he was too late and retired to Kolossi. Richard called Isaac
   to negotiations but Isaac broke his oath of hospitality and started
   demanding Richard's departure. Richard ordered his cavalry to follow
   him in a battle against Isaac's army in Tremetusia. The few Roman
   Catholics of the island joined Richard's army and so did the island's
   nobles who were dissatisfied with Isaac's seven years of tyrannical
   rule. Though Isaac and his men fought bravely, Richard's army was
   bigger and better equipped, assuring his victory. Isaac continued to
   resist from the castles of Pentadactylos but after the siege of his
   castle of Kantara he finally surrendered. In a fit of sardonic irony,
   Richard had Isaac confined with silver chains, scrupulously abiding by
   a previous promise that he would not place Isaac in irons should he be
   taken prisoner. Richard became the new ruler of Cyprus, gaining for the
   Crusade a major supply base that was not under immediate threat from
   the Turks as was Tyre. Richard looted the island and massacred those
   trying to resist him. He and most of his army left Cyprus for the Holy
   Land early in June. In his absence Cyprus would be governed by Richard
   Camville.

   Guy of Lusignan purchased the island from Richard in 1192 compensated
   for the loss of his kingdom by purchasing Cyprus from the Templars. The
   Republic of Venice took control in 1489 after the death of the last
   Lusignan Queen, after which the Ottoman Empire conquered the Island in
   1571.

   Ottoman rule brought about two radical results in the history of the
   island. For the first time since the Phoenicians in the ninth century
   BC, a new population group appeared, the Turks. The Ottoman Empire gave
   timars – land grants – to soldiers under the condition that they and
   their families would stay there permanently. During the seventeenth
   century the Turkish population grew rapidly. Most of the Turks who had
   settled on the island during the three centuries of Ottoman rule
   remained when control of Cyprus – although not sovereignty – was ceded
   to Britain in 1878. Many, however, left for Turkey during the 1920s. By
   1970, ethnic Turks represented 18% of the total population of the
   island, with ethnic Greeks representing the remainder. The distinction
   between the two groups was by religion and language.

   The second important result of the Ottoman conquest benefited the Greek
   peasants who no longer remained serfs of the land they were
   cultivating. Now they could acquire it by purchase, thus becoming
   owners of it. The Ottomans also applied the millet system to Cyprus,
   which allowed religious authorities to govern their own non-Muslim
   minorities. This system reinforced the position of the Orthodox Church
   and the cohesion of the ethnic Greek population. Gradually the
   Archbishop of Cyprus became not only religious but ethnic leader as
   well. In this way the Church undertook the task of the guardian of
   Greek cultural legacy, which is partly carried on even now, although
   diminished after independence.

   The heavy taxes and the abuses against the population on the part of
   the Ottoman rulers in the early years after the Ottoman conquest gave
   rise to opposition, following which the Sultan ordered the Governor
   (the "Kadi") and the Treasurer to govern with justice. While the
   Sultan's orders indicated his goodwill towards the local population,
   the local administration proved indifferent, arbitrary and often
   corrupt, along with imposing a heavy burden of taxes. The inhabitants
   of Cyprus, disappointed at the mismanagement of Ottoman governors, soon
   turned to Western Europe in search for help for liberation.

   Between 1572 and 1668, around twenty-eight bloody uprisings took place
   on the island and in many of these both Greeks and Turk peasants took
   part. All ended in failure.

   About 1660, in order to eliminate the mismanagement of the Ottoman
   administration, the Sultan recognised the Archbishop and the Bishops as
   "the protectors of people" and the representatives of the Sultan. In
   1670, Cyprus ceased to be a "pasaliki" for the Ottoman Empire and came
   under the jurisdiction of the Admiral of the Ottoman fleet. In his
   turn, the Admiral sent an officer to govern in his place.

   In 1703, Cyprus came under the jurisdiction of the Grand Vizier
   (Anthony Petane) who sent to the island a military and civil
   administrator. The title and function of this officer were awarded to
   the person who could raise the highest revenues in exchange. As a
   result, even heavier taxation was imposed. About 1760 the situation in
   Cyprus was intolerable. A terrible epidemic of plague, bad crops and
   earthquakes, drove many Cypriots to emigrate. In addition, what was
   worse for the Greeks and Turks of the island, the newly- appointed
   Pasha, doubled the taxes in 1764. In the end, Chil Osman and 18 of his
   friends were killed by Greek and Turkish Cypriots alike but the two
   ethnic elements had to pay a huge sum of money to the Sultan and the
   families of the victims. The latter did not accept this judgement and
   broke into an open rebellion, having Khalil Agha, the commander of the
   guard of the castle of Kyrenia, as their leader. Finally the uprising
   was crushed and Khalil Agha was beheaded.

   Cyprus was placed under British control on 4 June 1878 as a result of
   the Cyprus Convention, which granted control of the island to Britain
   in return for British support of the Ottoman Empire in the
   Russian-Turkish War.

   Famagusta harbour was completed in June 1906; by this time the island
   was a strategic naval outpost for the British Empire, shoring up
   influence over the Eastern Mediterranean and Suez Canal, the crucial
   main route to India.

   Cyprus was formally annexed by the United Kingdom in 1913 in the run-up
   to the First World War. Many Cypriots, now British subjects, signed up
   to fight in the British Army, in this and in the Second World War.

   During the 1900s and 1950s,Greek Cypriots began to demand union with
   Greece. In 1950, Greek Cypriots voted in a referendum in support of
   enosis while the Turkish Cypriots vetoed the referendum. The enosis
   movement largely ignored the Turkish Cypriots presence on the island
   and the British sought to quell any movement which could threaten their
   possession of the island. In 1955, the struggle against British rule
   erupted with the foundation of EOKA, which lasted until 1959.

   Independence was attained in 1960 after exhaustive negotiations between
   the United Kingdom, as the colonial power, and Greece and Turkey, the
   cultural 'motherlands' for both of the communities in Cyprus. The UK
   ceded the island under a constitution allocating government posts and
   public offices by ethnic quota, but retained two small Sovereign Base
   Areas.

Post-independence

   During the 1960s, Makarios and Küçük pursued a non-aligned foreign
   policy, cultivating good relations with Britain, Greece and Turkey, and
   taking a leading role in developing the Non-Aligned Movement.

   Tension began in 1963 when Makarios proposed thirteen amendments to the
   constitution of the Republic of Cyprus. Turkish Cypriots were opposed
   to the proposal since it sought to remove their constitutional
   safeguards which Greek Cypriots claimed to be problematic in the
   conduct of government. On 21 December 1963, clashes between Greek
   Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots erupted unleashed a wave of violence
   across the island.

   By 1974, dissatisfaction among Greek nationalist right-wing elements in
   favour of the long-term goal of Enosis precipitated a coup d'etat
   against President Makarios which was sponsored by the military
   government of Greece and led by the Cypriot National Guard. The new
   regime replaced Makarios with Nikos Giorgiades Sampson as president,
   and Bishop Gennadios as head of the Cypriot Orthodox Church. Seven days
   after these events Turkey intervened militarilly in Cyprus by sea and
   air on 20 July 1974. At the time Turkey claimed it was invading to
   uphold its obligation under the 1960 Treaty of Guarantee. Talks in
   Geneva involving Greece, Turkey, the United Kingdom and the two Cypriot
   factions failed in mid-August, and Turkish forces subsequently moved
   from the previous cease-fire lines to gain control of 37% of the
   island's territory. During the invasion, over 160,000 Greek Cypriots
   were displaced from their home land, while Turkish forces killed
   several thousand Greek Cypriots captured in the occupied areas. While
   this was happening, the entire inhabitants of several Turkish Cypriot
   villages were massacred in reprisal for the landings by Greek Cypriot
   paramilitaries. As of today, there are still thousands of Greek
   Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots unaccounted for. The events of the summer
   of 1974 have dominated Cypriot politics ever since and have been a
   major point of contention between Greek and Turkish Cypriots, as well
   as Greece and Turkey.

   Since 1974, there have been continual efforts to negotiate a
   settlement, which met with varying levels of disagreement from either
   side. Since 18% of the population was left in control of 37% of the
   territory, including fertile and productive land, the Turkish
   government arranged an influx of settlers from Turkey whose exact
   numbers are disputed, but believed to be in the range of over 100,000.
   Turkey counters that the Turkish Cypriots - before 1963 - owned and
   farmed 33% of Cypriot land before being forced into enclaves, thus the
   take-over of one-third of Cyprus was seen as compensating the Turkish
   Cypriots for their lost land. This figures are rejected by the Cyprus
   Republic Authorities as fictional. According to the records held by the
   Cyprus Land Registry, only 12,3% of all cypriot land, or 16,7% of
   privately owned land was owned by Turkish Cypriots. Of the
   3.241.930.428 square meters of the occupied area, 60,27% is owned by
   Greek Cypriots, 16,39% is owned by Turkish Cypriots and 23,09% is state
   owned land.

   Turkish Cypriots proclaimed a separate state, the Turkish Republic of
   Northern Cyprus (TRNC), under Rauf Denktaş on November 15, 1983. The UN
   Security Council, in its Resolution 541 of November 18, 1983, declared
   the action illegal and called for withdrawal. Turkey is the only
   country to date that recognises the administration on the northern
   third of Cyprus. Turkey does not recognise the Republic of Cyprus's
   authority over the whole island, and refers to it as the Greek Cypriot
   administration.

   Cyprus joined the European Union as a full member in May 2004. Although
   it was the island as a whole which joined (theoretically including the
   northern areas), the Acquis communautaire applies only to those (Greek)
   areas under the control of the Republic of Cyprus.

   In 2004, the UN backed Annan plan sought to reunify the island before
   EU accesion. Turkish Cypriots accepted the plan whilsts Greek Cypriots
   rejected it, leading to the entry of a divided island, though the
   Acquis communautaire is considered suspended from the north, it is
   still theoretically part of the European Union.

   Since the invasion, the economy of Cyprus has grown greatly and enjoys
   a high standard of living. The north maintains a lower standard of
   living due to international embargoes, relying on Turkey for aid,
   though increased revenues through tourism and a recent construction
   boom have led to rapid economic development in recent years. The
   Turkish Cypriot administration has allowed the illegal sale of real
   estate, consisting almost entirely of property and land still owned by
   Greek Cypriots since before the 1974 Turkish invasion, to private
   buyers from overseas. In 2005, the UK's Guardian Newspaper reported
   that up to 10,000 Europeans had invested in property in the north of
   Cyprus, a trend that still causes concern in the south. This concern
   was highlighted by the UK's Telegraph Newspaper in 2006 when the wife
   of Britain's prime minister, Cherie Blair, touched a diplomatic nerve;
   Mrs Blair, in her capacity as an advocate at law, represented a UK
   couple, the Orams, who had been taken to court by Greek Cypriots who
   claimed ownership of the land on which the Orams had built a house.
   President Tassos Papadopoulos referred to Blair's decision to represent
   the Orams as "a provocative action".

Geography

   MODIS satellite image of Cyprus.
   Enlarge
   MODIS satellite image of Cyprus.
   Topography of Cyprus.
   Enlarge
   Topography of Cyprus.

   The third largest island in the Mediterranean Sea (after Sicily and
   Sardinia), Cyprus is geographically situated in the eastern
   Mediterranean and just south of the Anatolian peninsula (or Asia Minor)
   of the Asian mainland; thus, it is commonly included in the Middle East
   (see also Western Asia and Near East). Turkey is 75 kilometres (47
   miles) north; other neighbouring countries include Syria and Lebanon to
   the east, Israel to the southeast, Egypt to the south, and Greece to
   the west-north-west.

   Politically and culturally, however, it is closely aligned with Europe
   – particularly Greece and Turkey. Historically, Cyprus has been at the
   crossroads between Europe, Western Asia, and Northern Africa, with
   lengthy periods of mainly Greek and intermittent Anatolian, Levantine,
   and British influences. Thus, it is generally considered a
   transcontinental island.

   The central plain ( Mesaoria) with the Kyrenia and Pentadactylos
   mountains to the north and the Troodos mountain range to the south and
   west. There are also scattered, but significant, plains along the
   southern coast.

   The climate is temperate and Mediterranean with hot, dry summers and
   cool, variably rainy winters. There is sufficient snow for a seasonal
   ski facility in the Troodos mountains.

   The capital city, Nicosia, is located to the north-east of the centre
   of the island and is the only divided capital in the world. All the
   other major cities are situated on the coast: Paphos to the south-west,
   Limassol to the south, Larnaca to the south-east, Famagusta to the
   east, and Kyrenia to the north.

Administrative divisions

   Map of Cyprus showing political divisions and districts
   Enlarge
   Map of Cyprus showing political divisions and districts

   Cyprus is divided into six districts:
                      Greek               Turkish
   Famagusta Αμμόχωστος (Ammochostos) Gazimağusa
   Kyrenia   Κερύvεια (Keryneia)      Girne
   Larnaca   Λάρνακα (Larnaka)        Larnaka
   Limassol  Λεμεσός (Lemesos)        Limasol/Leymosun
   Nicosia   Λευκωσία (Lefkosia)      Lefkoşa
   Paphos    Πάφος (Pafos)            Baf

Politics

   After independence Cyprus became a founding member of the Non-Aligned
   Movement despite all three guarantor powers (Greece, Turkey and the UK)
   being North Atlantic Treaty Organization members. Cyprus left the
   Non-Aligned Movement in 2004 to join the European Union, though it
   retains special observer status.

   The 1960 Cypriot Constitution provided for a presidential system of
   government with independent executive, legislative, and judicial
   branches, as well as a complex system of checks and balances, including
   a weighted power-sharing ratio designed to protect the interests of the
   Turkish Cypriots. The executive, for example, was headed by a Greek
   Cypriot president, Archbishop Makarios III, and a Turkish Cypriot vice
   president, Dr Fazıl Küçük, elected by their respective communities for
   5-year terms and each possessing a right of veto over certain types of
   legislation and executive decisions. This system was destined to fail
   as the power of veto meant that whether democratically desired certain
   legislation could not be passed. This of course also meant that a
   Turkish Cypriot could never be president and the government would,
   therefore, be Greek Cypriot dominant meaning that all laws passed would
   be in favour of the Greek Cypriots. To prevent Dr Fazıl Küçük from
   becoming provisional president Archbishop Makarios III never left the
   island.

   The House of Representatives was elected on the basis of separate
   voters' rolls. Since 1964, following clashes between the two
   communities, the Turkish Cypriot seats in the House remained vacant,
   while the Greek Cypriot Communal Chamber was abolished. The
   responsibilities of the chamber were transferred to the newfounded
   Ministry of Education.

   By 1967, when a military junta had seized power in Greece, the
   political impetus for enosis had faded, partly as a result of the
   non-aligned foreign policy of Cypriot President Makarios. Enosis
   remained an ideological goal, despite being pushed significantly
   further down the political agenda. Dissatisfaction in Greece with
   Makarios's perceived failure to deliver on earlier promises of enosis
   convinced the Greek colonels to sponsor the 1974 coup in Nicosia.

   Turkey responded by launching a military operation on Cyprus in a move
   not approved by the other two international guarantor powers, Greece
   and the United Kingdom using as a pretext the protection of the Turkish
   minority from Greek militias. The invasion is called "Cyprus Peace
   Operation" by the Turkish side. Turkish forces captured the northern
   part of the island. Many thousands of others, from both sides, left the
   island entirely. In addition to many of the Greek Cypriot refugees (a
   third of the population), many Turkish Cypriots (on whose pretext
   Turkey invaded) also moved to the UK and other countries where for the
   past 30 years they have lived as neighbours with the Greek Cypriots. In
   the meantime Turkey illegally imported Turkish colonists to populate
   the occupied territories, thereby altering the ethnic make up of the
   occupied north. Under the Geneva Conventions of 1949, it is a war crime
   to transfer, directly or indirectly, the civilian population of a
   country power onto land under that country's military occupation.

   Subsequently, the Turkish Cypriots established their own separatist
   institutions with a popularly elected de facto President and a Prime
   Minister responsible to the National Assembly exercising joint
   executive powers. In 1983, the Turkish Cypriots declared an independent
   state called the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC), an action
   opposed by the United Nations Security Council. In 1985, the TRNC
   adopted a constitution and held its first elections.

Political division

   Cyprus gained independence from the United Kingdom in 1960, with the
   UK, Greece and Turkey retaining limited rights to intervene in internal
   affairs.
   The capital Nicosia remains divided since 1974. The UN buffer zone
   separates the two sectors.
   Enlarge
   The capital Nicosia remains divided since 1974. The UN buffer zone
   separates the two sectors.

   In July 1974, after an attempted coup against the Makarios government
   by extreme right-wing factions aided by the Greek junta, Turkey invaded
   Cyprus, despite the fact that the coup had been quashed before the
   arrival of Turkish paratroopers. The area occupied by the Turkish
   military was further extended to 37 percent of the island beyond the
   demarcation line given in the UN brokered ceasefire. Turkey has ever
   since occupied the northern part by a massive military force, estimated
   at 35 to 60 thousand troops. Cyprus has been divided, de facto, into
   the Greek-Cypriot controlled rump of the Republic, somewhat less than
   two-thirds of the island and the Turkish-occupied 37 percent area in
   the north. Further, British sovereign bases under the term of the
   establishment of the Republic in 1960, occupy 99 square miles (256
   square kilometers). The Republic of Cyprus is the legitimate
   internationally-recognised government of Cyprus. Turkey aside, all
   foreign governments and the United Nations recognise the sovereignty of
   the Republic of Cyprus over the whole island of Cyprus.

   The Turkish Cypriot administration of the northern part of the island,
   together with Turkey, rejects the Republic's rule over the whole island
   and refers to it as the "Greek Authority of Southern Cyprus". Its
   territory, a result of the Turkish invasion of 1974 and whose status
   remains disputed, extends over the northern 34 percent of the island.

   The north proclaimed its independence in 1975, and the self-styled
   Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus was established in 1983. This state
   is recognised only by Turkey. The Organization of the Islamic
   Conference granted it observer member status under the name of "Turkish
   Cypriot State".

   The other power with territory on Cyprus is the United Kingdom. Under
   the independence agreement, the UK retained entitlement to lease two
   extensive areas on the southern coast of the island, around Akrotiri
   and Dhekelia, known collectively as the UK sovereign base areas. They
   are used as military bases.

Exclaves and enclaves

   Cyprus has four exclaves, all in territory that belongs to the British
   Sovereign Base Area of Dhekelia. The first two are the villages of
   Ormidhia and Xylotymvou. Additionally there is the Dhekelia Power
   Station, which is divided by a British road into two parts. The
   northern part is an enclave, like the two villages, whereas the
   southern part is located by the sea and therefore not an enclave
   —although it has no territorial waters of its own .

   The UN buffer zone separating the territory controlled by the Turkish
   Cypriot administration from the rest of Cyprus runs up against Dhekelia
   and picks up again from its east side, off Ayios Nikolaos (connected to
   the rest of Dhekelia by a thin land corridor). In that sense, the
   buffer zone turns the south-east corner of the island, the Paralimni
   area, into a de facto, though not de jure, exclave.

Reunification, the Annan Plan and EU entry

   The results of early negotiations between the Greek and Turkish
   politicians resulted in a broad agreement in principle to reunification
   as a bi-cameral, bi-zonal federation with territory allocated to the
   Greek and Turkish communities within a united island. However,
   agreement was never reached on the finer details, and the two sides
   often met deadlock over the following points, among others:

   The Greek side:
     * took a strong line on the right of return for refugees to
       properties vacated in the 1974 displacement of Cypriots on both
       sides, which was based on both UN Resolutions and decisions of the
       European Court of Human Rights;
     * took a dim view of any proposals which did not allow for the
       repatriation of Turkish settlers from the mainland who had
       emigrated to Cyprus since 1974; and
     * supported a stronger central government.

   The Turkish side:
     * favoured a weak central government presiding over two sovereign
       states in voluntary association, a legacy of earlier fears of
       domination by the majority Greek Cypriots; and
     * opposed plans for demilitarisation, citing security concerns.

   The continued difficulties in finding a settlement presented a
   potential obstacle to Cypriot entry to the European Union, for which
   the government had applied in 1997. UN-sponsored talks between the
   Greek and Turkish leaders, Glafkos Klerides and Rauf Denktash,
   continued intensively in 2002, but without resolution. In December
   2002, the EU formally invited Cyprus to join in 2004, insisting that EU
   membership would apply to the whole island and hoping that it would
   provide a significant enticement for reunification resulting from the
   outcome of ongoing talks. However, weeks before the UN deadline,
   Klerides was defeated in presidential elections by centre candidate
   Tassos Papadopoulos. Papadopoulos had a reputation as a hard-liner on
   reunification and based his stance on international law and human
   rights. By mid-March, the UN declared that the talks had failed.

   A United Nations plan sponsored by Secretary-General Kofi Annan was
   announced on 31 March 2004, based on what progress had been made during
   the talks in Switzerland and fleshed out by the UN, was put for the
   first time to civilians on both sides in separate referenda on 24 April
   2004. The Greek side overwhelmingly rejected the Annan Plan, and the
   Turkish side voted in favour. In considering the outcome it is
   interesting to note that whilst the Turkish settlers (who make up the
   majority in the occupied north) were allowed to vote, the refugees who
   had fled Cyprus had no right to vote in a referendum which would
   ultimately determine their future (their right to return and right to
   their property).

   In May 2004, Cyprus entered the EU, although in practice membership
   only applies to the southern part of the island which is in the control
   of the Republic of Cyprus, but this reality does not concern the
   personal rights of native Turkish Cypriots as EU citizens, as they are
   considered as citizens of the Member State Republic of Cyprus.

Economy

   Economic affairs in Cyprus are dominated by the division of the country
   due to the Turkish occupation of the north part of the island.

   The Cypriot economy is prosperous and has diversified in recent years.
   Cyprus has been sought as a basis for several offshore businesses, due
   to its highly developed infrastructure. Economic policy of the Cyprus
   government has focused on meeting the criteria for admission to the
   European Union.

   Recently, oil has been discovered in the sea South of Cyprus (between
   Cyprus and Egypt) and talks are under way with Egypt to reach an
   agreement as to the exploitation of these resources. The level of the
   oil field in terms of production (barrels per day) that the two
   countries will be able to produce is still a matter of speculation.

   The economy of the Turkish Cypriot North is dominated by the services
   sector including the public sector, trade, tourism and education, with
   smaller agriculture and light manufacturing sectors. The economy
   operates on a free-market basis, although it continues to be
   handicapped by the political isolation of Turkish Cypriots, the lack of
   private and governmental investment, high freight costs, and shortages
   of skilled labor. Despite these constraints, the Turkish Cypriot
   economy turned in an impressive performance in 2003 and 2004, with
   growth rates of 9.6% and 11.4%. Over the same period, per capita income
   almost doubled. This growth has been buoyed by the relative stability
   of the Turkish Lira and by a boom in the education and construction
   sectors.

   Eventual adoption of the euro currency is required of all new countries
   joining the European Union, and the Cyprus government currently intends
   to adopt the currency on 1 January 2008.

   The largest bank on the island is the Bank of Cyprus.

Demographics

   Greek and Turkish Cypriots share many customs but maintain separate
   ethnic identities based on religion, language, and close ties with
   their respective motherlands. Greeks comprise 77% of the island's
   population, Turks 18%, while the remaining 5% are of other ethnicity.

   After the Turkish invasion of 1974, about 150.000 Turks from Anatolia
   were asked or decided to settle in the north. This has changed the
   acutal demographic structure of the island.

   The major part of Greek Cypriots, and thus the majority of entire
   Cyprus, belong to the Autocephalous Orthodox Church of Cyprus ( Cypriot
   Orthodox Church), whereas most Turkish Cypriots are Sunni Muslims.
   Church attendance is relatively high and Cyprus is known, along with
   Malta and Greece, as one of the most religious countries in the
   European Union. In addition, there are also small Roman Catholic,
   Maronite and Armenian Apostolic communities in Cyprus.

   Greek is the predominant language in the south, Turkish is spoken in
   the north and by some Greek Cypriots, too. This delineation is only
   reflective of the post-1974 division of the island, which involved an
   expulsion of Greek Cypriots from the north and the analoguous move of
   Turkish Cypriots from the south. Historically, the Greek language was
   largely spoken by all Greek Cypriots and by many Turkish Cypriots too,
   given the fact that the Greek Cypriots formed the majority of the
   population. Turkish Cypriots uses Turkish as VO language and rather as
   a strong dialect of Turkish.

   English is widely understood, and is taught in schools from the primary
   age.

Education

   Cyprus has a well-developed system of primary and secondary education
   offering both public and private education. State schools are generally
   seen as equivalent in quality of education to private sector
   institutions. Although they don't offer A-level examinations, their end
   of year reports are partly recognized by the British universities.
   Graduates of public schools are required to take an entrance
   examination in order to enrol ato the University of Cyprus or other
   Universities in Greece. Private school students usually study in
   Britain and the USA although some of them go to the university of
   Cyprus or Greek universities. The main problem faced in public
   education is the need of extended extra lessons, while students in
   private schools need virtually no extra lessons. Neither for their
   entrance to the university nor for the school syllabus. The government
   is trying to eliminate this problem but this seems impossible at its
   current state.

   The majority of Cypriots receive their higher education at Greek,
   British, Turkish, other European and North American universities, while
   there are also sizeable emigrant communities in the United Kingdom and
   Australia. Private colleges and state-supported universities have been
   developed by both the Turkish and Greek communities.

   According to the 1960 constitution, education is under the control of
   the two communities (the communal chambers). State education was based
   on nationalisation of existing community supported schools from the
   colonial period. Thus following 1974 the Cypriot system follows the
   Greek system in the south, in other words providing their students with
   an apolytirion, and the Turkish system in the north. A large number of
   students after sitting for A-levels and/or SATs study abroad, mainly in
   English speaking countries such as the United Kingdom or the United
   States, but also in other European destinations such as France and
   Germany. Traditionally the communist party AKEL provided scholarships
   for its members to study in Eastern Europe. Eastern European countries,
   especially Bulgaria and Hungary, are still popular destinations for
   students.

   In the north there are several universities, which are mostly attended
   by Turkish Cypriot and Turkish students. The largest of these
   universities is the Eastern Mediterranean University .

Educational institutions

     * Cyprus International Institute for the Environment and Public
       Health in association with Harvard School of Public Health (taught
       in English)
     * University of Cyprus
     * Open University of Cyprus
     * Cyprus College (taught in English) situated in Nicosia
     * Intercollege (taught in English) situated in Nicosia, Limassol and
       Larnaca
     * Higher Technological Institute (taught in English and Greek)
       situated in Nicosia
     * Frederick Intitute of Technology (taught in English + Greek)
       situated in Nicosia and Limassol

   Private secondary schools include:
     * The Falcon School (Nicosia)
     * The American Academy (Nicosia and Limassol)
     * The American International School (Nicosia)
     * The English School Nicosia (Nicosia)
     * GC School of Careers (Nicosia)
     * The Grammar School (Nicosia)
     * PASCAL English School (Nicosia, Larnaka, and Limassol)
     * PASCAL Greek School (Ελληνική Σχολή ΠΑΣΚΑΛ)
     * Foleys Grammar School (Limassol)

Current events

   A consequence of the 2006 Israel-Lebanon conflict has been the
   evacuation of many thousands of refugees to southern Cyprus.
   Governments including the U.K., U.S, France and Germany are launching
   independent operations to evacuate their citizens from the area. Canada
   has leased seven ships from Cyprus in order to facilitate the
   evacuation of Canadians living or vacationing in Lebanon.

Internal membership

   The island nation Cyprus is member of: Australia Group, CE, EBRD, EIB,
   EU, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICCt, ITUC, IDA, IFAD, IFC , IHO, ILO,
   IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, IOM, IPU, ITU, MIGA, NAM, NSG, OPCW, OSCE,
   PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
   WMO, WToO, WTO.

Notables

     * Peter Andre (born 1973), singer.
     * Marcos Baghdatis (born 1985), tennis player.
     * Mustafa Halilsoy (born 1949), physicist
     * Michael Cacoyiannis (born 1922), film director known for the movies
       Stella (1955) and Zorba the Greek (1964).
     * Antony Costa, former member of the boy band Blue whose father
       is/was a Greek Cypriot.
     * Evridiki, singer.
     * Sir Stelios Haji-Ioannou (born 1967), owner of easyGroup and
       self-styled "serial entrepreneur".
     * Costas Harris, (Born 1983), Chess Player, came 29th in World Junior
       Chess Championships for Cyprus in 1999
     * Mick Karn (born 1958), bassist for the new-wave band Japan.
     * Giannos Kranidiotis (died 1999 in airplane crash), former deputy
       Minister of State.
     * Dr Fazil Küçük (1906-1984), the first and only Turkish Cypriot Vice
       President of the 1960 Republic of Cyprus.
     * Archbishop Makarios (1913-1977), first President of the Republic of
       Cyprus.
     * George Michael (born 1963), singer.
     * Stel Pavlou (born 1970), author and screenwriter.
     * Peter Polycarpou, actor.
     * Anna Vissi (born 1957), singer.
     * Yusuf Islam (previously "Cat" Stevens), singer whose father was a
       Greek Cypriot.
     * Zeno of Citium (born 333 BC), Hellenistic philosopher, founder of
       Stoicism; possibly Phoenician.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyprus"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
