   #copyright

Dál Riata

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: British History 1500 and
before (including Roman Britain)

   Satellite image of northern Britain and Ireland showing the approximate
   area of Dál Riata (shaded). The mountainous spine which separates the
   east and west coasts of Scotland can be seen.
   Enlarge
   Satellite image of northern Britain and Ireland showing the approximate
   area of Dál Riata (shaded). The mountainous spine which separates the
   east and west coasts of Scotland can be seen.

   Dál Riata (also Dalriada or Dalriata) was a Goidelic kingdom on the
   western seaboard of Scotland and the northern coasts of Ireland,
   situated in what is now Argyll and Bute, Lochaber, and County Antrim.
   The traditional view that Dál Riata was an Irish colony in Scotland has
   lately been questioned, largely on archaeological grounds, but it is
   not clear that a consensus view has yet been reached. The inhabitants
   of Dál Riata are often referred to as Scots, from the Latin scotti, a
   word which meant Gael, and later came to mean Gaelic-speakers whether
   Scottish, Irish or otherwise. They are referred to here as Gaels, an
   unambiguous term, or as Dál Riatans.

   The kingdom reached its height under Áedán mac Gabráin, but its
   expansion was checked at the Battle of Degsastan by Æthelfrith of
   Northumbria. Serious defeats in Ireland and Scotland in the time of
   Domnall Brecc (d. 642) ended Dál Riata's Golden Age, and the kingdom
   became a client of Northumbria, then subject to the Picts. There is
   disagreement over the fate of the kingdom from the late 8th century
   onwards where some have seen no revival of Dal Riata after the long
   period of foreign domination from after 637 to around 750 or 760, while
   others have seen a revivial of Dal Riata under Áed Find and the
   usurping of the kingship of Fortriu by the Dál Riata a couple of
   generations earlier than the time of the traditional individual
   credited with this, Kenneth I of Scotland (Cináed mac Ailpín). The
   kingdom finally disappeared in the Viking Age.

People, Land and Sea

   The modern human landscape of Dál Riata differs a great deal from that
   of the first millennium. Most people today live in settlements far
   larger than anything known in early times, while some areas, such as
   Kilmartin and many of the islands, such as Islay and Tiree may well
   have had as many inhabitants as they do today. Many of the small
   settlements have now disappeared, so that the countryside is far
   emptier than was formerly the case, and many areas which were formerly
   farmed are now abandoned. Even the physical landscape is not entirely
   as it was: sea-levels have changed, and the combination of erosion and
   silting will have considerably altered the shape of the coast in some
   places, while the natural accumulation of peat and man-made changes
   from peat-cutting has altered inland landscapes.

   As was normal at the time, subsistence farming was the occupation of
   most people. Oats and barley were the main cereal crops. Pastoralism
   was especially important, and transhumance was the practice in many
   places. Some areas, most notably Islay, were especially fertile, and
   good grazing would have been available all year round, just as it was
   in Ireland. Tiree was famed in later times for its oats and barley,
   while smaller, uninhabited islands were used to keep sheep. The area,
   until lately, was notable for its inshore fisheries, and for plentiful
   shellfish, therefore seafood is likely to have been an important part
   of the diet.

   The Senchus fer n-Alban lists three main kin groups in Dál Riata in
   Scotland, with a fourth being added later:
     * The Cenél nGabráin, in Kintyre, supposedly the descendants of
       Gabrán mac Domangairt.
     * The Cenél n-Óengusa, in Islay and Jura, supposedly the descendants
       of Óengus Mór mac Eirc.
     * The Cenél Loairn, in Lorne, perhaps also Mull and Ardnamurchan,
       supposedly the descendants of Loarn mac Eirc.
     * The Cenél Comgaill, in Cowal and Bute, a later addition, supposedly
       the descendants of Comgall mac Domangairt.

   The Senchus does not list any kindreds in Ireland. Among the Cenél
   Loairn it lists the Airgíalla, although whether this should be
   understood as being Irish settlers or simply another tribe to whom the
   label was applied is unclear. The meaning of Airgíalla 'hostage givers'
   adds to the uncertainty, although it must be observed that only one
   grouping in Ireland was apparenly given this name and it is therefore
   very rare, perhaps supporting the Ui Macc Uais hypothesis. It is also
   interesting to speculate whether this is the real basis of the later
   Clan Donald claims of linkage to the Irish Airgíalla. There is no
   reason to suppose that this is a complete or accurate list.
   Dunadd Hill, Scotland upon which the Dal Riata hill fort stood
   Enlarge
   Dunadd Hill, Scotland upon which the Dal Riata hill fort stood

   Among the royal centres in Dál Riata, Dunadd appears to have been the
   most important. It has been partly excavated, and in addition to
   fortifications, weapons, quernstones and many moulds for the
   manufacture of jewellery were found. Other high-status material
   included glassware and wine amphorae from Gaul, and in larger
   quantities than found elsewhere in Britain and Ireland. Lesser centres
   included Dun Ollaigh, seat of the Cenél Loairn kings, and Dunaverty, at
   the southern end of Kintyre, in the lands of the Cenél nGabráin. The
   main royal centre in Ireland appears to have been at Dunseverick (Dún
   Sebuirge).

   The difficulty of overland travel and the many islands made Dál Riata
   an archipelago, with travel by sea by far the easiest means of moving
   any distance. As well as long distance trade, local trade must also
   have been significant. Currachs were probably the most common seagoing
   craft, and on inland waters dugouts and coracles were used. Large
   timber ships, called long ships, perhaps similar to the Viking ships of
   the same name, are attested to in a variety of sources.

Religion and Art

   The 8th century St Martin's Cross on Iona
   Enlarge
   The 8th century St Martin's Cross on Iona

   There is no direct evidence of pre-Christian Dál Riata. The records
   come to us through the chroniclers of Iona and Irish monasteries.
   Adomnán's Life of St Columba implies a Christian Dál Riata. Whether
   this is true cannot be known. The figure of Columba looms large in any
   history of Christianity in Dál Riata. Adomnán's Life, however useful as
   a record, was not intended to serve as history, but as hagiography. We
   are fortunate that the writing of saints' lives in Adomnán's day had
   not reached the stylised formulas of the High Middle Ages, so that the
   Life contains a great deal of historically valuable information. It is
   also a vital linguistic source showing the distribution of Gaelic and
   P-Celtic placenames in northern Scotland by the end of the 7th century
   and interestingly notes Columba's need for a translator when conversing
   with an individual on Skye, evidence of a non-Gaelic language which is
   also backed up by a sprinkling of P-Celtic placenames on the remote
   mainland opposite the island (W.F.H. Nicolaisen 'Scottish Placenames').

   Columba's founding Iona within the bounds of Dál Riata ensured that the
   kingdom would be of great importance in the spread of Christianity in
   northern Britain, not only to Pictland, but also to Northumbria, via
   Lindisfarne, to Mercia, and beyond. Although the monastery of Iona
   belonged to the Cenél Conaill of the Northern Uí Néill, and not to Dál
   Riata, it had close ties to the Cenél nGabráin, ties which may make the
   annals less than entirely impartial.

   If Iona was the greatest religious centre in Dál Riata, it was far from
   unique. Lismore, in the territory of the Cenél Loairn, was sufficiently
   important for the death of its abbots to be recorded with some
   frequency. Applecross, probably in Pictish territory for most of the
   period, and Kingarth on Bute are also known to have been monastic
   sites, and many smaller sites, such as on Eigg and Tiree, are known
   from the annals. In Ireland, Armoy was the main ecclesiastical centre
   in early times, associated with Saint Patrick and with Saint Olcán,
   said to have been first bishop at Armoy. An important early centre,
   Armoy later declined, overshadowed by the monasteries at Movilla (
   Newtownards) and Bangor.
   Madonna and child, folio 7 v of the Book of Kells.
   Enlarge
   Madonna and child, folio 7 v of the Book of Kells.

   As well as their primary spiritual importance, the political
   significance of religious centres cannot be dismissed. The prestige of
   being associated with the saintly founder was of no small importance.
   Monasteries represented a source of wealth as well as prestige.
   Additionally, the learning and literacy found in monasteries served as
   useful tools for ambitious kings.

   The Book of Kells may have been produced at Iona, although not by
   Columba as legend has it. Whether it was, or not, this type of
   illuminated manuscript would have been produced in Dál Riatan
   monasteries. For other arts, a number of sculptures remain to give an
   impression of Dál Riatan work. The St. Martin's Cross on Iona is the
   best-preserved cross of its type, probably inspired by Northumbrian
   free-standing crosses, such as the Ruthwell Cross, although a similar
   cross exists in Ireland ( Ahenny, County Tipperary). The Kildalton
   Cross on Islay is similar. A sculpted slab at Ardchattan appears to
   show strong Pictish influences, while the Dupplin Cross, it has been
   argued, shows that influences also moved in the opposite direction.
   Fine Hiberno-Saxon metalwork is believed to have been created at
   Dunadd.

   In addition to the monastic sites, a considerable number of churches
   are attested, not only from archaeological evidence, but also from the
   evidence of place-names. The element "kil", from Gaelic cill, can be
   shown in many cases to be associated with early churches, such as at
   Kilmartin by Dunadd.

History

Origins

   Footprint used in king-making ceremonies, Dunadd
   Enlarge
   Footprint used in king-making ceremonies, Dunadd

   The Dál Riata appear to have been present in Ireland (Antrim) by the
   2nd century AD according to Ptolemy. At the same time Argyll was
   apparently dominated by the Epiddi tribe. At some point between
   Ptolemy's geography and the 6th century AD, Dalriada become
   well-established in Argyll.

   In Ireland, Dál Riata had formed an apparent loose confederacy with the
   Cruthin of eastern Ulster and the Dál Fiatach ( Uluti) of the same
   area, with the Uluti dominating. The extent of the Uluti included much
   of the territory of the north of Ireland, down as far as the Boyne
   River. Irish Dál Riata was a well defined petty kingdom that consisted
   of the coastal part of County Antrim from modern Bushmills to Glenarm.
   Its boundaries consisted of the Irish Sea, the River Bush from
   Bushmills to a little south-east of Armoy and the Antrim plateau
   watershed from there to Glenarm. These boundaries could not have been
   more extensive than this as other tribes, divisions of the Dál nAraidi,
   can be consistently shown in contemporary sources dating from the late
   7th to early 13th century to have occupied the areas immediately west
   of the River Bush (The Elne or DalnAraide between the Bush, the Bann
   and the Clogh) and immediately south of Glenarm (the Latharna and
   Seimhne). Indeed, all the non-Dalriadic remainder of County Antrim (the
   bulk of the county) belonged to the various subdivisions of the Dál
   nAraidi, who were considered the largest surviving Cruithin grouping
   and were totally unrelated to the Dal Riata (who belonged to the Erainn
   population strata). The name Cruithin is connected with the Welsh word
   for Britain and probably originally meant 'Briton' but later, as
   Romanisation progressed, came to mean Pict. However, although the Picts
   of Scotland were considered Cruithin, the Irish Cruithin were never
   called Picts. The latter term referred to a specific confederation of
   tribes in a specific area (Scotland north of the Forth-Clyde line) at a
   specific time (the 3rd to 9th centuries AD). There is no evidence for
   any different language or cultural traits among the Cruithin in
   Ireland, so, while the name suggests a group with distant British
   links, nothing tangeable of this survived into the Early Christian
   period.

   There is no evidence that Irish Dál Riata was ever more extensive than
   outlined above in Early Christian documentation although it is possible
   that its land may have retreated eastwards along with the other main
   Ulaid tribes in the early centuries AD if the Ulster Cycle tales
   accurately reflect the Ulaid's former territory. The tribe nearest to
   Dál Riata's position in Ptolemy's geography was the Robogdii, a name
   which the linguist T.F. O'Rahilly suggested was an early form of the
   second element of the name Dál Riata. The Darini lay to the south,
   possibly in north County Down, and O'Rahilly again notes that this is
   probably linked to Daire, a mythological figure associated with the
   Erainn population strata in Ireland. The Erainn tribes that had
   survived to Ptolemy's time were located in the north-east and
   south-west corners of Ireland but were probably once much more
   widespread. The north-east group of the Erainn consisted of the Dál
   Riata in north-east Antrim and the true Ulaid or Dál Fiathach in east
   County Down. The Ulaid are thought by many scholars to appear as the
   Uolunti in Ptolemy's geography. In term of population strata, the
   Erainn are probably the oldest as their name is connected with that of
   the island and basically means "Ireland people", presumably at one
   stage contrasting with incomers. An early form of the Gaelic name of
   Ireland is recorded in the 6th century BC, showing the antiquity of the
   name and almost certainly of Celtic (probably Goidelic) on the island.
   As Ireland was effectively in the Bronze Age in the 6th century BC, it
   is thought likely that the Erainn may represent the pre-Iron Age but
   apparently Celtic inhabitants of Ireland. O'Rahilly's historical model
   of linking the Erainn with the Fir Bolg seems unlikely and his scheme
   wherebye Gaelic's arrival in Ireland is connected to the spread of the
   Connachta has been debunked on the grounds of the very early Gaelic
   oghams in the Erainn areas of SW Ireland, far from the Connachta and Uí
   Néill sphere. Contrary to O'Rahilly's scheme, it was probably the
   Erainn tribes that first spoke Gaelic (by the end of the Bronze Age)
   and subsequent arrivals with suggested British or continental
   connections probably brought P-Celtic forms. However, their numbers may
   have been small, meaning that, unlike most of the Celtic world, they
   soon accepted the older Q-Celtic form.

   The most important thing to note from this summary is that this implies
   that Irish Dál Riata was apparenly Gaelic speaking from the end of the
   Bronze Age. Also, if O'Rahilly is correct in his interpretation of the
   Robogdi of Ptolemy as a distortion of Redodi, an early form of Dál
   Riata, then we have clear evidence that the Dál Riata were located in
   Ireland roughly where they were later placed, in the north-east of
   Antrim. The fact that in Ptolemy's geography Argyll was occupied by the
   Epidii tribe would suggest that the Dál Riata only crossed to Argyll
   after the 2nd century AD, apparently supporting the colonial model. It
   is not clear if Irish Dál Riata's small size was a relatively recent
   thing when native Irish records began or not. An unprecidented
   population explosion in Ireland during the later Roman period in
   Britain is cleary indicated in pollen cores. This could have led to
   external presssure as a push factor together with the pull factor of
   new lands in Scotland.

   Even if Irish Dál Riata had not shrunk and it had always been a small
   territory, this should not invite disbelief that it could have
   conquered an area much larger than the 'mother' territory. There are
   many parallels of this 'rags to riches' type rise, including the Dál
   gCais of Munster who went from a minor marginal sept to producing high
   kings of Ireland (Brian Boru etc) in a few generations. After a colony
   had been established in Kintyre, this had been diminished by warfare
   with the Picts in western Scotland. A second wave by Fergus and his
   brothers in 503 successfully established the first kingdom of the
   Scots. Through Fergus' line is descended all the kings of Scotland, and
   from there is descended the present British monarch, Queen Elizabeth
   II.

   The Duan Albanach tells that the three sons of Erc— Fergus Mór, Loarn
   and Óengus— conquered Alba (Britain) around 500 AD. Bede offers a
   different, and probably older, account wherein Dál Riata was settled by
   a certain Reuda, which is more internally consistent, given that Old
   Irish Dál means portion or share, and is usually followed by the name
   of an eponymous founder. Bede's tale may come from the same root as the
   Irish tales of Cairpre Riata and his brothers, the sons of Conaire Mór.
   The story of kingdom moves from foundation myth to something nearer to
   history with the reports of the death of Comgall mac Domangairt around
   540 and of his brother Gabrán around 560.

   The version of history in the Duan Albanach was long accepted, although
   it is preceded by the purely legendary tale of Albanus and Brutus
   conquering Britain. The implantation of the Old Irish language in
   Scotland was seen as a product of a large-scale migration from Ulster.
   However, archaeological evidence shows that Argyll and its surrounds
   were different from Ireland, before and after the supposed migration,
   but that they also formed part of the Irish Sea province with Ireland,
   being easily distinguished from the rest of Scotland.

   For this reason, it is now generally, but not universally, supposed
   that the Gaelic language had long been present in the area of Dál
   Riata, perhaps since the Insular Celtic languages had divided into
   Goidelic and Brythonic branches. However Dál Riata came to form, the
   period in which it arose was one of great instability in Ulster,
   following the loss of territory by the kingdom of Ulaid, including the
   ancient centre of Emain Macha, to the Airgíalla and the Uí Néill.
   Whether the two parts of Dál Riata had long been united, or whether a
   conquest in the 4th century or early 5th century, either of Antrim from
   Argyll, or vice versa, in line with myth, is not known.

Druim Cett to Mag Rath

   Map of Dál Riata at its height, c. 580–600. Pictish regions are marked
   in yellow.
   Enlarge
   Map of Dál Riata at its height, c. 580–600. Pictish regions are marked
   in yellow.

   The history of Dál Riata, while unknown before the middle of the 6th
   century, and very unclear after the middle of the 8th century, is
   relatively well recorded in the intervening two centuries, although
   many questions must remain unanswered. As has been said, the origins of
   the link between Dál Riata in Scotland and Ireland are obscure. What is
   not in doubt is that Irish Dál Riata was a lesser kingdom of Ulaid. The
   Kingship of Ulster was dominated by the Dál Fiatach and contested by
   the Cruithne kings of the Dál nAraidi.

   In 575, Saint Columba fostered an agreement between Áedán mac Gabráin
   and Áed mac Ainmuirech of the Cenél Conaill at Druim Cett. This
   alliance was likely precipitated by the conquests of the Dál Fiatach
   king Báetán mac Cairill, one of the very few High Kings of Ireland not
   of the Connachta or the Uí Néill, who had sought to subjugate all of
   Dál Riata, and the Isle of Man as well. Báetán died in 581, but the
   Ulaid kings did not abandon their attempts to control Dál Riata.

   The kingdom of Dál Riata reached its greatest extent in the reign of
   Áedán mac Gabráin. It is said that Áedán was ordained as king by
   Columba. If true, this was one of the first ordinations known. As
   noted, Columba brokered the alliance between Dál Riata and the Northern
   Uí Néill, and this alliance was successful, first in defeating Báetan
   mac Cairill, then in allowing Áedán to campaign widely against his
   neighbours, as far afield as Orkney and lands of the Maeatae, on the
   River Forth. Áedán appears to have been very successful in extending
   his power, until he faced the Bernician king Æthelfrith at Degsastan c.
   603. Æthelfrith's brother was among the dead, but Áedán was defeated,
   and the Bernician kings continued their advances in southern Scotland.
   Áedán died c. 608 aged about 70. Dál Riata did expand to include Skye,
   possibly conquered by Áedán's son Gartnait.

   It appears, although the original tales are lost, that Fiachnae mac
   Báetáin (d. 626), Dál nAraidi King of Ulster, was overlord of both
   parts of Dál Riata. Fiachnae campaigned against the Northumbrians, and
   besieged Bamburgh, and the Dál Riatans will have fought in this
   campaign.

   Dál Riata remained allied with the Northern Uí Néill until the reign of
   Domnall Brecc, who reversed this policy and allied with Congal Cáech
   (also known as Congal Cláen) of the Dál nAraidi. Domnall joined Congal
   in a campaign against Domnall mac Áedo of the Cenél Conaill, the son of
   Áed mac Ainmuirech. The outcome of this change of allies were defeats
   for Domnall Brecc and his allies on land at Mag Rath ( Moira, County
   Down) and at sea at Sailtír, off Kintyre, in 637. This, it was said,
   was divine retribution for Domnall Brecc turning his back on the
   alliance with the kinsmen of Columba. Domnall Brecc's policy appears to
   have died with him, in 642, at his final, and fatal, defeat by Eugein
   map Beli of Alt Clut at Strathcarron, for as late as the 730s, armies
   and fleets from Dál Riata fought alongside the Uí Néill.

Mag Rath to the Pictish Conquest

   The history of Dál Riata in Ireland after Mag Rath is not entirely
   clear. It appears that the Uí Chóelbad kings of Dál nAraidi came to
   control the Glens of Antrim in the years after the battle. The Dál
   Riatan lands along the River Bush appear to have fallen into the hands
   of the Cenél nEógain, and the Airgíalla may have benefitted by taking
   over lands to the south of the Antrim Mountains. It has been proposed
   that some of the more obscure kings of Dál Riata mentioned in the
   Annals of Ulster, such as Fiannamail ua Dúnchado and Donncoirche may
   have been kings of Irish Dál Riata.

   The fate of Scottish Dál Riata is no more certain. It does appear that
   the kingdom was tributary to Northumbrian kings until the Pictish king
   Bruide mac Bili defeated Ecgfrith of Northumbria at Dunnichen in 685.
   It is not certain that this subjection ended in 685, although this is
   usually assumed to be the case. However, it appears that Eadberht
   Eating made some effort to stop the Picts under Óengus mac Fergusa
   crushing Dál Riata in 740. Whether this means that the tributary
   relationship had not ended in 685, or if Eadberht sought only to
   prevent the growth of Pictish power, is unclear.

   Since it has been thought that Dál Riata swallowed Pictland to create
   the Kingdom of Alba, the later history of Dál Riata has tended to be
   seen as a prelude to future triumphs. The annals make it clear that the
   Cenél Gabraín lost any earlier monopoly of royal power in the late 7th
   century and in the 8th, when Cenél Loairn kings such as Ferchar Fota,
   his son Selbach, and grandsons Dúngal and Muiredach are found
   contesting for the high-kingship of Dál Riata. The long period of
   instability in Dál Riata was only ended by the conquest of the kingdom
   by Óengus mac Fergusa, king of the Picts, in the 730s. After a third
   campaign by Óengus in 741, Dál Riata then disappears from the Irish
   records for a generation.

The Last Century

   Áed Find may appear in 768, fighting against the Pictish king of
   Fortriu. At his death in 778 Áed Find is called "king of Dál Riata", as
   is his brother Fergus mac Echdach in 781. The Annals of Ulster say that
   a certain Donncoirche, "king of Dál Riata" died in 792, and there the
   record ends. Any number of theories have been advanced to fill the
   missing generations, none of which are founded on any very solid
   evidence. A number of kings are named in the Duan Albanach, and in
   royal genealogies, but these are rather less reliable than we might
   wish. The obvious conclusion is that whoever ruled the petty kingdoms
   of Dál Riata after its defeat and conquest in the 730s, only Áed Find
   and his brother Fergus drew the least attention of the chroniclers in
   Iona and Ireland. This argues very strongly for Alex Woolf's conclusion
   that Óengus mac Fergusa "effectively destroyed the kingdom."

   It is unlikely that Dál Riata was ruled directly by Pictish kings, but
   it is argued that Domnall, son of Caustantín mac Fergusa, was king of
   Dál Riata from 811 to 835. He was apparently followed by the last known
   king of Dál Riata, Áed mac Boanta, who was killed in the great Pictish
   defeat of 839 at the hands of the Vikings.

From Dál Riata to the Innse Gall

   If the Vikings had a great impact on Pictland and in Ireland, in Dál
   Riata, as in Northumbria, they appear to have entirely replaced the
   existing kingdom with a new entity. In the case of Dál Riata this was
   to be as the kingdom of the Sudreys, traditionally founded by Ketil
   Flatnose (Caitill Find in Gaelic) in the middle of the 9th century.

   The story may be more complex. A cryptic entry (for 836) in the Annals
   of the Four Masters records that " Gofraid mac Fergusa, chief of
   Airgíalla, went to Alba, to strengthen the Dál Riata, at the request of
   Cináed mac Ailpín." The Annals also (for 851) record the death of
   "Gofraidh mac Fergusa, chief of the Innsi Gall." The Innsi Gall, or
   "foreigner's islands", was the name given to Hebrides, due to Viking
   settlement there. Why a Gaelic Irish king should be chief of the
   "foreigner's isles" at about the time that Ketil is supposed to have
   founded the kingdom of the Sudreys is unknown, and perhaps unknowable.

   Alex Woolf has suggested that there occurred a formal division of Dál
   Riata between the Norse-Gaelic Uí Ímair and the natives, like those
   divisions that took place elsewhere in the British Isles, with the
   Norse controlling most of the islands, and the Gaels controlling the
   Scottish coast and the more southerly islands. In turn Woolf suggests
   that this gave rise to the terms Airer Gaedel and Innse Gall,
   respectively "the coast of the Gaels" and the "Islands of the
   foreigners".

Trivia

   Dalriada School, a grammar school in Ballymoney, Northern Ireland is
   named after the Kingdom, as is an area of the village of Cushendall.
   The name 'Dalriada' is commonly found in the names of businesses
   throughout the north Antrim area.

   "Dalriada" is also the name of a band from Australia who plays original
   pop/rock/ Celtic rock music using traditional Celtic instruments.
   Dalriada has been featured at most of Australia's major music festivals
   and have released three albums to date.

   Echo of Dalriada is the name of a Hungarian symphonic metal band.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/D%C3%A1l_Riata"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
