   #copyright

Düsseldorf

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: European Geography

          The title of this article contains the character ü. Where it is
          unavailable or not desired, the name may be represented as
          Duesseldorf.

   Coordinates: 51°14′N 6°47′E
                               Düsseldorf
   Coat of arms of Düsseldorf Location of Düsseldorf in Germany
     __________________________________________________________________

   Country                    Germany
   State                      North Rhine-Westphalia
   Administrative region      Düsseldorf
   District                   urban district
   Population                 577,416 source (31/12/2005)
   Area                       217.0 km²
   Population density         2,675 / km²
   Elevation                  38 m
   Coordinates                51°14′ N 6°47′ E
   Postal code                40000-40629
   Area code                  0211
   Licence plate code         D
   Mayor                      Joachim Erwin ( CDU)
   Website                    duesseldorf.de

   Düsseldorf is the capital city of the German Federal State of North
   Rhine-Westphalia and (together with Cologne and the Ruhr Area) the
   economic centre of Western Germany. Düsseldorf is located on the River
   Rhine and it is one of the main centers of the densely populated
   Rhine-Ruhr area.

History

   When the Roman Empire was strengthening its position throughout Europe,
   a few Germanic tribes clung on to their marshy territory off the
   eastern banks of the Rhine River.

   In the 7th and 8th centuries, the odd farming or fishing settlement
   could be found at the point where the small river Düssel flows into the
   Rhine. It was from such settlements that the city of Düsseldorf grew.

   The first written mention of the town of Düsseldorf dates back to 1135
   (then called Düsseldorp). It was told that under Emperor Friedrich
   Barbarossa the small town of Kaiserswerth, lying to the North of
   Düsseldorf, became a well fortified outpost, where soldiers kept their
   watchful eyes over every movement on the Rhine. Kaiserswerth eventually
   became a suburb of Düsseldorf in 1929.

   In 1186 Düsseldorf came under the rule of Berg. The counts of Berg
   moved their seat to the town in 1280. 14 August 1288 is one of the most
   important dates in the history of Düsseldorf as it was on this day that
   the sovereign Count Adolf V of Berg granted the village on the banks of
   the Düssel city rights.
   Portion of monument portraying the brutality of the battle of Worringen
   Enlarge
   Portion of monument portraying the brutality of the battle of Worringen

   Prior to that announcement, a bloody struggle for power had taken place
   between the Archbishop of Cologne and the count of Berg, culminating in
   the Battle of Worringen. The Archbishop of Cologne's forces were wiped
   out, paving the way for Düsseldorf's elevation to city status, which is
   remembered today with a monument on the Burgplatz. It is often said
   that from this day to the present, there has been a kind of hostility
   between the citizens of Cologne and Düsseldorf. This is, however,
   historically wrong because Düsseldorf's citizens fought side by side
   with those of Cologne. The rivalry between the two cities started
   towards the end of the 19th century when Düsseldorf started to grow
   very quickly as a result of its industrialisation. Today it finds its
   expression mainly in a humorous form (especially during the Rhineland
   Karneval) and in sports.

   A market square sprang up on the banks of the Rhine and the square was
   protected by city walls in all four directions. In 1380, Düsseldorf was
   made regional capital of the Duchy of Berg. During the following
   centuries several famous landmarks were built, including the Collegiate
   Church of St. Lambertus. In 1609, the ducal line of Jülich-Berg- Cleves
   died out, and after a virulent struggle over succession, Jülich and
   Berg fell to the Counts of Palatinate-Neuburg, who made Düsseldorf
   their main domicile, even after they inherited the Palatinate, in 1685,
   becoming now Prince-electors as Electors Palatine.

   Düsseldorf's growth was even more impressive under the leadership of
   Johann Wilhelm II (r. 1690-1716) in the 18th century, also known to his
   people as Jan Wellem. Greatly influenced by his wife Anna Maria Luisa
   de' Medici, the art lover designed a vast art gallery with a huge
   selection of paintings and sculptures that were housed in the
   Stadtschloss (city castle).

   After the death of childless Jan Wellem, the flourishing royal capital
   fell back to hard times, especially after Elector Karl Theodor
   inherited Bavaria and moved the electoral court to Munich. With him he
   took the art collection, which became part of what is now the Alte
   Pinakothek in Munich. Destruction and poverty struck Düsseldorf after
   the Napoleonic Wars.

   By the mid-19th century, Düsseldorf enjoyed a revival thanks to the
   Industrial Revolution as the city boasted 100,000 inhabitants by 1882;
   the figure doubled in 1892. However, the First and Second World Wars
   soon plunged Düsseldorf into depression. During World War II, the city
   was virtually reduced to a pile of rubble as round-the-clock air
   attacks took their toll.

   In 1946 Düsseldorf was made capital of the federal state of North
   Rhine-Westphalia. The city's construction proceeded at a frenetic pace
   and the economic transformation saw Düsseldorf growing into the wealthy
   city of trade, administration and service industries as it is known
   today.

Geography

Physical geography

   Düsseldorf lies in the middle of the lower Rhine basin on the delta of
   the Düssel River where it flows into the Rhine. The city is on the east
   side of the Rhine, except for District 4 ( Oberkassel, Niederkassel,
   Heerdt and Lörick). Across the Rhine Neuss was built on the delta of
   the Erft river. Düsseldorf lies southwest of the Ruhr mining district,
   and in the middle of the Rhine-Ruhr urbanized region.

   Düsseldorf is built entirely on alluvium, muds, sands, clays and
   occasionally gravels. The highest point in Düsseldorf is the top of
   Sandberg in the far eastern part of the city ( Hubbelrath borough) at
   165 m. The lowest point is at the far northern end in Wittlaer borough
   where the Schwarzbach (Black Creek) enters the Rhine, with an average
   elevation of 28 m. Like the rest of the lower Rhinelands Düsseldorf has
   mild winters and moderately warm summers, with an average yearly
   temperature of 10.5°C and 77 cm. of rainfall. The predominate wind
   direction is out of the south or southeast with velocities in the range
   of 3 to 4 m/s, with gusts of 3.5 - 4.8 m/s. The wind is calm (under 2
   m/s) about 35% of the time, more frequently at night and in the winter.

Districts

   Düsseldorf is currently (2006) divided into ten administrative
   districts. Each district (Bezirk) has its own elected district council
   (Bezirksvertretung) and its own district mayor (Bezirksvorsteher). The
   district councils are advisory only. Each district is further
   subdivided into boroughs. There are 49 boroughs in Düsseldorf.

Adjacent cities and districts

   The following districts and cities border Düsseldorf (clockwise
   starting from the north): the City of Duisburg, the District of
   Mettmann ( Ratingen, Mettmann, Erkrath, Hilden), Langenfeld, and
   Monheim), and the District of Neuss ( Dormagen, Neuss, and Meerbusch).

Economy

   Düsseldorf is not only widely known as a stronghold of the German
   advertising and fashion industry. In the last few years the city on the
   Rhine has become a top telecommunications centre in Germany. There are
   18 internet providers located in the capital of North-Rhine Westphalia.
   With two of the four big German providers of mobile frequencies, D2
   Vodafone and E-Plus, Düsseldorf leads the German mobile phone market.
   This pioneer position is evidenced by the presence of many foreign
   trading centers in Düsseldorf such as NTT, Ericsson, Nokia or GTS.

   Along with the abundant advertising industry, these companies serve as
   an important motor for the new economy. There are 400 advertising
   agencies in Düsseldorf, among them three of the largest in Germany:
   BBDO Group, Publicis Group and Grey Group. A number of affiliates of
   foreign agencies deserve mention as well, such as Ogilvy & Mather,
   Dentsu, Hakuhodu, Digital District and DDB. Against this background,
   many internet agencies in Düsseldorf have their roots in the classical
   world of advertising.

   The city of Düsseldorf plays an important role in the financial world:
   some 170 national and international financial institutions and about
   130 insurance agencies are based here. Furthermore, one of the biggest
   German stock exchanges is located here. The print media, represented in
   Düsseldorf by around 200 publishing houses, have adjusted to the
   requirements of various fields of the economy - online and offline.
   Important newspapers and journals such as Handelsblatt,
   Wirtschaftswoche, Deutsches Wirtschaftsblatt or VDI-Nachrichten are
   published in the city on the Rhine. Almost all of these papers are
   available online on the Internet. Renowned filmmaking companies (such
   as Germany's biggest cinema enterprise the Riech-Group) and TV-channels
   such as CNN, NBC Giga and QVC have made Düsseldorf a city of moving
   images.

   Some other major German companies have their headquarters located in
   the city: Henkel (Branded Consumer Goods and Industrial technologies);
   E.on (energy); ThyssenKrupp (metallurgy); Metro (wholesale, retail);
   Ergo (insurance); LTU (air transport).

   Since the 1960s, there is a strong relationship between the city and
   Japan. Many Japanese banks and corporations have their European
   headquarters in Düsseldorf. Düsseldorf has the largest Japanese
   community of any European city.

   The "Kö", which stands for Königsallee (King's Avenue) is the street to
   go shopping in Düsseldorf. Some of the most reputed jewellery shops,
   designer labels and galleries have their stores here, such as Cartier,
   Aigner, Lacoste, Eickhoff, Jil Sander, Benetton, Gucci, Esprit, Laurel,
   Armani, Chanel, Escada, Hugo Boss, Joop, Kookaï, Prada and many more.
   Gehry-buildings in Media harbour, looking from Monkey Island.
   Enlarge
   Gehry-buildings in Media harbour, looking from Monkey Island.
   Düsseldorf at night.
   Enlarge
   Düsseldorf at night.

Infrastructure

   Düsseldorf International Airport, also referred to as Rhein-Ruhr
   Airport, is located eight kilometres from the city centre and can
   easily be reached by train or urban railway S-Bahn. There exists a
   long-distance station served by regional and national services and
   linked to the airport by the SkyTrain, an automatic peoplemover based
   on the Dortmund H-Bahn. The (old) local station situated under the
   terminal building carries the S-Bahn line to Solingen as well as a few
   selected night services. After Frankfurt and Munich, Düsseldorf
   International Airport is Germany's third largest commercial airport,
   with about 16 million passengers annually. The airport offers 180
   destinations on 4 continents, and is served by 70 airlines.

   The city is a major hub in the Deutsche Bahn (DB) network. More than
   1,000 trains stop in Düsseldorf every day. The central railway station
   at Konrad-Adenauer-Platz is located in Düsseldorf's city centre.
   Several S-Bahn lines connect Düsseldorf to the cities of Rhine-Ruhr.
   Local light rail Stadtbahn traffic as well as bus traffic is carried
   out by the city-owned Rheinbahn which operates within the VRR.

   The Central Station (Hauptbahnhof) and the Airport Station
   (Flughafen-Bahnhof) are conneted to the national and European high
   speed (Intercity / Eurocity, IC / EC) and extreme high speed (
   InterCityExpress, Thalys) railway net.

   North Rhine-Westphalia has a closely-woven autobahn network with many
   routes leading directly to Düsseldorf. Düsseldorf is connected to the
   A3, A44, A46, A52, A57, A59 and A524 motorways.

Demographics

   Düsseldorf like many large German cities has large population of
   minorities and foreigners.
     * 17% of Düsseldorf's population is comprised of foreigners, which is
       a total 98,686 people.
     * Düsseldorf has the third largest Jewish community in Germany of
       about 7,300 members, which is more than 1% of the city's
       population.
     * Düsseldorf and its environs has the largest Japanese community in
       Europe (about 11,000).

Culture

Tradition in arts

   Art-loving Elector Jan Wellem and his wife Anna Maria Luisa of Tuscany
   of the Medici dynasty, were the patrons of Düsseldorf's first
   significant cultural activities in the 17th and 18th centuries.
   Heinrich Heine, whose 200th birthday was celebrated in 1997, Clara and
   Robert Schumann as well as Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy are the most
   prominent artists related to the city. Artistic impulses were often
   born in the Academy of Fine Arts and the names of Paul Klee, Joseph
   Beuys and Albert Bierstadt are associated with the institution (
   Düsseldorf School). The Düsseldorf cultural scene comprises traditional
   and avant-garde, classical and glamorous. The world famous state art
   collection of North Rhine-Westphalia, the highly acclaimed Deutsche
   Oper am Rhein (opera), and the Düsseldorfer Schauspielhaus (theatre),
   artistic home of Gustaf Gründgens, are major elements of Düsseldorf's
   reputation as a centre of the fine arts.

   Since the 1950s the " Kom(m)ödchen" has been one of the most prominent
   political cabarets of Germany. Düsseldorf's most famous contribution to
   the culture of modern popular music is beyond doubt the avant-garde
   electronic music band Kraftwerk. Formed by a few Düsseldorf-born
   musicians, Kraftwerk have often been regarded as the most significant
   band in the history of post-war German music and as pioneers in
   electronic music. Also one of Germany's most famous punk bands Die
   Toten Hosen, which are not only famous in Germany but also in South
   America and parts of Asia and even toured the U.S. and Australia, was
   formed in Düsseldorf.

Sports

   Düsseldorf is also famous for its football team. Fortuna Düsseldorf
   1895 (Düsseldorfer Turn-und Sportverein 1895 e.V.) won the championship
   in 1933 and the DFB-Cup in 1979 and 1980. Fortuna also faced Barcelona
   FC in the Cup Winners Final in 1979, however they lost the game. Today
   Fortuna is an ambitious team in the German Regionalliga (3rd Division)
   and their new stadium, the LTU arena opened its doors in January 2005.
   It has a capacity of 51,500 and is one of the most modern arenas in
   Europe. Düsseldorf is the only one of nine 1974 World Cup cities not to
   be part of the twelve cities that hosted the 2006 World Cup.

   Very successful sports in Düsseldorf are icehockey (the DEG Metro
   Stars, former DEG - Düsseldorfer Eislauf Gemeinschaft, which play in
   the new iss Dome) and American football ( Rhine Fire Düsseldorf).

Carnival

   One of the biggest cultural events in Düsseldorf is the Düsseldorfer
   Karneval (also referred to as the "fifth season") which starts every
   year on 11 November at 11:11 a.m., and reaches its climax on
   Rosenmontag (Rose Monday), featuring a huge parade through the streets
   of Düsseldorf. Karneval ends on Aschermittwoch ( Ash Wednesday). The
   Düsseldorf carnival is part of the traditional carnival festivities in
   the Rhineland. Other major places at which the Rhineland carnival is
   celebrated are neighbouring Cologne and Mainz (close to Frankfurt).

Theaters

     * Deutsche Oper am Rhein (Opera; Ballet)
     * Düsseldorfer Marionetten-Theater (puppet theatre)
     * Düsseldorfer Schauspielhaus; the theatre started with theatralic
       performances in 1585
     * FFT - Forum Freies Theatre (Juta and Kammerspiele)
     * Kom(m)ödchen (political cabaret)
     * Komödie Düsseldorf (Boulevardtheater)
     * Musiktheater Capitol (Musical)
     * NEMO - Pantomime
     * Savoy-Theatre
     * Palais Wittgenstein
     * Theateratelier Takelgarn
     * theatre Flin
     * Tonhalle Düsseldorf (classical music, jazz, pop, cabaret)
     * Puppentheater an der Helmholtzstraße
     * Theatre an der Kö
     * Theatre an der Luegallee
     * Roncalli's Apollo Varieté

   Image:800px-Tonhalle Düsseldorf.jpg
   Tonhalle Düsseldorf

Museums and arts institutes

     * Aquazoo-Löbbecke-Museum (aquarium and zoological museum)
     * Filmmuseum (cinema museum)
     * Forum NRW
     * Goethe-Museum
     * Heinrich-Heine-Institut
     * Hetjens-Museum (Deutsches Keramik-Museum)
     * Kunsthalle Düsseldorf
     * Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen - K20 (Grabbeplatz) and K21
       (Ständehaus)
     * Kunstverein für die Rheinlande und Westfalen
     * museum kunst palast
     * Mahn- und Gedenkstätte Düsseldorf
     * Schifffahrt-Museum im Schlossturm (Museum of ships)
     * Senfmuseum
     * Stadtmuseum (City history museum)
     * Stiftung Schloss und Park Benrath - Museum für Europäische
       Gartenkunst
     * Theatermuseum

University and colleges

   Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf is located in the southern part of
   the city. It has about 20,000 students and a wide range of subjects in
   natural sciences, mathematics, computer sciences, philosophy, social
   sciences, arts, languages, medicine, economy and the law.

   Other academic institutions include
     * the Clara Schumann Musikschule (Music School)
     * the Robert Schumann Musikhochschule ( official website) (Musics
       College)
     * the Kunstakademie Düsseldorf ( Official Homepage) (Academy of Fine
       Arts) which is famous for high-profile artists like Joseph Beuys,
       Paul Klee and
     * the Fachhochschule Düsseldorf ( official website) (University of
       Applied Sciences).
     * the Max Planck Institute for Iron Research ( Official homepage of
       the institute)
     * The Goethe Institute ( Official Homepage)

Buildings

     * Rheinturm (1982: 234 m, since 2004: 240,50 m), the lights on which
       comprise the world's largest digital clock.
     * The Gehry buildings in the Düsseldorf media harbour (see picture
       above)
     * The Benrather Schloss (Benrath castle)
     * The Wilhem Marx House of 1922/24, with twelve stories Germany's
       first high-rise building
     * Gerresheim Basilica
     * St. Suitbertus Basilica

Sister Cities

     * United Kingdom Reading, United Kingdom (since 1947, officially
       since 1988)
     * Israel Haifa, Israel
     * Germany Chemnitz, Germany
     * Poland Warsaw, Poland
     * Russia Moscow, Russia
     * People's Republic of China Chongqing, China
     * People's Republic of China Shenyang, China (since 1984)

Famous people connected with Düsseldorf

     * Doro Pesch, singer
     * Heinrich Heine, poet
     * Karl August Varnhagen von Ense, biographer
     * Johann Georg Jacobi, poet
     * Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi, philosopher and writer
     * Peter von Cornelius, painter
     * Oswald Achenbach, drawer
     * Clara Schumann, classical componist and pianist
     * Robert Schumann, classical componist and pianist
     * Heino, folk music singer
     * Felix Mendelsohn-Bartholdy, classical composer
     * yuor moms a, mathematician
     * Fritz Henkel, founder of the chemical factory Henkel
     * Konrad Henkel, founder of the Henkel Company
     * Emanuel Leutze, drawer
     * Gustav Gründgens, actor and director of the theatre
     * Joseph Beuys, performance artist
     * Jürgen Mittelstraß, philosopher
     * Jürgen Habermas, philosopher
     * Lore Lorentz, cabaret artist
     * James V. Fletcher, academic and philosopher
     * Klaus fisher, football player
     * Erik Hochstein, swimmer
     * Ulrich Roth, guitarist
     * Wim Wenders, movie director, producer
     * Die Toten Hosen, punk rock band
     * Elisabeth Röhm, actress
     * Claudia Schiffer, model
     * Kraftwerk, electronic music group
     * Emil Fahrenkamp, architect
     * Steffen Driesen, swimmer
     * Peter Behrens, architect and designer
     * Heike Makatsch, actress
     * Monika Johnson, translator
     * Augustus Gloop, a winner of Willy Wonka's Golden Ticket Contest
       (the place shown in the movie is not Düsseldorf, there are no
       mountains in Düsseldorf)

Famous Places

     * KÖ (Königsallee) an expensive shopping street

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/D%C3%BCsseldorf"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
