   #copyright

Damon Hill

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Sports and games people


   This is a featured article. Click here for more information.
   Damon Hill
   Formula One Career
      Nationality     United Kingdom British
      Active years    1992 - 1999
        Team(s)       Brabham, Williams, Arrows, Jordan
      Grands Prix     122
     Championships    1 ( 1996)
          Wins        22
   Podium finishes    42
     Pole positions   20
      Fastest laps    19
    First Grand Prix  1992 British Grand Prix
       First win      1993 Hungarian Grand Prix
        Last win      1998 Belgian Grand Prix
    Last Grand Prix   1999 Japanese Grand Prix

   Damon Graham Devereux Hill OBE (born 17 September 1960 in London) is a
   retired English racing driver and the 1996 Formula One World Champion.
   He is the son of the late double Formula One world champion, Graham
   Hill, and is the only son of a world champion to win the title.

   Damon Hill came to professional motorsports relatively late: he began
   racing motorcycles in 1983 at the age of 23. The following year he won
   the 350 cc Clubman's cup at Brands Hatch. In 1985 he moved on to
   four-wheel single-seater racing with Team Van Diemen in the Formula
   Ford championship, before moving up into the UK Formula 3 championship
   in 1986. After three seasons in Formula 3, where he won four races,
   Hill ascended another tier of open wheel racing by joining Mooncraft in
   the International Formula 3000 championship, where, although often
   competitive, he never won a race.

   Hill started his Formula One career in 1992 with the then uncompetitive
   Brabham team. He took the first of his 22 victories at the 1993
   Hungarian Grand Prix for the Williams team the following year. In 1994,
   he won the British Grand Prix, a race his father had never won in his
   long and successful career. During the mid 1990s, Hill was Michael
   Schumacher's main rival for the Formula One Driver's Championship,
   finishing runner-up in the German's 1994 and 1995 title seasons. The
   two had a series of controversial clashes on and off the track,
   including the collision at the 1994 Australian Grand Prix that gave
   Schumacher his first title by a single point.

   Hill was dropped by Williams in 1997 despite taking eight victories and
   the world championship in 1996. He went on to record the Jordan team's
   first ever win at the 1998 Belgian Grand Prix, and came within a few
   miles of being the only driver to win a Grand Prix for the Arrows team
   and their Yamaha engine supplier at the 1997 Hungarian Grand Prix. He
   retired from the sport at the end of the 1999 season, after 122 race
   starts.

   In 2006, Hill became president of the British Racing Drivers' Club,
   succeeding Jackie Stewart.

Personal and early life

   Hill was born in London on 17 September 1960 to double Formula One
   world champion Graham Hill, who won his first World Championship two
   years after Damon's birth, and his wife Bette. Hill has two sisters,
   Samantha and Brigitte. Brigitte was an actress; she starred in her
   first film (Caravan to Vaccares) in 1974, and started Hill Marketing in
   1998 after working with Damon. In 2002, she began managing the
   unrelated American racing driver Derek Hill, son of 1961 Formula One
   World Champion Phil Hill.

   While in his teens Damon attended the prestigious Haberdashers' Aske's
   Boys' School in Hertfordshire. The death of his father in a plane crash
   in 1975 when Damon was only 15 years old left the Hill family in
   drastically changed circumstances; Hill worked as a labourer and a
   motorcycle courier to support his further education.

   Damon is married to Georgie (born 20 April 1963) and they have four
   children: Oliver (born 4 May 1989), Joshua (born 9 January 1991),
   Tabitha (born 16 July 1995) and Rosie (born 1 February 1998). Oliver
   was born with Down's syndrome and Damon and Georgie are both active
   supporters of related charities.

Career

Pre-Formula One

   Hill started his motorsport career in motorcycle racing in 1983,
   winning the 350 cc clubman's championship at Brands Hatch, before
   taking a race car course at the Winfield Racing School in France. Hill
   did not make his single-seater debut until 1984, wearing the blue and
   white colours of the London Rowing Club on his helmet as his father had
   done. He slowly graduated through Formula Ford, winning six races for
   Team Van Diemen in 1985. Hill then moved up into Formula Three where he
   raced for three different teams in three years, with a steady first
   season for Mooncraft in 1986 and brace of wins in each of the following
   years for Middlebridge Racing and then Intersport. In 1989 Hill
   progressed to Formula 3000, racing again for Mooncraft and then
   Middlebridge Racing over the next three years. Although Hill ran at the
   front with the unfavoured Lola chassis for Middlebridge in 1990 and
   1991 - he took three pole positions and led five races in 1990 - he did
   not win a race during his Formula 3000 career.

Formula One

1992: Brabham

   Related Article: Brabham Racing Organisation

   Hill was 32, an age by which many drivers have retired from top
   competition, when he broke into Grand Prix racing with the struggling
   Brabham team in 1992. The former championship-winning team was in
   serious financial difficulties. Hill only started the season after
   three races, replacing Giovanna Amati after her sponsorship had failed
   to materialise. Amati had not been able to get the car through
   qualifying but Hill matched his team-mate, Eric van de Poele by
   qualifying for two mid-season Grands Prix: The British Grand Prix and
   the Hungarian Grand Prix. The Hungaroring would later be the scene of
   two victories for Hill and he would never again finish out of the
   points there. Hill was also the test driver for the dominant Williams-
   Renault team that year.

1993–1996: Williams

   Related Article: WilliamsF1

   1993
   Hill's number '0' Williams
   Enlarge
   Hill's number '0' Williams

   When Nigel Mansell left Williams to drive IndyCars in 1993, Hill was
   promoted to the race team alongside Alain Prost ahead of more
   experienced candidate Martin Brundle. In his first full season of
   Formula One Hill benefited greatly from the vast experience of his
   veteran French team-mate. After four retirements in the first half of
   the season, as well as a tyre failure while leading the German Grand
   Prix, the Englishman went on to win three successive races in Hungary,
   Belgium - where he and Michael Schumacher had a thrilling race - and
   Italy. In doing so he became the first son of a Formula One Grand Prix
   winner to take victory himself.

   Traditionally the reigning driver's world champion carries the number
   '1' on his car; his team-mate takes the number '2'. As Nigel Mansell,
   the 1992 champion, was not racing in Formula One in 1993, his Williams
   team were given numbers '0' and '2'. As the junior partner, Hill took
   '0', the second man in Formula One history to do so, after Jody
   Scheckter in 1973.

   1994
   Hill drives through the altered Eau Rouge corner during practice for
   the 1994 Belgian Grand Prix.
   Enlarge
   Hill drives through the altered Eau Rouge corner during practice for
   the 1994 Belgian Grand Prix.

   In 1994 the triple world champion Ayrton Senna joined Hill at Williams.
   As the reigning champion - this time Prost - was again no longer
   racing, Hill retained his number '0'. The pre-season betting had been
   that Senna would coast to the title, but at Imola the Brazilian died
   after his car went off the road. With the team undergoing investigation
   from the Italian authorities on manslaughter charges, Hill found
   himself team leader with only one season’s experience in the top
   flight. Although Hill told BBC Sport in 2004 that he believed Senna
   simply took the corner too fast for the conditions, it was widely
   reported at the time that the car's steering column had failed. Under
   difficult circumstances Hill took an emotional win two races later in
   Barcelona, much as his father had done 26 years earlier for Lotus after
   the death of Jim Clark. Schumacher struggled to second with a gearbox
   fault, having comfortably led the early laps.

   Although Schumacher dominated the early part of the season, Hill came
   back into contention for the title after winning the British Grand
   Prix, a race in which his late father had never tasted victory.
   Schumacher was disqualified from that race and banned for two further
   races for overtaking during the formation lap and ignoring a black
   flag. Four more victories for Hill, three of which were in races where
   Schumacher was banned or disqualified, took the title battle to the
   final event at Adelaide.

   Neither he nor Schumacher finished the race after a controversial
   collision which gave the title to Schumacher. Hill was catching
   Schumacher when the German driver ran off the track while leading;
   although it is unknown whether Schumacher did or did not damage his
   Benetton, it a internationally agreed among jounalists that damage was
   indeed inflicted on the Benetton. Hill had just come through the fifth
   corner of the track when he saw Schumacher returning to the racing
   line. Coming into the sixth corner Hill moved to the inside to pass the
   slower moving car and the two collided, breaking the Williams' front
   left suspension wishbone, and forcing Hill's retirement from the race.
   BBC Formula One commentator Murray Walker, a great fan and friend of
   Damon, has often maintained that Schumacher did not cause the crash
   intentionally. Patrick Head of the Williams team feels differently:
   After Schumacher's punishment for blocking the circuit during
   qualifying for the 2006 Monaco Grand Prix, he told F1 Racing that in
   1994 "Williams were already 100% certain that Michael was guilty of
   foul play", but didn't protest Schumacher's title because the team was
   still dealing with the death of Ayrton Senna. Schumacher has been
   blamed by the UK public for the incident - in 2003, the BBC conducted a
   search for "The Most Unsporting Moment" in which the Adelaide incident
   was nominated. Hill's 1994 season earned him the 1994 BBC Sports
   Personality of the Year.
   Damon Hill driving for the Williams Formula One team in Montreal in
   1995
   Enlarge
   Damon Hill driving for the Williams Formula One team in Montreal in
   1995

   1995

   Coming into the 1995 season, Hill was confident of title glory. The
   Williams team were reigning constructors champions, having beaten
   Benetton in 1994, and with young David Coulthard as team-mate, Hill was
   undoubtedly the number one driver. The season started badly when he
   spun off in Brazil due to a mechanical problem, but a couple of wins
   put him in the championship lead. It was not to last. Schumacher hit
   top form and successfully defended his title with two races to spare.
   To make matters worse, Williams lost the constructors championship.
   Hill made several high profile errors in 1995, most notable in Britain
   and Italy, and it was around this time that Frank Williams began to
   consider bringing in Heinz-Harald Frentzen for the future. With Hill
   already under contract for 1996 his place at the team was secure for
   one more season, but it would prove to be his last at the Grove squad.

   1996

   In 1996 the Williams car was clearly the quickest in Formula One and
   Hill went on to win the title ahead of team-mate Jacques Villeneuve (in
   his first year in Formula One), becoming the first and only son of a
   Formula One champion to win the championship himself. Taking eight wins
   and never qualifying off the front row, Hill enjoyed by far his best
   season. At Monaco, the legendary circuit where his father had been so
   dominant, he had been on course for victory before technical
   difficulties curtailed his race allowing Ligier driver Olivier Panis to
   take his one and only win. Hill's 1996 world championship earned him
   his second BBC Sports Personality Of The Year Award, making him one of
   only three people ever to receive the award twice – the others being
   Boxer Henry Cooper and fellow Formula One driver Nigel Mansell. Despite
   winning the title, Hill learned before the season's close that he was
   to be dropped by Williams in favour of Frentzen for the following
   season, to the outrage of fans and media alike,, so Hill left Williams
   as the team's second most successful driver, in terms of race
   victories, with 21, second only to Nigel Mansell. Hill was also awarded
   the Segrave Trophy by the Royal Automobile Club. The trophy is awarded
   to the British national who accomplishes the most outstanding
   demonstration of the possibilities of transport by land, sea, air, or
   water.

1997: Arrows

   Related Article: Arrows
   At the British GP, Hill scored his first point for the Arrows team
   Enlarge
   At the British GP, Hill scored his first point for the Arrows team

   As world champion Hill was in high demand, but surprisingly signed to
   Arrows, a team which had never won a race in its 20 year history and
   had scored only a single point the previous year. His title defence in
   1997 proved unsuccessful, getting off to a poor start when he only
   narrowly managed to qualify for the Australian Grand Prix, and then
   retired on the parade lap. The Arrows car, using tyres from series
   debutant Bridgestone and engines from unfancied Yamaha, was generally
   uncompetitive, and Hill did not score his first point for the team
   until the British Grand Prix at Silverstone in July. The highlight of
   the year came at the Hungarian Grand Prix. On a day when the
   Bridgestone tyres had a competitive edge over their Goodyear rivals,
   Hill qualified third in a car which hadn't previously placed higher
   than 9th on the grid. During the race he managed to pass championship
   contender and old rival Michael Schumacher on the track and was
   leading, well ahead of the eventual 1997 World Champion Villeneuve,
   late in the race when a hydraulic problem slowed the Arrows
   drastically. This allowed Villeneuve to storm past and win, although
   Hill still salvaged a brilliant second place and the team's first
   podium since the 1995 Australian Grand Prix.

1998–1999: Jordan

   Related Article: Jordan Grand Prix

   1998 Despite the result in Hungary, it was clear that Arrows could not
   provide Hill with the kind of success that he was used to. For 1998 he
   switched to Jordan to partner Ralf Schumacher. The first half of the
   season was disastrous, with the car off the pace and unreliable. In
   Canada however, things began to improve. Hill benefited from others'
   misfortunes to lead the race and enjoyed a high speed duel with arch
   rival Michael Schumacher. He did not finish in Montreal, but had shown
   his speed once more. Finally at Hockenheim he scored his first point of
   1998. At Spa he took Jordan's first ever win, leading home his
   team-mate for a 1-2 in soaking conditions, in an incredibly dramatic
   race which only eight drivers finished. It was his first victory since
   being dropped by Williams. He went on to finish the year very strongly
   with a last lap move on Frentzen at Suzuka which earned him 4th place
   in the race, and Jordan 4th in the constructors championship.

   1999 Hopes were high for 1999, but Hill did not enjoy a good season.
   Struggling with the new four-grooved tyres introduced that year, he was
   outpaced by his new team-mate - none other than his replacement at
   Williams, Heinz-Harald Frentzen - and appeared to lose motivation.
   After an inglorious crash at Montreal he announced plans to retire at
   the end of the year, but after a miserable French Grand Prix he
   considered quitting immediately. Jordan persuaded him to stay on for
   Silverstone at least, but going into the weekend Hill was talking of
   stopping after the race. Jordan had tested Jos Verstappen as a
   contingency for Hill retiring mid-season, but following a strong fifth
   place at his home event, the 1996 champion opted to see out the year.
   Only two more points were added that year, with a sixth place at Spa,
   scene of his last win, representing his final point in Formula One. To
   make matters worse, his performance was in stark contrast to that of
   team-mate Frentzen, who eventually finished third in the championship
   and was in the running to win the title going into the final few races.
   With three races of 1999 to go, there were rumours that Prost would
   release Jarno Trulli, who had signed for Jordan for 2000, early to
   replace Hill, but the Briton completed the season. At Suzuka his last
   race in Formula One ended when he spun off the track and pulled into
   the pits to retire a healthy car, much to the dismay of the team.

Notable battles with Michael Schumacher

   Hill and Michael Schumacher clashed frequently on the track in the mid
   1990s:
     * Japan 1994: Schumacher led the early stages of the rain-soaked
       event only for the race to be stopped after Brundle's McLaren
       crashed. Hill took over the lead at the re-start and pushed very
       hard to beat Schumacher, the acknowledged ‘rain master’, in the wet
       and take the title fight to the final race of the season in
       Australia.
     * Adelaide 1994: Schumacher went off the track while leading the last
       race of the season. He returned to the track at reduced speed where
       Hill tried to pass him at the next corner. The two collided and
       both retired. The world title went to Schumacher by a single point.
     * Silverstone 1995: At his home grand prix and trailing Schumacher by
       11 points in the championship, Hill attempted to pass the German
       going into Priory 11 laps from the end of the race. The two
       collided again and both retired. Hill described it as a "racing
       incident" while Schumacher compared it to Adelaide 1994.
     * Spa 1995: The two made contact at the Les Combes corner. On this
       occasion Schumacher received a one-race suspended ban.
     * Monza 1995: On lap 24 Hill and Schumacher collided when trying to
       lap Taki Inoue. Neither accepted blame. Hill questioned why
       Schumacher was "suddenly doing nought miles an hour", while a
       majority of Schumacher fans described it as a "stupid move" by
       Hill. Hill received a suspended one-race ban, which was never put
       into effect.
     * Nurburgring 1995: On lap 18 Hill attempted to overtake Schumacher
       but the German blocked and squeezed him to the edge of the track.
       Hill locked up and hit the back of the Benetton.
     * Hungary 1997: After qualifying third in the usually uncompetitive
       Arrows, Hill passed Schumacher cleanly on the inside on lap 11
       going into the first corner before pulling away into the lead of
       the race.
     * Canada 1998: Schumacher accused Hill of "dangerously weaving" while
       they were dicing for second. Hill responded by saying that
       Schumacher's comments were "rich" coming from someone who forced
       Heinz-Harald Frentzen off in the track in the very same race.

Helmet

   Damon Hill uses the same helmet design as his father, a simple, easily
   identifiable design of eight white oar blades arranged vertically
   around the upper surface of the helmet, which is dark blue. The device
   and colours represent the London Rowing Club of which Graham and Bette
   Hill were both successful members and where they first met. Although
   Hill is not a rower himself, he has said that he is proud to wear his
   father's colours and the club are happy for him to keep up the
   tradition.

   The sponsors on Damon's helmet have been AGV (Helmet Manufacturer),
   Cellnet, Ricoh, Arai (Helmet Manufacturer), Camel, Olympus, Elf,
   Renault, Canon, Sega, Rothmans, Andersen Consulting, Danka,
   PlayStation, Remus, Delphi, Benson & Hedges and Hill Sport.

Later life

   In retirement, Hill founded the high-performance car leasing business
   P1 International, based in Surrey, England, and became involved in a
   BMW dealership that bears his name. He has contributed many articles to
   the world's best-selling grand prix magazine, F1 Racing. Hill has raced
   both cars and motorcycles at the Goodwood Festival of Speed and in 2005
   he tested the new GP2 car, lapping impressively from the off.

   Hill also did a famous television advert with Murray Walker for Pizza
   Hut in the UK, in which Walker commentated on Hill's meal as if it was
   a race. Parodying Hill's 1994 and 1995 seasons, the advert sees Walker
   jokingly report that "... Hill finishes second... again!” before being
   threatened by Hill and replying (in his famous commentary tones) "He's
   lost it! He's out of control!"

   Hill appeared in the 2005 series of the British automotive programme
   Top Gear in the UK in June, where he set a time of 1:46.3 around their
   test course. This was the fastest time recorded at that point, although
   the record has since been broken by fellow former British Formula One
   driver, Nigel Mansell with a time of 1:44.6 (for the F1 lap times),
   Jenson Button with a time of 1:44.7 and the show's 'tame racing
   driver', The Stig with a time of 1:44.4 (for both F1 and Star boards).
   During the show, presenter Jeremy Clarkson joked about claims that Hill
   was in fact The Stig (the programme's anonymous benchmark test driver),
   by smelling his breath and after a slight pause replying to the
   audience, "Yep...Magnesium", implicitly identifying him as the Stig
   through an apparent shared attribute. Hill himself stresses that he is
   not the Stig, but many continue to believe the claims.

   As well as his Top Gear appearance, Hill appeared in a number of other
   TV shows, appearing in an episode of This is Your Life and before
   taking part in the 1998 French Grand Prix, Hill appeared as a guest on
   TFI Friday. Hill later appeared on other shows, such as Shooting Stars;
   Late Show with David Letterman; Clive Anderson All Talk and appeared as
   a guest star on the first episode of Bang Bang, It's Reeves and
   Mortimer.

   In April 2006, Hill succeeded Jackie Stewart as President of the BRDC (
   British Racing Drivers Club). The BRDC, owner of the Silverstone
   circuit, is at a crucial stage as it seeks to steer the future of the
   track and its facilities while facing increased competition from newer
   international facilities domestically and abroad. In June of the same
   year Hill defended Britain's current next hope for the Formula One
   title, Jenson Button in the media, claiming that Button was being held
   back by his Honda car rather than his own driving ability.

   In August 2006, Hill was back behind wheel of a single-seater race car,
   when he took a 600bhp Grand Prix Masters machine for a test run around
   Silverstone. In an interview with ITV F1, Hill said that he enjoyed the
   experience and that he might consider racing in the GP Masters in the
   future. He was also asked in the interview to give his opinion on
   Jenson Button's maiden Grand Prix victory in Hungary, saying that he
   thought Jenson was "good" and that he was "a very fast driver." He was
   also asked in the interview about the battle between his old rival,
   Michael Schumacher and Fernando Alonso, Hill said that he was "just as
   fascinated as anyone to see what’s going to happen".

   In October 2006, Hill opened a new conference facility at the
   Silverstone Circuit, the facility is part of the Silverstone Innovation
   Centre, a joint project between the British Racing Drivers Club and the
   East Midlands Development Agency, "This is a great example of how the
   BRDC through Silverstone and the East Midlands Development Agency are
   working together to make a positive contribution to the motorsport
   business community in this country," Hill said.

Music career

   Damon Hill formed the punk band "Sex, Hitler and the Hormones" with
   some friends while at school. Hill once joked in an interview that at
   that time they didn't go on tour because they didn't have mopeds. Hill
   continued to be interested in music and after achieving success in
   Formula One became friends with ex-Beatle George Harrison, with whom he
   played several times. Hill also recorded with rock band Def Leppard
   after meeting their lead singer Joe Elliott at a party. He played on
   the opening track of the album Euphoria, "Demolition Man", including a
   10-second guitar solo. Elliott described Damon's style as "a cross
   between the way Slash plays and Andy McCoy from Hanoi Rocks".

   During his racing career Hill often played in front of a crowd of
   Formula One fans at the British Grand Prix at Silverstone. In 1995 he
   was joined by fellow Formula One racer Johnny Herbert. In 1999 Hill's
   team boss at the time, Eddie Jordan, starred on drums while he played
   for his fans for the very last time at Silverstone. Hill has also
   played with the S.A.S. band, which has many guest performances, and
   with Pat Cash's Wild Colonial Boys.

   Hill's most recent band was The Conrods which was active up to 2003.
   The band was formed after his retirement from racing at the end of the
   1999 season and played cover versions of well known songs from The
   Rolling Stones, Beatles and Kinks. Band members were Damon Hill
   (guitar), Josh Phillips (keyboards; Midge Ure & Whitesnake), Mark
   Brzezicki (drums; Big Country), Steve Brzezicki (bass; Scatman John),
   Robert Hart (vocals; Bad Company) and Steve Roux (guitar/vocals). The
   band performed at Grands Prix, Formula One social events and in various
   smaller venues as well as on several TV programmes. Since becoming
   president of the BRDC Hill claims to have abandoned the guitar - being
   "too busy doing school runs and looking after pets."

Complete Formula One results

   ( key) (Races in bold indicate pole position)
   Year Team 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Team WDC Points
   1992 Brabham RSA
   MEX
   BRA
   ESP
   DNQ SMR
   DNQ MON
   DNQ CAN
   DNQ FRA
   DNQ GBR
   16 GER
   DNQ HUN
   11 BEL
   ITA
   POR
   JAP
   AUS
   Brabham - 0
   1993 Williams RSA
   Ret BRA
   2 EUR
   2 SMR
   Ret ESP
   Ret MON
   2 CAN
   3 FRA
   2 GBR
   Ret GER
   15 HUN
   1 BEL
   1 ITA
   1 POR
   3 JPN
   4 AUS
   3 Williams 3rd 69
   1994 Williams BRA
   2 PAC
   Ret SMR
   6 MON
   Ret ESP
   1 CAN
   2 FRA
   2 GBR
   1 GER
   8 HUN
   2 BEL
   1 ITA
   1 POR
   1 EUR
   2 JPN
   1 AUS
   Ret Williams 2nd 91
   1995 Williams BRA
   Ret ARG
   1 SMR
   1 ESP
   4 MON
   2 CAN
   Ret FRA
   2 GBR
   Ret GER
   Ret HUN
   1 BEL
   2 ITA
   Ret POR
   3 EUR
   Ret PAC
   3 JPN
   Ret AUS
   1 Williams 2nd 69
   1996 Williams AUS
   1 BRA
   1 ARG
   1 EUR
   4 SMR
   1 MON
   Ret ESP
   Ret CAN
   1 FRA
   1 GBR
   Ret GER
   1 HUN
   2 BEL
   5 ITA
   Ret POR
   2 JPN
   1 Williams 1st 97
   1997 Arrows AUS
   DNS BRA
   Ret ARG
   Ret SMR
   Ret MON
   Ret ESP
   Ret CAN
   9 FRA
   12 GBR
   6 GER
   8 HUN
   2 BEL
   13 ITA
   Ret AUT
   7 LUX
   8 JPN
   11 EUR
   Ret Arrows 12th 7
   1998 Jordan AUS
   8 BRA
   DSQ ARG
   8 SMR
   10 ESP
   Ret MON
   8 CAN
   Ret FRA
   Ret GBR
   Ret AUT
   7 GER
   4 HUN
   4 BEL
   1 ITA
   6 LUX
   9 JPN
   4 Jordan 6th 20
   1999 Jordan AUS
   Ret BRA
   Ret SMR
   4 MON
   Ret ESP
   7 CAN
   Ret FRA
   Ret GBR
   5 AUT
   8 GER
   Ret HUN
   6 BEL
   6 ITA
   10 EUR
   Ret MAL
   Ret JPN
   Ret Jordan 12th 7
                             Sporting positions
      Preceded by:
   Michael Schumacher Formula One World Champion
                      1996                                Succeeded by:
                                                        Jacques Villeneuve
      Preceded by:
   Jonathan Edwards   BBC Sports Personality of the Year
                      1996                                Succeeded by:
                                                        Greg Rusedski
      Preceded by:
   Linford Christie   BBC Sports Personality of the Year
                      1994                                Succeeded by:
                                                        Jonathan Edwards
      Preceded by:
   Jackie Stewart     BRDC President
                      2006-Present                        Succeeded by:
                                                        Current President

   Formula One World Drivers' Champions (1990–)

   World Drivers' Champions • ( 1990– 91)  Ayrton Senna • ( 1992)  Nigel
   Mansell • ( 1993)  Alain Prost • ( 1994– 95)  Michael Schumacher • (
   1996) Damon Hill • ( 1997)  Jacques Villeneuve • ( 1998– 99)  Mika
   Häkkinen • ( 2000– 04)  Michael Schumacher • ( 2005– 06)  Fernando
   Alonso
     __________________________________________________________________

   Complete List • Champions (1950–1969) • Champions (1970–1989)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Damon_Hill"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
