   #copyright

Daniel Ellsberg

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Political People

   Daniel Ellsberg (born April 7, 1931) is a former American military
   analyst employed by the RAND Corporation who precipitated a national
   uproar in 1971 when he released the Pentagon Papers, the US military's
   account of activities during the Vietnam War, to The New York Times.
   The release awakened the American people to how much they had been
   deceived by their own government about the war.

History

   Ellsberg, the son of Jewish parents with a passion for Christian
   Science, grew up in Detroit and attended Cranbrook Kingswood School,
   then attended Harvard University, graduating with a Ph.D. in Economics
   in 1959 in which he described a paradox in decision theory now known as
   the Ellsberg paradox. He served as a company commander in the Marine
   Corps for two years, and then became an analyst at the RAND
   Corporation. A committed Cold Warrior, he served in the Pentagon in
   1964 under Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara. He then served for two
   years in Vietnam as a civilian in the State Department, and became
   convinced that the Vietnam War was unwinnable. He further believed that
   nearly everyone in the Defense and State Departments felt, as he did,
   that the United States had no realistic chance of achieving victory in
   Vietnam, but that political considerations prevented them from saying
   so publicly. McNamara and others continued to state in press interviews
   that victory was "just around the corner." As the war continued to
   escalate, Ellsberg became deeply disillusioned.

The Pentagon Papers

   As a Vietnam expert, Ellsberg was invited to contribute to the
   assemblage of classified papers regarding the execution of the Vietnam
   war. These documents later became collectively known as the Pentagon
   Papers. They revealed the knowledge, early on, that the war would not
   likely be won and that continuing the war would lead to many times more
   casualties than was admitted publicly. Further, the papers showed a
   deep cynicism towards the public and a disregard for the loss of life
   and injury suffered by soldiers and civilians.

   Ellsberg knew that releasing these papers would most likely result in a
   conviction and sentence of many years in prison. Throughout 1970,
   Ellsberg covertly attempted to convince a few sympathetic Senators
   (among them J. William Fulbright) to release the Pentagon Papers on the
   Senate floor, because a Senator cannot be prosecuted for anything he
   says on record before the Senate.

   When these efforts failed, Ellsberg, with the assistance of Anthony
   Russo, copied them and finally leaked the Pentagon Papers to Neil
   Sheehan at The New York Times. On June 13, 1971, the Times began
   publishing the first installment of the 7,000 page document. For 15
   days, the Times was prevented from publishing its articles on the
   orders of the Nixon administration. However, the Supreme Court soon
   ordered publication to resume freely. Although the Times did not reveal
   Ellsberg as their source, he knew that the FBI would soon determine
   that he was the source of the leak. Ellsberg went underground, living
   secretly among like-minded people. He was not caught by the FBI, even
   though they were under enormous pressure from the Nixon Administration
   to find him.

   The Nixon administration also began a campaign to discredit Ellsberg.
   Nixon's plumbers broke into Ellsberg's psychiatrist's office in an
   attempt to find damaging information. When they failed to find
   Ellsberg's file, they made plans to break into the psychiatrist's home.

Fallout

   The publication of the papers greatly eroded public support for the war
   in Vietnam. This was a primary reason that President Nixon decided to
   make discrediting Ellsberg a high priority. Nixon's Oval Office tape
   from June 14 shows H. R. Haldeman describing the situation to Nixon.

          To the ordinary guy, all this is a bunch of gobbledygook. But
          out of the gobbledygook comes a very clear thing: you can't
          trust the government; you can't believe what they say; and you
          can't rely on their judgment. And the implicit infallibility of
          presidents, which has been an accepted thing in America, is
          badly hurt by this, because it shows that people do things the
          president wants to do even though it's wrong, and the president
          can be wrong.

   The release of these papers was politically embarrassing, not only to
   the incumbent Nixon Administration, but also to the previous Johnson
   and Kennedy Administrations. John Mitchell, Nixon's Attorney General,
   almost immediately issued a telegram to the Times ordering that it halt
   publication. The Times refused, and the government brought suit against
   it.

   Although the Times eventually won the trial before the Supreme Court,
   an appellate court ordered that the Times temporarily halt further
   publication. This was not the first successful attempt by the federal
   government to restrain the publication of a newspaper as Lincoln
   illustrated during the civil war; this was remarkable because prior
   restraint has historically been viewed as the most oppressive form of
   censorship. Ellsberg released the Pentagon Papers to other newspapers
   in rapid succession, making it clear to the government that they would
   have to obtain injunctions against every newspaper in the country to
   stop the story. The right of the press to publish the papers was upheld
   in New York Times Co. v. U.S..

Trial and Mistrial

   On June 28, Ellsberg publicly surrendered to the US Attorney's Office
   in Boston, Massachusetts. He was taken into custody believing he would
   spend the rest of his life in prison; he was charged with theft,
   conspiracy, and espionage.

   In one of Nixon's actions against Ellsberg, G. Gordon Liddy and E.
   Howard Hunt, members of the White House Special Investigation Unit
   (also called the "White House Plumbers") broke into Ellsberg's
   psychiatrist's office in September 1971, hoping to find information
   they could use to discredit him. The revelation of the break-in became
   part of the Watergate scandal. According to Ellsberg's autobiography,
   on May 3, 1972 the White House secretly flew a dozen Cuban CIA "assets"
   to Washington DC with orders to "totally incapacitate" him. (They
   backed out because the crowd was too large.) Because of the gross
   governmental misconduct, all charges against Ellsberg were eventually
   dropped. White House counsel Charles Colson was later prosecuted and
   pled no contest for obstruction of justice in the burglary of
   Ellsberg's psychiatrist's office.

Later life

   Daniel Ellsberg has continued as a political activist, giving lecture
   tours and speaking out about current events. Recently he garnered
   criticism from the George W. Bush administration for praising Katharine
   Gun and calling on others to leak any papers that reveal deception
   regarding the 2003 invasion of Iraq. Daniel Ellsberg also testified in
   2004 at the conscientious objector hearing of Camilo Mejia at Fort
   Sill, Oklahoma.

   The Pentagon Papers is a 2003 movie documenting Ellsberg's life
   starting with his work for Rand Corp and ending with the day on which
   the judge declared his espionage trial a mistrial.

   Ellsberg was arrested, in November 2005, for violating a county
   ordinance for trespassing while protesting against George W. Bush's
   conduct of the Iraq War.

   In July 2006, Ellsberg was interviewed on the Alex Jones radio show
   where he discussed his opinions on US Government involvement in the
   September 11 terrorist attacks. Interview available in MP3 format. 10
   minute segment starts at 23:55

   In September 2006, Ellsberg wrote in Harper's Magazine that he hoped
   someone would leak information about a U.S. invasion of Iran before the
   invasion happened, to stop the war. He reiterated this in a September
   21, 2006 interview on The Colbert Report.

   Ellsberg is the recipient of the Inaugural Ron Ridenhour Courage Award;
   a prize established by The Nation Institute and The Fertel Foundation.
   On September 28, 2006 he was awarded the Right Livelihood Award.

Works by Daniel Ellsberg

     * Daniel Ellsberg. 2002. Secrets: A Memoir of Vietnam and the
       Pentagon Papers. New York: Viking. ISBN 0-670-03030-9
     * Daniel Ellsberg. 2001. Risk, Ambiguity and Decision Routledge. ISBN
       0-8153-4022-2 (Ellsberg's 1962 PhD was released as a book)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daniel_Ellsberg"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
