   #copyright

David Blanchflower

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Political People

   David Graham Blanchflower (born March 2, 1952) is a leading labour
   economist, currently a tenured economics professor at Dartmouth
   College, Hanover, New Hampshire, and an external member of the Bank of
   England's interest rate-setting Monetary Policy Committee (MPC). He is
   also a current Research Associate at the National Bureau of Economic
   Research, and a Research Fellow at the Centre for Economic Studies at
   the University of Munich and (since 1999) the Institute for the Study
   of Labor (IZA) at the University of Bonn.

   British-born, Blanchflower is now a U.S. citizen, having moved to the
   United States in 1989. On June 1, 2006, he replaced Stephen Nickell on
   the MPC.

Education

   Blanchflower attended Varndean Grammar School for Boys in Brighton and
   Cantonian High School in Cardiff. He went on to earn a B.A. in Social
   Sciences (Economics) at the University of Leicester in 1973 and a
   Postgraduate Certificate in Education at the University of Birmingham
   in 1975. He received an M.Sc. (Economics) at the University of Wales in
   1981 and his Ph.D. in 1985 at the University of London. He was also
   awarded an honorary A.M. in 1996 at Dartmouth College.

Work in Economics

   Blanchflower served as a Research Officer at the Institute for
   Employment Research at University of Warwick from 1984 to 1986, when he
   became a Lecturer at the Department of Economics at the University of
   Surrey, a post he held until 1989 when he moved to the United States.

   He has been a member of the Editorial Board of Small Business
   Economics, Scottish Journal of Political Economy, and Industrial &
   Labor Relations Review.

   He has also been a Research Associate at the Centre for Economic
   Performance at the London School of Economics and at the Canadian
   International Labour Network.

The Wage Curve

   Blanchflower's The Wage Curve (with Andrew Oswald), with eight years of
   data from 4 million people in 16 countries, argued that the wage curve,
   which plots wages against unemployment, is negatively sloping,
   reversing generations of macroeconomic theory. "The Phillips Curve is
   wrong, it's as fundamental as that," said Blanchflower. The Guardian
   praised the findings as "one of the most devastating findings of
   contemporary economics". The implications, that wages are highest when
   unemployment is lowest and that increased unemployment drives down
   wages, have been suggested periodically in economics since the
   publication of Karl Marx's Wage-Labour and Capital, but were not
   accepted by the mainstream.

Happiness

   Much of Blanchflower's work has focused on the economics of happiness.
   He has posited a correlation between age and happiness, declining
   through the 20s, 30s, and 40s before increasing in retirement. He has
   been labelled a "happiness guru" for his ability to quantify the
   increase in happiness for individuals who are married or have sex
   frequently, work which has applications in divorce law and
   pharmaceutical advertising.

   He has been interviewed several times on NPR and New Hampshire Public
   Radio about his work in this area.

Blanchflower v. Blanchflower

   In 2003 Blanchflower filed for an "at fault" divorce from his wife Sian
   Blanchflower on the grounds that she was having an adulterous affair
   with another woman. Mrs. Blanchflower admitted to the affair, but
   argued that the affair did not constitute adultery under New Hampshire
   law. After a lower court initially sided with Mr. Blanchflower, the New
   Hampshire Supreme Court reversed the lower court's decision and ruled
   3-2 in favour of Mrs. Blanchflower, concluding that adultery must
   involve sexual intercourse and that same-sex relations could not
   constitute sexual intercourse, based on the 1961 edition of Webster's
   Third New International Dictionary. Some gay-rights groups, who had
   filed amicus curiae briefs in favour of Mr. Blanchflower, condemned the
   ruling, which is seen as a setback to the same-sex marriage movement.

Selected works

     * Part-time employment in Great Britain 1980, Department of
       Employment Research Paper No. 57, 1987.
     * Occupational earnings and work histories: who gets the good jobs?,
       Department of Employment Research Paper No. 68, 1989.
     * Swedish labor market policy: an evaluation. Report of a Non-Nordic
       Institution, published by the Swedish Ministry of Labour,
       Stockholm, Sweden, 1995.
     * The Wage Curve, published in 1994 by MIT Press, Cambridge,
       Massachusetts.
     * The area labour cost adjustment: analysis and a new approach,
       National Economic Research Associates, London, May 1996.
     * The area labour cost adjustment: empirical analysis and evidence on
       a new approach, National Economic Research Associates, London, May
       1996.
     * The area labour cost adjustment: disaggregated estimates, London
       Economics, June 1996.
     * Review of the area labour cost adjustment: project A - final
       report, London Economics, June 1996.
     * The role and influence of trade unions in the OECD, report to the
       Bureau of International Labor Affairs, U.S. Department of Labor,
       August, 1996.
     * Wage levels in the regions of Britain; a report for Tesco, London
       Economics, September 1996.
     * The area cost adjustment: specific cost approach, A report for the
       Associations of Local Government in London and the South East,
       National Economic Research Associates, London, July 1998.
     * Youth Employment and Joblessness in Advanced Countries, University
       of Chicago Press and NBER, 2000.

IZA discussion papers

     * A Cross-Country Study of Union Membership. 2006.
     * The Scots May Be Brave But They Are Neither Healthy Or Happy. 2005.
     * An Analysis of the Impact of Affirmative Action Programs on
       Self-Employment in the Construction Industry. 2005.
     * The Wage Curve Reloaded. 2005.
     * Happiness and the Human Development Index: The Paradox of
       Australia. 2005.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Blanchflower"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
