   #copyright

Davy Jones' Locker

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Myths

   Davy Jones's Locker is an idiom for the bottom of the sea — the resting
   place of drowned seamen. It is used as a euphemism for death at sea
   (e.g. to be "sent to Davy Jones's Locker"); Davy Jones is a nickname
   (used primarily by sailors) for what would be the devil of the seas.
   The origins of the name are unclear, and many theories have been put
   forth, including incompetent sailors, a pub owner who kidnapped
   sailors, or that Davy Jones is another name for the devil.

   The story's reputation has been widespread among sailors since its
   popularization, and nautical traditions have been created around Davy
   Jones. He is also very popular in the broader culture.

Origin

Literature

   Daniel Defoe mentions the phrase in his 1726 book "The Four Years
   Voyages of Capt. George Roberts": "Heaving the rest into David Jones's
   locker, i.e. the sea." It appears not to have yet taken on the later
   connotations of misfortune.

   The earliest known reference to Davy Jones's negative connotation
   occurs in The Adventures of Peregrine Pickle by Tobias Smollett,
   published in 1751:

          This same Davy Jones, according to sailors, is the fiend that
          presides over all the evil spirits of the deep, and is often
          seen in various shapes, perching among the rigging on the eve of
          hurricanes, ship-wrecks, and other disasters to which sea-faring
          life is exposed, warning the devoted wretch of death and woe.

   He is described in the same story as having saucer eyes, three rows of
   teeth, horns, a tail, and blue smoke coming from his nostrils.

   In 1824, Washington Irving mentions Jones's name in his "Adventures of
   the Black Fisherman.":

          He came, said he, in a storm, and he went in a storm; he came in
          the night, and he went in the night; he came nobody knows
          whence, and he has gone nobody knows where. For aught I know he
          has gone to sea once more on his chest, and may land to bother
          some people on the other side of the world; though it's a
          thousand pities, added he, if he has gone to Davy Jones's
          locker.

Theories

   The exact origin of "Davy Jones" is unclear, and many explanations have
   been proposed. David Jones was a pirate on the Indian Ocean in the
   1630s, but most scholars agree that he was not famous enough to gain
   such lasting global fame. Sources have cited the British pub owner who
   is referenced in the 1594 song "Jones's Ale is Newe." He may be the
   same pub owner who supposedly threw drunken sailors into his ale locker
   and then dumped them onto any passing ship. He could also be Duffer
   Jones, a notoriously myopic sailor who often found himself overboard.

   Others have suggested more supernatural meanings. Some believe the name
   came from Welsh sailors who would call upon Saint David for protection
   in times of mortal danger. Some also think it is just another name for
   the devil. Some call him Deva, Davy or Taffy, the thief of the evil
   spirit. Some think Jonah became the "evil angel" of all sailors. Upon
   death, a wicked sailor's body supposedly went to Davy Jones's locker,
   but a holy sailor soul went to Fiddler's Green.

Etymology

   Davy may come from Duppy, a West Indian term for a malevolent ghost, or
   from Saint David, also known as Dewi, the patron saint of Wales, while
   Jones comes from the prophet Jonah, whose story is considered bad luck
   for sailors.

Reputation

   Jones's reputation causes fear among sailors, and many refuse to
   discuss Davy Jones in any great detail. Not all traditions dealing with
   Davy Jones are fearful. In traditions associated with sailors crossing
   the Equatorial line, there was a "raucous and rowdy" initiation
   presided over by those who had crossed the line before, known as
   shellbacks, or Sons of Neptune. The eldest shellback was called King
   Neptune, and the next eldest was his assistant who was called Davy
   Jones.

In popular culture

Movies

   Davy Jones is the main villain in the film Pirates of the Caribbean:
   Dead Man's Chest ( 2006), played by Bill Nighy. He appears along with
   his crew of half-human, half-sea creature sailors aboard the Flying
   Dutchman. He is portrayed as a mutated cross between a man and an
   octopus, with a wriggling beard of tentacles and two crustacean-esque
   limbs. The movie also extrapolates on the origins of Davy Jones. In the
   movie, the story follows that Davy Jones was once an average sailor who
   fell in love with a beautiful woman, wild and untameable as the sea.
   When he could not have her, the pain was so much that he cut out his
   still beating heart, and sealed it in a chest, so that he would never
   have to feel love or compassion ever again.

Television

   In an episode of SpongeBob SquarePants, The Flying Dutchman threatens
   to send Mr. Krabs to Davy Jones' locker, which is full of smelly gym
   socks.

   In the Anime and Manga series One Piece, Davy Jones is mentioned as
   being the inspiration for the Davy Back Fight. The Davy Back Fight is a
   pirates game where crews of pirates play games, the winners of which
   can take crew members from the opposing team. The number of games are
   chosen based on a coin system, meaning you can have either a 1-coin,
   2-coin, or 3-coin game. After the selection, the coins are thrown into
   the ocean, supposedly payment to Davy Jones.

   Davy Jones is also referenced many times in the television series
   Rocko's Modern Life.

   His ship, The Flying Dutchman, has been parodied on The Simpsons as the
   restaurant The Frying Dutchman.

   On the 1960's comedy The Monkees, actor / character Davy Jones made
   reference to one day inheriting the locker in an episode of the series,
   " Hitting the High Seas."

   In "The Bird's Last Jest," an episode of the live-action Batman series,
   Robin ( Burt Ward) exclaims, "Holy Davy Jones!" as Chief O'Hara (
   Stafford Repp) appears to be headed for a watery grave.

   Also, in an episode of Yo Yogi, Yogi says "send them to Davey Jones'
   locker".

Video Games

   In the videogame Banjo-Tooie, in the fourth world the boss (a giant
   anglerfish called Lord Woo Fak Fak) is inside a locker that says: "D.
   Jones". The other lockers, incidentally, bear the names of the game's
   producers.

   In the beginning of the PC Game The Curse of Monkey Island, the
   wanna-be pirate Wally describes his toughness by saying "I'm so tough,
   that in junior high I stuffed Davy Jones in his locker!"

   In " The Secret of Monkey Island", when at the shopkeeper's on Melee
   Island, try to look at the safe, and Guybrush will describe it as one
   of "Davey Jones' Lockers" .

   In Sierra's PC game King's Quest IV: The Perils of Rosella, whenever
   the player swims Rosella too long in the ocean, she tires out and
   drowns, with the message that she has been sent back to Davy Jones'
   locker.

   In the computer game Blood Money (developed by DMA Design, published by
   Psygnosis in 1989), the shops in the under water level bear a sign that
   says "Davy Jones Equipment Locker".

   Jonathan Jones is a character from the game Super Mario RPG: Legend of
   the Seven Stars, who is likely a reference to Davy Jones.

   In MegaMan Battle Network 6: Cybeast Falzer/Cybeast Gregar, The
   character Captain Blackbeard, after being announced guilty in his court
   trial, says "I'll send ye all to Davy Jones' locker!"

   In the PC game Wizardry 8 you can find "Davy Jones' Locker", a chest at
   the bottom of the sea containing some of the best loot in the game.

   In the PC game Zuma, some levels take place under water. They are
   titled "Davy Jones' Locker"

   In the NES game Little Nemo: The Dream Master, in the Ocean at Night
   level, a hidden cave is referred to as Davy Jones Locker.

Music

   On the album "The Power of Seven" by the ambient techno group System 7
   there is a song called "Davy Jones' Locker." On the album "Bermuda
   Triangle," by guitar virtuoso Buckethead, there is a song titled "Davy
   Jones' Locker."

   Techno / electro project Drexciya have a track called "Davey Jones
   Locker" on the compilation "True People: The Detroit Techno Album".

   On the Beastie Boys album " Licensed to Ill", the track "Rhymin' &
   Stealin'" mentions Davy Jones locker with the line "My pistol is loaded
   - I shot Betty Crocker; Deliver Colonel Sanders down to Davy Jones'
   locker".

   Iron Maiden mentions Davy Jones in their " No Prayer for the Dying"
   album, on the song "Run Silent, Run Deep"

   The Devil Makes Three, an acoustic group with a mix of country ragtime
   to rock-n-roll with a little punk, has a song called The Plank with a
   chorus that mentions Davy Jones Locker, "To all our enemies, we'll see
   you in hell. We're gonna walk 'em off the plank into the wishing well.
   Down to Davy Jones' Locker where the fishes sleep. I won't be praying
   for you so don't be praying for me."

   Australian punk band Frenzal Rhomb talk about Davy Jones in their song
   "Ship of Beers". In the song, the ship of beers that the band are
   sailing is sinking and they claim "...it won't be long 'till Davy Jones
   can claim me - hopefully he'll feel like a cleansing ale after all he's
   only human." This talks about exchanging their souls for a beer.

   On his album, " Food & Liquor", rapper Lupe Fiasco makes mention of
   Davey Jones' Locker in the song "Pressure" featuring Jay-Z. He goes on
   by dropping this line..."Stones in the pocket will drag em down to Davy
   Jones' Locker"

Print

   The band The Ocean Blue released a CD entitled "Davy Jones' Locker" in
   2001. It was released on independent pop label March records, and
   included acclaimed independent hits " Ayn" and "Denmark", which both
   had eponymic EPs.

   In the comic book series " Hellboy", Davy Jones' locker is an
   underwater room full of jars in the shapes of men. This room is owned
   by the villainous Bog Roosh, a fish-like witch that draws her power
   from the souls of drowned sailors.

   Neal Stephenson makes many references to "David Jones' Locker" in the
   book " Quicksilver" of " The Baroque Cycle." A reference is also made
   to "Davy Jones' Locker" in his book " Cryptonomicon."

   Davy Jones' Locker is mentioned in Eric Linklater's juvenile fantasy
   The Pirates of the Deep Green Sea (1949) where Davy Jones also is a
   major character, a benevolent underwater monarch whose moveable court
   bears this name.

   Davy Jones was a wooden whale and companion to the title character in
   John R. Neill's 1942 Oz book, Lucky Bucky in Oz.

Games

   In the constructible strategy game Pirates of the Spanish Main, Davy
   Jones appears as a unique crew for the Cursed faction, and his flagship
   is the Flying Dutchman.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Davy_Jones%27_Locker"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
