   #copyright

Dayuan

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Peoples


   This is a featured article. Click here for more information.
   The Dayuan (in Ferghana) was one of the three advanced civilizations of
   Central Asia around 130 BCE, together with Parthia and Greco-Bactria,
   according to the Chinese historical work Book of Han.
   Enlarge
   The Dayuan (in Ferghana) was one of the three advanced civilizations of
   Central Asia around 130 BCE, together with Parthia and Greco-Bactria,
   according to the Chinese historical work Book of Han.

   The Dayuan or Ta-Yuan (Chinese: 大宛; pinyin: dàyuān; Wade-Giles:
   Ta-Yuan, lit. “Great Yuan”) were a people of Ferghana in Central Asia,
   described in the Chinese historical works of Records of the Grand
   Historian and the Book of Han, which follow the travels of Chinese
   explorer Zhang Qian in 130 BCE and the numerous embassies that followed
   him into Central Asia thereafter. The country of Dayuan is generally
   accepted as relating to the Ferghana Valley.

   These Chinese accounts describe the Dayuan as urbanized dwellers with
   Caucasian features, living in walled cities and having "customs
   identical to those of the Greco-Bactrians", a Hellenistic kingdom that
   was ruling Bactria at that time in today’s northern Afghanistan. The
   Dayuan are also described as manufacturers and great lovers of wine.

   The Dayuan were probably the descendants of the Greek colonies that
   were established by Alexander the Great in Ferghana in 329 BCE, and
   prospered within the Hellenistic realm of the Seleucids and
   Greco-Bactrians, until they were isolated by the migrations of the
   Yueh-Chih around 160 BCE. It has also been suggested that the name
   “Yuan” was simply a transliteration of the words “ Yona”, or “ Yavana”,
   used throughout antiquity in Asia to designate Greeks (“ Ionians”), so
   that Dayuan (lit. “Great Yuan”) would mean "Great Ionians".
   Characters for Dayuan, associating the character for "Great", and a
   character originally depicting two persons seated under one roof, but
   used for its sound value here.
   Enlarge
   Characters for Dayuan, associating the character for "Great", and a
   character originally depicting two persons seated under one roof, but
   used for its sound value here.

   The interaction between the Dayuan and the Chinese is historically
   crucial, since it represents one of the first major contacts between an
   urbanized Indo-Aryan culture and the Chinese civilization, opening the
   way to the formation of the Silk Road that was to link the East and the
   West in material and cultural exchange from the 1st century BCE to the
   15th century.

Hellenistic rule (329–160 BCE)

   Probable Greek soldier, woollen wall hanging, Sampul tapestry, 3rd-2nd
   century BCE, Sampul, Urumqi Xinjiang Museum.
   Enlarge
   Probable Greek soldier, woollen wall hanging, Sampul tapestry, 3rd-2nd
   century BCE, Sampul, Urumqi Xinjiang Museum.

   The region of Ferghana was conquered by Alexander the Great in 329 BCE
   and became his most advanced base in Central Asia. He founded the
   fortified city of Alexandria Eschate (Lit. “Alexandria the Furthest”)
   in the southwestern part of the Ferghana valley, on the southern bank
   of the river Syr Darya (ancient Jaxartes), at the location of the
   modern city of Khujand (also called Khozdent, formerly Leninabad), in
   the state of Tajikistan. Alexander built a 6 kilometer long brick wall
   around the city and, as for the other cities he founded, had a garrison
   of his retired veterans and wounded settle there.

   The whole of Bactria, Transoxiana and the area of Ferghana remained
   under the control of the Hellenistic Seleucid Empire until 250 BCE. The
   region then wrested independence under the leadership of its governor
   Diodotus of Bactria, to become the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom.

Greco-Bactrian kingdom (250–160 BCE)

   The Greco-Bactrians held their territory, and according to the Greek
   historian Strabo even went beyond Alexandria Eschate and "extended
   their empire as far as the Seres (China) and the Phryni" ( Strabo
   XI.XI.I). There are indications that they may have led expeditions as
   far as Kashgar in Chinese Turkestan, leading to the first known
   contacts between China and the West around 200 BC. Various statuettes
   and representations of Greek soldiers have been found north of the Tien
   Shan, and are today on display in the museum of Urumqi (Boardman).

   Around 160 BC, the area of Ferghana seems to have been invaded by Saka
   tribes (called the Sai-Wang by the Chinese). The Sai-Wang, originally
   settled in the Ili valley in the general area of Lake Issyk Kul, were
   retreating southward after having been dislodged by Yuezhi (who
   themselves were fleeing from the Xiongnu):
   Silver tetradrachm of King Eucratides I, who probably lost the
   territory of Ferghana to the Sakas.
   Enlarge
   Silver tetradrachm of King Eucratides I, who probably lost the
   territory of Ferghana to the Sakas.

          "The Yuezhi attacked the king of the Sai ("Sai-Wang") who moved
          a considerable distance to the south and the Yuezhi then
          occupied his lands" (Han Shu, 61 4B).

   The Sakas occupied the Greek territory of Dayuan, benefiting from the
   fact that the Greco-Bactrians were fully occupied with conflicts in
   India against the Indo-Greeks, and could hardly defend their northern
   provinces. According to W.W.Tarn, "The remaining of the Sai-Wang tribes
   apparently seized the Greek province of Ferghana… It was easy at this
   time to occupy Ferghana: Eucratides had just overthrown the Euthydemid
   dynasty, he himself was with his army in India, and in 159 he met his
   death… Heliocles, preoccupied first with the recovery of Bactria and
   then with the invasion of India, must have let this outlying province
   go" (W.W.Tarn, "The Greeks in Bactria and India").

Saka rule (160 BCE onward)

   A Saka (Scythian) horseman from the area north of the Tian Shan,
   Pazyryk, c.300 BCE.
   Enlarge
   A Saka (Scythian) horseman from the area north of the Tian Shan,
   Pazyryk, c.300 BCE.

   When the Chinese envoy Zhang Qian described Dayuan around 128 BCE, he
   mentioned, besides the flourishing urban civilization, warriors
   "shooting arrows on horseback", a probable description of Saka nomad
   warriors. Dayuan had probably by then become a caste of nomadic people
   ruling over a pre-existing agricultural population.

   Also in 106–101 BCE, during their conflict against China, the country
   of Dayuan is said to have been an ally with the neighbouring tribes of
   the Kang-Kiu ( Sogdians). The Chinese also record the name of the king
   of Dayuan as "Mu-Kua", a Saka name rendered in Greek as Mauakes or
   Maues (another Scythian ruler by the name of Maues is known as a ruler
   of the Indo-Scythian kingdom in northern India in the 1st century BCE).

Yuezhi by-pass (155 BCE)

   According to the Han Chronicles the Yuezhi suffered another defeat
   around 155 BCE, against the Wusun, and fled south from the Ili river
   area, by-passed the urban civilization of the Dayuan in Ferghana, and
   re-settled north of the Oxus in modern-day Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan,
   definitively cutting Dayuan from contact with the Greco-Bactrian
   kingdom. The Yueh-Chi would further expand southward into Bactria
   around 125 BCE, and then going on to form the Kushan Empire in India
   from the 1st century CE.

Interaction with China (130 BCE onward)

   The Dayuan remained a healthy and powerful civilization which had
   numerous contacts and exchanges with China from 130 BCE.
   Zhang Qian leaving emperor Han Wudi, for his expedition to Central Asia
   from 138 to 126 BCE, Mogao Caves mural, 618–712 CE.
   Enlarge
   Zhang Qian leaving emperor Han Wudi, for his expedition to Central Asia
   from 138 to 126 BCE, Mogao Caves mural, 618–712 CE.

   Around 130 BCE, at the time of Zhang Qian’s embassy to Central Asia,
   the Dayuan were described as inhabitants of a region corresponding to
   the Ferghana, to the west of the Chinese empire. “The capital of the
   kingdom of Dayuan is the city of Guishan ( Khujand), distant from
   Chang'an 12,550 li. The kingdom contains 60,000 families, comprising a
   population of 300,000, with 60,000 trained troops, a Viceroy, and a
   National Assistant Prince. The seat of the Governor General lies to the
   east at a distance of 4,031 li.” (Han Shu)

   To their south-west were the territories of the Yuezhi, with the
   Greco-Bactrians further south still, beyond the Oxus. “The great
   Yueh-chih is situated about 2000 or 3000 li west of Dayuan; they dwell
   north of the river Kuei ( Oxus). To the south of them there is Daxia (
   Bactrians), to the west, Anxis ( Parthians); to the north Kanzhu (
   Sogdians).” ( Shiji, 123.5b)

   The Shiji then explains that the Yueh-Chih originally inhabited the
   area East of the Dayuan, in the Tarim Basin, before they suffered a
   crushing defeat against the Xiongnu and their leader Mao-tun in 176
   BCE, forcing them to go beyond the territory of the Dayuan and resettle
   in the West by the banks of the Oxus, between the territory of the
   Dayuan and Bactria to the south.

Urbanized city-dwellers

   The customs of the Dayuan are said by Zhang Qian to be identical to
   those of the Bactrians in the south, who actually formed the
   Greco-Bactrian Kingdom at that time.
   Silver coin of the Greco-Bactrian king Heliocles I(150-125 BCE) at the
   time of Zhang Qian's embassy.
   Enlarge
   Silver coin of the Greco-Bactrian king Heliocles I(150-125 BCE) at the
   time of Zhang Qian's embassy.

   “Their customs (the Bactrians) are the same as those of Dayuan. The
   people have fixed abodes and live in walled cities and regular houses
   like the people of Dayuan. They have no great kings or heads, but
   everywhere in their walled cities and settlements they have installed
   small kings.” ( Shiji, 123.3b)

   They are described as town-dwellers, as opposed to other populations
   such as the Yuezhi, the Wun-Sun or the Xiongnu who were nomads. “They
   (the Dayuan) have walled cities and houses; the large and small cities
   belonging to them, fully seventy in number, contain an aggregate
   population of several hundreds of thousands…There are more than seventy
   other cities in the country.” (Han Shu)

Appearance and Culture

   The Shiji comments on the Caucasian-like appearance and the culture of
   the people around Dayuan: “The peoples west of Dayuan to Anxi (Parthia)
   have deep sunken eyes, and bushy beards and whiskers. They are clever
   traders, and dispute about the division of a farthing. Women are
   honorably treated among them, and their husbands are guided by them in
   their decisions.” ( Shiji, 123)

   They were great manufacturers and lovers of wine, a characteristic
   often associated with Greeks: “Round about Dayuan they make wine from
   grapes. Wealthy people store up as much as 10,000 stones and over in
   their cellars, and keep it for several tens of years without spoiling.
   The people are fond of wine.” ( Shiji, 123).

Influence

   According to the Shiji, grapes and alfalfa were introduced to China
   from Dayuan following Zhang Qian's embassy: "The Han envoys brought
   back grape and alfalfa seeds to China, and the emperor for the first
   time tried growing these plants in areas of rich soil." ( Shiji, 123)
   These were probably Vitis vinifera , as wild vine "mountain grapes"
   like Vitis thunbergii were being used for wine making in China before
   that time .

   The Shiji also claims that metal casting was introduced to the Dayuan
   region by Han deserters: "... the casting of coins and vessels was
   formerly unknown. Later, however, when some of the Chinese soldiers
   attached to the Han embassies ran away and surrendered to the people of
   the area, they taught them how to cast metal and manufacture weapons."
   ( Shiji, 123)

Relations with China

   Following the reports of Zhang Qian (who was originally sent to obtain
   an alliance with the Yuezhi against the Xiongnu, in vain), the Chinese
   emperor Wudi became interested in developing commercial relationships
   with the sophisticated urban civilizations of Ferghana, Bactria and
   Parthia: “The Son of Heaven on hearing all this reasoned thus: Ferghana
   (Dayuan) and the possessions of Bactria and Parthia are large
   countries, full of rare things, with a population living in fixed
   abodes and given to occupations somewhat identical with those of the
   Chinese people, but with weak armies, and placing great value on the
   rich produce of China” ( Shiji, 123)

   The Chinese subsequently sent numerous embassies, around ten every
   year, to these countries and as far as Seleucid Syria. “Thus more
   embassies were dispatched to An-si [ Parthia], An-ts'ai [the Aorsi, or
   Alans], Li-kan [Syria under the Seleucids], T'iau-chi [ Chaldea], and
   Shon-tu [India]… As a rule, rather more than ten such missions went
   forward in the course of a year, and at the least five or six.” (
   Shiji, 123)
   A horse of the Later Han Dynasty (1st-2nd century AD/CE)
   Enlarge
   A horse of the Later Han Dynasty (1st-2nd century AD/CE)

   The Chinese were also strongly attracted by the tall and powerful
   horses ("heavenly horses") in the possession of the Dayuan, which were
   of capital importance to fight the nomad Xiongnu. After the refusal of
   the Dayuan to offer them enough horses, the Chinese sent an army in 104
   BC/BCE under general Li Guangli. They failed, essentially through lack
   of preparation and because they underestimated their adversaries: “The
   army of Yuan is weak; if we attack it with no more than three thousand
   Chinese soldiers using crossbows, we shall be sure to vanquish it
   completely.” ( Shiji, 123)

   They then sent a second army of 100,000 men to subdue them and finally
   obtained 3,000 horses through negotiation, although they did not manage
   to take the Dayuan capital: “On its arrival there the Chinese army
   consisted of thirty thousand men. An army of Yuan gave battle, the
   victory being gained by the efficiency of the Chinese archery; and this
   caused the Yuan army to take refuge in their bulwarks and mount the
   city walls… After all, the Chinese were unable to enter the inner city,
   and, abandoning further action, the army was led back.” ( Shiji, 123)

   Contacts with the West were re-established following the peace treaty
   with the Yuan. Ambassadors were once again sent to the West, caravans
   were sent to Bactria.

An era of East-West trade and cultural exchange

   The Silk Road essentially came into being from the 1st century BC/BCE,
   following the efforts of China to consolidate a road to the Western
   world, both through direct settlements in the area of the Tarim Basin
   and diplomatic relations with the countries of the Dayuan, Parthians
   and Bactrians further west.

   Intense trade followed soon, confirmed by the Roman craze for Chinese
   silk (supplied by the Parthians) from the 1st century BC, to the point
   that the Senate issued, in vain, several edicts to prohibit the wearing
   of silk, on economic and moral grounds. This is attested by at least
   three significant authors:
     * Strabo (64/ 63 BCE–c. 24 CE).
     * Seneca the Younger (c. 3 BCE–65 CE).
     * Pliny the Elder (23–79 CE).

   This is also the time when the Buddhist faith and the Greco-Buddhist
   culture started to travel along the Silk Road, penetrating China from
   around the 1st century BCE.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dayuan"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
