   #copyright

Dead Sea scrolls

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Religious texts

   Fragments of the scrolls on display at the Archeological Museum, Amman
   Enlarge
   Fragments of the scrolls on display at the Archeological Museum, Amman

   The Dead Sea scrolls comprise roughly 825-872 documents, including
   texts from the Hebrew Bible, discovered between 1947 and 1956 in eleven
   caves in and around the Wadi Qumran (near the ruins of the ancient
   settlement of Khirbet Qumran, on the northwest shore of the Dead Sea).
   The texts are of great religious and historical significance, as they
   are practically the only known surviving Biblical documents written
   before AD 100.

Date and contents

   According to carbon dating, textual analysis, and handwriting analysis
   the documents were written at various times between the middle of the
   2nd century BC and the 1st century AD. At least one document has a
   carbon date range of 21 BC– 61 AD. The Nash Papyrus from Egypt,
   containing a copy of the Ten Commandments, is the only other Hebrew
   document of comparable antiquity. Similar written materials have been
   recovered from nearby sites, including the fortress of Masada. While
   some of the scrolls were written on papyrus, a good portion were
   written on a brownish animal hide that appears to be gevil. The scrolls
   were written with feathers from a bird and the ink used was made from
   carbon black and white pigments. One scroll, appropriately named the
   Copper Scroll, consisted of thin copper sheets that were incised with
   text and then joined together.

   About 80% to 85% of the Dead Sea Scrolls are written in one of three
   dialects of Hebrew, Biblical Hebrew (also known as Classical Hebrew), "
   Dead Sea Scroll Hebrew" (on which see Hoffman 2004 or Qimron 1986), or
   proto-Tannaitic Hebrew, as in the Copper Scroll and the MMT text.
   Biblical Hebrew dominates in the Biblical scrolls, and DSS Hebrew in
   scrolls which some scholars believe were composed at Qumran. Also some
   scrolls are written in Aramaic and a few in Koine Greek.

   For the view that the scrolls are the remnants of Jerusalem libraries
   and that there is no organic connection between the scrolls and Qumran,
   see below, section 2.3. Even according to those scholars who believe
   that there was scribal activity at Qumran, only a few of the biblical
   scrolls were actually composed there, the majority being copied before
   the Qumran period and coming into the ownership of the claimed Qumran
   community (Abegg et al 2002). There is, however, no concrete physical
   evidence of scribal activity at Qumran, nor, a fortiori, that the
   claimed Qumran community altered the biblical texts to reflect their
   own theology (Golb, 1995; cf. Abegg et al 2002). It is thought that the
   claimed Qumran community would have viewed the Book of Enoch and the
   Book of Jubilees as divinely inspired scripture (Abegg et al 2002). The
   biblical texts cited most often in the nonbiblical Dead Sea Scrolls are
   the Psalms, followed by the Book of Isaiah and the Book of Deuteronomy
   (Abegg et al 2002).

   Important texts include the Isaiah Scroll (discovered in 1947), a
   Commentary on the Habakkuk ( 1947); the so-called Manual of Discipline
   (= Community Rule) (1QS/4QSa-j), which gives much information on the
   structure and theology of a sect; and the earliest version of the
   Damascus Document. The so-called Copper Scroll ( 1952), which lists
   valuable hidden caches of gold, scrolls, and weapons, is probably the
   most notorious.

   The fragments span at least 801 texts that represent many diverse
   viewpoints, ranging from beliefs resembling those of the Essenes to
   those of other sects. About 30% are fragments from the Hebrew Bible,
   from all the books except the Book of Esther and the Book of Nehemiah
   (Abegg et al 2002). About 25% are traditional Israelite religious texts
   that are not in the canonical Hebrew Bible, such as the Book of Enoch,
   the Book of Jubilees, and the Testament of Levi. Another 30% contain
   Biblical commentaries or other texts such as the Community Rule
   (1QS/4QSa-j, also known as "Discipline Scroll" or "Manual of
   Discipline") and the War of the Sons of Light Against the Sons of
   Darkness (1QM, also known as the "War Scroll") related to the beliefs,
   regulations, and membership requirements of a Jewish sect, which some
   researchers continue to believe lived in the Qumran area. The rest
   (about 15%) of the fragments are yet unidentified.

Frequency of books found

   Books Ranked According to Number of Manuscripts found (top 16)
       Books      No. found
   Psalms         39
   Deuteronomy    33
   1 Enoch        25
   Genesis        24
   Isaiah         22
   Jubilees       21
   Exodus         18
   Leviticus      17
   Numbers        11
   Minor Prophets 10
   Daniel         8
   Jeremiah       6
   Ezekiel        6
   Job            6
   1 & 2 Samuel   4

Interpretations

Essenes

   According to a view almost universally held until the 1990s, the
   documents were written and hidden by a community of Essenes who were
   thought to have lived in the Qumran area. This is known as the
   Qumran-Essene Hypothesis. Jews revolted against the Romans in AD 66.
   Before they were massacred by Roman troops, the Essenes hid their
   scriptures in caves, not to be discovered until 1947. In view of rising
   opposition to this theory, it can no longer be stated with certitude
   that the opinion that the authors of the Dead Sea Scrolls were Essenes
   is the most prevalent view among scholars (Golb 1995; Hirschfeld 2004;
   Magen and Peleg 2006; cf. Abegg et al 2002). Since the 1990s a version
   of this theory, which can also no longer be said to be prevalent among
   scholars, stresses that the authors of the scrolls were "Essene-Like"
   or a splinter Essene group rather than simply Essenes as such. This
   modification of the Essene theory takes into account some significant
   differences between the world view expressed in some of the scrolls and
   the Essenes, as described by the classical authors. Together, the two
   theories may be called the "Qumran-sectarian theory".

Origins

Theory of Sadduceean Origin

   Another variation on the Qumran-sectarian theory, which has gained some
   popularity, is that the community was led by Zadokite priests (
   Sadducees). The most important document in support of this view is the
   "Miqsat Ma'ase haTorah" (MMT, 4Q394-), which states one or two purity
   laws identical to those attributed in rabbinic writings to the
   Sadducees (such as concerning the transfer of impurities). However many
   more purity laws differ. Any hard conclusions are hard to make on this
   fact. This document also reproduces a festival calendar which follows
   Sadducee principles for the dating of certain festival days.

   Florentino Martinez in a 2000 article in Near Eastern Archaeology dates
   composition of the Temple Scroll to the times of Hasmonean power
   consolidation, long before the existence of the Essenes and states that
   this is only the date when it was reduced to writing; the notions it
   expresses must be older. Some theological issues make this unlikely.
   Josephus tells us in his Jewish War and in his Antiquities of the Jews
   that the Sadducees and the Essenes held opposing views of
   predestination, with the Essenes beliving in an immortal soul and
   attributing everything to fate, while the Sadducees denied both the
   existence of the soul and the role of fate altogether. The scroll
   authors' belief that the soul survived beyond death (and this belief
   included resurrection) and their complex world of angels and demons
   engaged in a cosmic war was contrary to the Sadduceean belief that
   there is no resurrection, no angel or spirit. For the Saducees every
   man had the right to choose between good and bad, and this life was it.
   For the Essenes, God ruled all and man lived for the next life that was
   soon to come. It is unlikely that one became the other. It seems this
   could make it unlikely that Sadducees and Essenes were too closely
   related.

Jerusalem libraries

   In 1980 Norman Golb of the University of Chicago's Oriental Institute
   published the first of a series of studies critical of the
   Qumran-sectarian theory, and offering historical and textual evidence
   that the scrolls are the remains of various libraries in Jerusalem,
   hidden in the Judaean desert during the siege of Jerusalem by the
   Romans in 68-70 A.D. In broad terms, this evidence includes (1) the
   Copper Scroll found in Cave 3, which contains a list of treasures that,
   according to Golb and others, could only have originated in Jerusalem;
   (2) the great variety of conflicting ideas found among the scrolls; and
   (3) the fact that, apart from the Copper Scroll, they contain no
   original historical documents such as correspondence or contracts, but
   are all scribal copies of literary texts -- indicating that they are
   remnants of libraries and were not written at the site where they were
   found. Golb's theory has been endorsed by numerous scholars, including
   the prominent Israeli archaeologists Yizhar Hirschfeld,Yahman Jamaca,
   Yitzhak Magen and Yuval Peleg. Hirschfeld believes that Qumran was the
   country estate of a wealthy Jerusalemite. Magen and Peleg believe that
   the site was a pottery factory and had nothing to do with any sect.
   Golb believes that it was a military fortress, part of a concentric
   series of such bastions protecting Jerusalem. Thus, while one can no
   longer speak of any consensus regarding Qumran, what can be said is
   that current scrolls scholarship appears to be polarized between the
   traditional Qumran-sectarian theory and a growing movement towards the
   view that the site was secular in nature and had no organic connection
   with the parchment fragments found in the caves (see below). The
   scrolls are increasingly held to have come from a major centre of
   intellectual culture in Palestine such as only Jerusalem is known to
   have been during the intertestamentary period. According to this
   theory, the scrolls are in fact more important than they were
   previously thought to be, because of the light they cast on Jewish
   thought in Jerusalem at that time.

Temple library

   In 1963 Karl Heinrich Rengstorf of the University of Münster put forth
   the theory that the Dead Sea scrolls originated at the library of the
   Jewish Temple in Jerusalem. This theory was rejected by most scholars
   during the 1960s, who maintained that the scrolls were written at
   Qumran rather than transported from another location (a position then
   thought to be supported by de Vaux's identification of a room within
   the ruins of Qumran as a probable scriptorium -- an identification that
   has since been disputed by various archaeologists). Rengstorf's theory
   is also rejected by Norman Golb, who argues that it is rendered
   unlikely by the great multiplicity of conflicting religious ideas found
   among the scrolls. It has been revived, however, by Rachel Elior, who
   heads the department of Jewish Thought at the Hebrew University in
   Jerusalem.

Christian connections

   Spanish Jesuit José O'Callaghan has argued that one fragment ( 7Q5) is
   a New Testament text from the Gospel of Mark, chapter 6, verses 52–53.
   In recent years this controversial assertion has been taken up again by
   German scholar Carsten Peter Thiede. A successful identification of
   this fragment as a passage from Mark would make it the earliest extant
   New Testament document, dating somewhere between AD 30 and 60.
   Opponents consider that the fragment is tiny and requires so much
   reconstruction (the only complete word in Greek is "και" = "and") that
   it could have come from a text other than Mark.

   Robert Eisenman advanced the theory that some scrolls actually describe
   the early Christian community, characterized as more fundamentalist and
   rigid than the one portrayed by the New Testament. Eisenman also
   attempted to relate the career of James the Just and Paul of Tarsus to
   some of these documents.

Other theories

   Because they are frequently described as important to the history of
   the Bible, the scrolls are surrounded by a wide range of conspiracy
   theories. There is also writing about the Nephilim related to the Book
   of Enoch. Other theories with more support among scholars include
   Qumran as a military fortress or a winter resort (Abegg et al 2002).

Discovery

   The scrolls were found in 11 caves near a settlement at Qumran, none of
   them coming from the actual settlement. It is generally accepted that a
   Bedouin goat- or sheep-herder by the name of Mohammed Ahmed el-Hamed
   (nicknamed edh-Dhib, "the wolf") made the first discovery towards the
   beginning of 1947.

   In the most commonly told story the shepherd threw a rock into a cave
   in an attempt to drive out a missing animal under his care. The
   shattering sound of pottery drew him into the cave, where he found
   several ancient jars containing scrolls wrapped in linen.

   Dr. John C. Trevor has carried out a number of interviews with several
   men going by the name of Muhammed edh-Dhib, each relating a variation
   on this tale.

   The scrolls were first brought to a Bethlehem antiquities dealer named
   Ibrahim 'Ijha, who returned them after being warned that they may have
   been stolen from a synagogue. The scrolls then fell into the hands of
   Khalil Eskander Shahin, "Kando", a cobbler and antiques dealer. By most
   accounts the Bedouin removed only three scrolls following their initial
   find and, either encouraged by Kando to return, or revisited the site
   to gather more. Alternatively, it is postulated that Kando engaged in
   his own illegal excavation: Kando himself possessed at least four
   scrolls.

   Arrangements with Bedouin left the scrolls in the hands of a third
   party until a sale of them could be negotiated. That third party,
   George Isha'ya, was a member of the Syrian Orthodox Church, who soon
   contacted St. Mark's Monastery in the hope of getting an appraisal of
   the nature of the texts. News of the find then reached Metropolitan
   Athanasius Yeshue Samuel, more often referred to as Mar Samuel.

   After examining the scrolls and suspecting their age, Mar Samuel
   expressed an interest in purchasing them. All four scrolls found their
   way into his hands, the now famous Isaiah Scroll, the Community Rule,
   the Habakkuk Peshar, and the Genesis Apocryphon. Through the
   antiquities market, more scrolls soon surfaced, and Eleazer Sukenik
   found himself in possession of three: The War Scroll, Thanksgiving
   Hymns, and another more fragmented Isaiah scroll.

   By the end of 1947, Sukenik, received word of the scrolls in Mar
   Samuel's possession and attempted to purchase them. No deal was
   reached, and instead the scrolls found the attention of Dr. John C.
   Trevor, of the American School of Oriental Research (ASOR). Dr. Trevor
   compared the script in the scrolls to the Nash Papyrus, the oldest
   biblical manuscript at the time, finding similarities between the two.

   Dr. Trevor, a keen amateur photographer, met with Mar Samuel on
   February 21, 1948, when he photographed the scrolls. The quality of his
   photographs often exceeded that of the scrolls themselves over the
   years, as the texts quickly eroded once removed from their linen wraps.

   In March of that year, violence erupted between Arabs and Jews in
   Israel, prompting the removal of the scrolls from the country for
   safekeeping. The scrolls were illegally removed to Beirut.

Cave 1

   In 1949, scholars pinpointed the cave from which the scrolls were
   lifted, following the initial discovery, two years previously.
   Excavations of the cave began in February, under the direction of G L
   Harding, Roland de Vaux, and Ibrahim El-Assouli, caretaker of the
   Rockefeller Museum. Many of the larger manuscripts and fragments had
   been removed by local Bedouin peoples, yet the excavation uncovered
   some 600 fragments, alongside scraps of wood, cloth and pottery
   fragments. Infrared photographs, later to provide a valuable means of
   reading the texts, were taken on-site. A sum of 1000 Jordanian pounds
   was negotiated with the Bedouin, working with Kando, in exchange for
   the remaining fragments, after it became apparent that the scrolls
   obtained by Sukenik and Mar Samuel were missing.

Cave 2

   Three years later in 1952, the Bedouin, working with Kando, uncovered
   numerous fragments and sold them to the Palestine Archaeological Museum
   and the École Biblique.

Cave 3

   On March 14 of the same year, the scholarly expedition discovered a
   third cave containing manuscript fragments. In addition to these
   fragments was the Copper Scroll, which aroused much speculation,
   comprising a list and directions to treasure sites.

Cave 4

   In August 1952 the Bedouin made a find in Cave 4. Large volumes of
   scroll fragments (though no complete scrolls) soon surfaced on the
   antiquities market. When Harding discovered the site more than half of
   the cache had been gathered from the cave. The archaeological
   excavation began in late September of that year, yielding many more
   fragments from many more texts, as well as a second chamber to the
   cave.

   One of the fragments from cave 4 is the only known witness to an
   additional part of the narrative in the Books of Samuel about Nahash,
   king of Ammon.

   The financially struggling Jordanian government soon found itself
   unable to fund further purchases, and so instead offered the
   opportunity to foreign institutions to invest in the acquisition of the
   scrolls, for which they would be compensated with fragments. Several
   institutions responded, but were to be denied their purchase and
   refunded their money when the Jordanian government changed its
   position, instead keeping the texts in Jordan.

Caves 5 and 6

   Excavations at Cave 4 soon led to the discovery of Cave 5, offering a
   modest yield of fragments. The Bedouin, shortly thereafter, found Cave
   6, removing the remains of nearly three dozen more scrolls. Most of
   these were papyrus rather than the leather that predominated in the
   other caves.

   Mar Samuel, meanwhile, had made his way to America. Here he tried in
   vain to sell the texts in his possession, even displaying them once at
   the Library of Congress. Finally a now famous advertisement was taken
   out in the Wall Street Journal. On June 1, 1954, a Wall Street Journal
   ad proclaimed, "The Four Dead Sea Scrolls: Biblical Manuscripts dating
   back to at least 200 BC [sic], are for sale. This would be an ideal
   gift to an educational or religious institution by an individual or
   group." This ad was brought to the attention of Yigael Yadin, who,
   working through an intermediary, managed to purchase the scrolls for
   the sum of $250,000.

Caves 7–10

   In 1955 archaeologists would discover four more caves, 7 through 10.
   Yielding few fragments, they were nonetheless significant. Cave 7 would
   yield nineteen Greek fragments (including 7Q5) and spark much debate in
   the ensuing decades. Cave 8 held but five fragments, though many
   materials used in the tying of scrolls would be found. Cave 9 held but
   one fragment and Cave 10 nothing but an ostracon.

Cave 11

   The Bedouin discovered Cave 11, yielding over two dozen texts,
   including the Temple Scroll, which would later be seized by the Israeli
   army at the behest of Yigael Yadin. Several other scrolls emerged from
   Cave 11, a copy of Leviticus, a book of Psalms, see also Psalm 152-155,
   including several previously unknown hymns, as well as a targum on Job.
   Many have speculated that more Cave 11 scrolls may rest in the hands of
   a private collector.

Publication

   Some of the documents were published in a prompt manner: all of the
   writing found in Cave 1 appeared in print between 1950 and 1956; the
   finds from 8 different caves were released in a single volume in 1963;
   and 1965 saw the publication of the Psalms Scroll from Cave 11.
   Translation of these materials quickly followed.

   The exception to this speed that the documents from Cave 4, which
   represented 40% of the total material. The publication of these
   materials had been entrusted to an international team led by Father
   Roland de Vaux, a member of the Dominican Order in Jerusalem. This
   group published the first volume of the materials entrusted to them in
   1968, but spent much of their energies defending their theories of the
   material instead of publishing it. Geza Vermes, who had been involved
   from the start in the editing and publication of these materials,
   blamed the delay—and eventual failure—on de Vaux's selection of a team
   unsuited to the quality of work he had planned, as well as relying "on
   his personal, quasi-patriarchal authority" to control the completion of
   the work.

   As a result, a large part of the finds from Cave 4 were not made public
   for many years. Access to the scrolls was governed by a "secrecy rule"
   that allowed only the original International Team or their designates
   to view the original materials. After de Vaux's death in 1971, his
   successors repeatedly refused to even allow the publication of
   photographs of these materials so that other scholars could at least
   make their judgments. This rule was eventually broken: first by the
   publication in the fall of 1991 of 17 documents reconstructed from a
   concordance that had been made in 1988 and had come into the hands of
   scholars outside of the International Team; next, that same month, by
   the discovery and publication of a complete set of photographs of the
   Cave 4 materials at the Huntington Library in San Marino, California,
   that were not covered by the "secrecy rule". After some delays these
   photographs were published by Robert Eisenman and James Robinson (A
   Facsimile Edition of the Dead Sea Scrolls, two volumes, Washington,
   D.C., 1991). As a result, the "secrecy rule" was lifted, and
   publication of the Cave 4 documents soon commenced, with five volumes
   in print by 1995.

Vatican conspiracy theory

   Allegations that the Vatican suppressed the publication of the scrolls
   were published in the 1990s. Notably, Michael Baigent's and Richard
   Leigh's book The Dead Sea Scrolls Deception claim that several key
   scrolls were deliberately kept under wraps for decades to suppress
   unwelcome theories about the early history of Christianity; in
   particular, Eisenman's speculation that the life of Jesus was
   deliberately mythicized by Paul, possibly a Roman agent who faked his
   "conversion" from Saul in order to undermine the influence of
   anti-Roman messianic cults in the region.

   However, the complete publication and dissemination of translations and
   photographic records of the works in the late 1990s and early 2000s
   effectively undermined these ideas, since the 'new' Scroll material did
   not include anything which connected the Scrolls to early Christianity
   and certainly did not contain anything about the Catholic Church or
   anything the church would want to 'suppress'. As a result, most
   scholars discredit this conspiracy theory.

Significance

   The significance of the scrolls is still somewhat impaired by the
   uncertainty about their date and origin.

   In spite of these limitations, the scrolls have already been quite
   valuable to text critics. Before the discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls,
   the oldest Hebrew manuscripts of the Bible were Masoretic texts dating
   to 9th century. The biblical manuscripts found among the Dead Sea
   Scrolls push that date back to the 2nd century BC, and until that
   happened the oldest Greek manuscripts such as Codex Vaticanus and Codex
   Sinaiticus were the earliest extant versions of biblical manuscripts.
   Although some of the biblical manuscripts found at Qumran differ
   significantly from the Masoretic text, most do not. The scrolls thus
   provide new variants and the ability to be more confident of those
   readings where the Dead Sea manuscripts agree with the Masoretic text
   or with the early Greek manuscripts.

   Further, the sectarian texts of the Dead Sea Scrolls, most of which
   were previously unknown, offer new light on one form of Judaism
   practiced in the Second Temple period.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dead_Sea_scrolls"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
