   #copyright

Delhi

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Asia

   Delhi
   Delhi
   State
    -  District(s)           National Capital Territory of Delhi
                              - Delhi
   Coordinates               28.61° N 77.23° E
   Area
    -  Elevation
    -  Districts             1,483  km²
                              - 293 m
                              - 9
   Time zone                 IST ( UTC+5:30)
   Population ( 2006)
    -  Density
    -  Agglomeration ( 2006) 11,215,130 ( 2nd)
                              - 9,294/km²
                              - 17,753,087
   Chief Minister            Sheila Dikshit
   Lt. Governor              B.L. Joshi
   Codes
    -  Postal
    - Telephone
    -  Vehicle
                              - 110 xxx
                              - +011
                              - DL-0?
                  Website: www.mcdonline.gov.in
                          Seal of Delhi

   Delhi pronunciation  ( Hindi: दिल्ली, Urdu: دہلی or دلّی‎, Punjabi:
   ਦਿੱਲੀ) is a metropolis in northern India. The name Delhi also refers to
   the National Capital Territory of Delhi (NCT), which is a special union
   territory jointly administered by the Central government, the NCT
   elected government and three municipal corporations. The metropolis of
   Delhi and the National Capital Territory of Delhi are coextensive and
   for most practical purposes they are considered to be the same entity.
   New Delhi, an urban area within the metropolis of Delhi, is the seat of
   the Government of India.

   With a population of 15.3 million people (2005 figure), Delhi is the
   seventh most populous metropolis in the world . Delhi's metropolitan
   area, informally known as the National Capital Region (NCR), comprises
   the NCT, the neighbouring satellite towns of Faridabad and Gurgaon in
   Haryana, and NOIDA and Ghaziabad in Uttar Pradesh. Altogether, the NCR
   is the world's sixth most populous agglomeration with a population of
   19.7 million.

   Delhi was the capital of several empires in ancient India and has over
   60,000 recognized monuments erected over several millennia. Delhi
   derives its historic importance from its position in northern India
   between the Aravalli Hills to the southwest and the Yamuna River to the
   east. This enabled it to dominate the old trade routes from northwest
   India to the Gangetic Plains. As a result, it has long been an
   important cultural, political, and intellectual centre. Due to a high
   migration rate, Delhi registers as one of the fastest growing cities in
   Asia. As a consequence, it faces key issues like environmental
   degradation, air and water pollution, traffic congestion, and acute
   power and water shortages.

Etymology

   The name "Delhi" is of uncertain etymology. One suggestion is that its
   eponym is "Dhillu", the name of a Mauryan maharaja. However, some
   historians believe that the word Dilli, another name for Delhi,
   orignated from the Persian word dahleez ( Urdu: دہلیز‎), meaning "
   frontier" or "threshold". Another theory suggests that the city's
   original name was Dhillika. The Persianized surname Dahelvi is also
   related to residents of Delhi. The Hindi/ Prakrit word dhili ("loose")
   was also used for the locality, gradually morphing into the local name
   "Dilli".

History

   At 72.5 metres, the Qutub Minar is the world's tallest brick minaret.
   Enlarge
   At 72.5 metres, the Qutub Minar is the world's tallest brick minaret.

   Delhi is believed to be the site of Indraprastha, capital of the
   Pandavas in the Indian epic Mahabharata, founded perhaps as long ago as
   5000 BC. Ancient Hindu texts describe a city in North India called
   Indraprastha, which means "city of Indra" (God). In later years,
   according to the ancient texts, parts of the city came to be known as
   Hastinapur or "the city of elephants". Archaeological evidence suggests
   that Indraprastha once stood where the Old Fort is today. The earliest
   architectural relics date back to the Maurya Period (c. 300 BC); since
   then the site has seen continuous settlement. The famous Iron pillar
   near the Qutub Minar was commissioned by the emperor Kumara Gupta I of
   the Gupta dynasty (320-540) and transplanted to Delhi during the 10th
   century. Eight major cities have been situated in the Delhi area. The
   first four cities were in the southern part of present-day Delhi.

   The Tomara Rajput dynasty founded the city of Lal Kot in 736 A.D. near
   the Qutub Minar. The epic Prithvirajaraso names the Rajput Anangpal as
   the founder of Delhi. The Chauhan Rajput kings of Ajmer conquered Lal
   Kot in 1180 A.D. and renamed it Qila Rai Pithora. The Chauhan king
   Prithviraj III was defeated in 1192 by the Afghan Muhammad Ghori. From
   1206, Delhi became the capital of the Delhi Sultanate under the Slave
   Dynasty. The first Sultan of Delhi, Qutb-ud-din Aybak was a former
   slave who rose through the ranks to become a general, a governor and
   then Sultan of Delhi. Qutb-ud-din started the construction the Qutub
   Minar to commemorate his victory but died before its completion. In the
   Qutb complex he also constructed the Quwwat-al-Islam (might of Islam),
   which is the earliest extant mosque in India. After the end of the
   Slave dynasty, a succession of Turkic and Central Asian dynasties, the
   Khilji dynasty, the Tughluq dynasty, the Sayyid dynasty and the Lodhi
   dynasty held power in the late medieval period and built a sequence of
   forts and townships that are part of the seven cities of Delhi. In
   1526, following the First Battle of Panipat, Zahiruddin Babur, the
   former ruler of Fergana, defeated the last Lodhi sultan and founded the
   Mughal dynasty which ruled from Delhi, Agra and Lahore.
   The India Gate commemorates the 90,000 Indian soldiers who died in the
   Afghan Wars and World War I
   Enlarge
   The India Gate commemorates the 90,000 Indian soldiers who died in the
   Afghan Wars and World War I

   In the mid-sixteenth century there was an interruption in the Mughal
   rule of India as Sher Shah Suri defeated Babur's son Humayun and forced
   him to flee to Afghanistan and Persia. Sher Shah Suri built the sixth
   city of Delhi, as well as the old fort known as Purana Qila and the
   Grand Trunk Road. After Sher Shah Suri’s early death, Humayun recovered
   the throne with Persian help. The third and greatest Mughal emperor,
   Akbar, moved the capital to Agra resulting in a decline in the fortunes
   of Delhi. In the mid-seventeenth century, the Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan
   (1628-1658) built the seventh city of Delhi that sometimes bears his
   name ( Shahjahanabad), and is more commonly known as the old city or
   old Delhi. The old city served as the capital of the later Mughal
   Empire from 1638 onwards, when Shah Jahan transferred the capital back
   from Agra. Aurangzeb (1658-1707) crowned himself as emperor in Delhi in
   1658. In 1761, Delhi was raided by Ahmed Shah Abdali after the Third
   battle of Panipat.

   Delhi passed to British control in 1857 after the First War of Indian
   Independence. Shortly after the First War of Independence, Calcutta was
   declared the capital of British India and Delhi was made a district
   province of the Punjab. But in 1911, Delhi was again declared as the
   capital of India. Parts of the old city were pulled down to create New
   Delhi, a monumental new quarter of the city designed by the British
   architect Edwin Lutyens to house the government buildings. New Delhi,
   also known as Lutyens' Delhi, was officially declared as the seat of
   the Government of India after independence in 1947. During the
   Partition of India thousands of Hindu and Sikh refugees from West
   Punjab and Sindh migrated to Delhi.

   In 1984, the assassination of then Prime Minister of India, Indira
   Gandhi, led to a violent backlash against the Sikh community, resulting
   in more than two thousand seven hundred deaths.

   In 1991, the Parliament of India passed the National Capital Territory
   Act which gave Delhi its own legislative assembly, though with limited
   powers. On February 16, 2006 the Delhi High Court passed a notice to
   the Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) to remove all commercial
   ventures within residential areas in the city.

Geography

   The Great Gangetic Plains cover most of Delhi, as can be seen in this
   NASA image.
   Enlarge
   The Great Gangetic Plains cover most of Delhi, as can be seen in this
   NASA image.

   Delhi is located at 28.38° N and 77.13° E and lies in northern India.
   It borders the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh on the south and Haryana
   on the west. Delhi can be divided into three major geographical
   regions: the Yamuna flood plain, the ridge and the Gangetic Plains. The
   low-lying Yamuna flood plains provide fertile alluvial soil suitable
   for agriculture. However, these plains are prone to recurrent floods.
   With an average altitude of 293  m above sea level, the ridge forms the
   most dominating feature in this region. It originates from the Aravalli
   Hills in the south and encircles the west, northeast and northwest
   portions of the city. The Great Gangetic Plains are located in the
   south of the city and cover most of Delhi.

   Yamuna, one of the most sacred rivers in Hinduism, is the only main
   river flowing through Delhi. Most of the city, including New Delhi,
   lies west of the river. East of the river is the urban area of
   Shahdara.

Climate

   Delhi has a semi- arid climate with high variation between summer and
   winter temperatures. Due to Delhi's proximity to the Himalayas, cold
   waves from the Himalayan region dip temperatures across Delhi. Summers
   are long, from early April till October, with the monsoon season in
   between. Extreme temperatures have ranged from −0.6  °C ( 10 January
   1935) to 47 °C. Winter starts in November and peaks in January. Delhi
   is notorious for its heavy fog during the winter season. In December,
   visibility is reduced to near zero disrupting road, air and rail
   traffic in the city.. During the summer season, the city faces extreme
   power and water shortage when the demand for these utilities is at its
   peak. Every year, the heat wave in summer claims several lives in
   Delhi. The city, however, has a pleasant climate from February to April
   and from August to November.

   The average annual rainfall is approximately 670  mm (27  inches), most
   of which falls during the Monsoons, in July and August. Traditionally,
   the Monsoons are supposed to touch Delhi by June 29 every year.

   CAPTION: Climate Table

   Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
   Mean daily maximum temperature ( °C) 21.1 24.2 30.0 36.2 39.6 39.3 35.1
   33.3 33.9 32.9 28.3 23.0
   Mean daily minimum temperature ( °C) 7.3 10.1 15.4 21.5 25.9 28.3 26.6
   25.9 24.4 19.5 12.8 8.2
   Mean total rainfall ( mm) 20.3 15.0 15.8 6.7 17.5 54.9 231.5 258.7
   127.8 36.3 5.0 7.8
   Mean number of rain days 1.7 1.3 1.2 0.9 1.4 3.6 10.0 11.3 5.4 1.6 0.1
   0.6
   Source: World Meteorological Department
   Map showing the nine districts of Delhi
   Enlarge
   Map showing the nine districts of Delhi

Urban structure

   Most of the Delhi metropolitan area lies within the National Capital
   Territory of Delhi (NCT). The NCT has three local municipal
   corporations: Municipal Corporation of Delhi, New Delhi Municipal
   Council and Delhi Cantonment Board. The Municipal Corporation of Delhi
   (MCD) is one of the largest municipal corporations in the world
   providing civic amenities to an estimated 13.78 million people. The
   capital of India, New Delhi, falls under the administration of New
   Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC). The chairperson of the NDMC is
   appointed by the Government of India in consultation with the Chief
   Minister of Delhi.

   The National Capital Territory of Delhi is divided into nine districts.
   Each district is headed by a Deputy Commissioner and has three
   subdivisions. A Subdivision Magistrate heads each subdivision. All
   Deputy Commissioners report to the Divisional Commissioner. The
   District Administration of Delhi is the enforcement department for all
   kinds of State and Central Government policies and exercises
   supervisory powers over numerous other functionaries of the Government.

   Delhi has four major satellite cities which lie outside the National
   Capital Territory of Delhi. These are Gurgaon and Faridabad in Haryana
   and NOIDA and Ghaziabad in Uttar Pradesh.

Government and politics

   The North Block in Raisina Hill, New Delhi houses the Indian Home
   Ministry and Ministry of Finance.
   Enlarge
   The North Block in Raisina Hill, New Delhi houses the Indian Home
   Ministry and Ministry of Finance.

   In 1991, the sixty-ninth amendment to the Constitution of India granted
   Delhi the status of a special union territory and officially changed
   its name to the National Capital Territory of Delhi (NCT). Delhi has
   its own Legislative Assembly, Lieutenant Governor, Council of Ministers
   and Chief Minister. The legislative assembly seats are filled by direct
   election from territorial constituencies in the NCT. However, the Union
   Government of India and the Government of National Capital Territory of
   Delhi jointly administer New Delhi. New Delhi, an urban area in Delhi,
   is the seat of both the State Government of Delhi and the Government of
   India. Delhi has always been a stronghold of the Indian National
   Congress, locally known as the Congress Party. The trend started to
   change in the 1990s when the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) under the
   leadership of Madan Lal Khurana came into power for the first time.
   However, in 1998 Sheila Dixit of the Congress Party defeated Madan Lal
   Khurana in state elections and has remained in power since then.

   The per-capita electricity consumption is about 1,000 kwh but actual
   demand is much more. In 1997, Delhi Vidyut Board (DVB) replaced Delhi
   Electric Supply Undertaking which was managed by the MCD. In 2002, the
   annual demand for electric power in Delhi touched 3250 MW while DVB's
   own electric power production was only 405 MW. The DVB meets rest of
   the electricity demand by drawing power from India's Northern Region
   Grid. As a result, Delhi faces a huge power shortage resulting in
   frequent blackouts and brownouts. Several industrial units in Delhi
   rely on private electrical generators to meet their electric demand.
   The Delhi government invested 149.2 billion INR in the city's energy
   sector and privatised Delhi's energy distribution system. However, the
   city continues to face acute power crisis especially during the summer
   season when energy demand is at its peak. Power theft is worse in Delhi
   than in any other major Indian metropolitan city. According to a report
   by BSES, Delhi's main electricity distribution company, 35% of Delhi's
   power is stolen.

   Water supply in Delhi is managed by the Delhi Jal Board (DJB). In 2001,
   731 MGD of water was consumed by various households in Delhi out of
   which 609 MGD was supplied by DJB while the rest 122 MGD was met by
   private and public tube wells and hand pumps. Illegal water tapping in
   Delhi is very common. At 250 MGD, the Bhakra storage is the biggest
   water source for DJB followed by river Yamuna and Ganges. Due to the
   falling level of ground water in Delhi, DJB is constructing several
   dams across river Yamuna, water treatment plants and water reservoirs.
   PWD and DJB have also implemended schemes for harvesting rain water. In
   2002, the DJB had a water treatment capacity of 497.4 MGD.

Economy

   Tall buildings in the downtown area near Connaught Place, the
   commercial hub of Delhi.
   Enlarge
   Tall buildings in the downtown area near Connaught Place, the
   commercial hub of Delhi.

   With an estimated Gross Domestic Product of 478 billion INR (2005
   figure) , Delhi is an important commercial centre in South Asia.
   According to the economic survey of Delhi, carried out in 2000–01,
   Delhi had a per capita income of 38,860 INR and recorded an annual
   economic growth rate of 9.9%. In 2001, the tertiary sector contributed
   78.4% of Delhi's GDP followed by Secondary and Primary sectors with
   20.2% and 1.4% contribution respectively. The city enjoys a
   considerably high literacy rate (81.7%). Delhi's workforce constituted
   32.84% of the population showing an increase of 51.9% between 1991 and
   2001. This massive increase in the workforce was primarily due to
   migration of unemployed people from neighbouring states. As a
   consequence, Delhi's unemployment rate increased from 5.7% to 12.7%
   during the period 1992 to 2000. In December 2000, 991,000 people were
   registered with various employment exchange programs in Delhi.

   Historically, Delhi has always been the economic capital of northern
   India. In early 19th century, it started to gain importance in arts and
   craft, textile and handloom. Many small-scale industries expanded,
   including the handloom and Copper utensils industry. By the end of the
   19th century, Delhi was northern India's manufacturing hub. Delhi lies
   along the important trade route between Punjab and the Gangetic plains
   making it one of ancient India's most important trading centres.
   Urban Delhi at Dawn
   Enlarge
   Urban Delhi at Dawn

   In recent years, Delhi's service sector has expanded exponentially due
   in part to the large skilled English-speaking workforce that has
   attracted many multinational companies. Key service industries include
   information technology, telecommunications, hotels, banking, media,
   tourism and life sciences. Delhi's manufacturing industry has also
   grown considerably as many consumer goods industries have established
   manufacturing units and headquarters in and around Delhi. Delhi's large
   consumer market, coupled with the easy availability of skilled labour,
   has attracted a lot of foreign investment in Delhi. In 2001, the
   manufacturing sector employed 731,000 workers (24.6% of Delhi's
   workforce) while the number of industrial units increased by 48.4%.
   However, the contribution of the manufacturing sector to Delhi's GDP
   declined from 25.4% in 1994 to 20.2% in 2001. Construction, banking,
   power, telecommunications, health and community services and real
   estate form integral parts of Delhi's economy. Tourism is also a
   significant contributor to the economy of Delhi. Other key industries
   include government administration and defence. In 2001, the Union
   government had a total workforce of more than 212,000 in Delhi while
   the State government employed more than 114,000 people. Other local
   government bodies in Delhi employ as many as 298,000 people. In
   comparison, organised private sector employed only 217,000.

   Delhi's relatively high per capita income, better living standards and
   high economic growth rate has attracted a lot of people from rural
   areas in neighbouring states such as Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, Uttar
   Pradesh and Bihar. Due to this high migration rate, Delhi registers as
   one of the fastest growing cities in the world. According to a United
   Nations report, Delhi will be the third largest agglomerate in the
   world after Tokyo and Mumbai by 2025.

Transport

   Auto rickshaws are one of the most popular means of public
   transportation in Delhi.
   Enlarge
   Auto rickshaws are one of the most popular means of public
   transportation in Delhi.

   Public transportation in Delhi is provided by auto rickshaws, buses,
   rapid transit system, taxis and suburban railways. Buses are the most
   popular means of transportation catering to about 60% of the total
   demand. Major bus service providers include state-owned Delhi Transport
   Corporation (DTC), BlueLine Transport Corporation and several other
   private concerns. Private vehicles account for 30% of the total demand
   for transportation while the rest of the demand is met largely by
   auto-rickshaws, taxis, rapid transit system and railways.

   Transportation in Delhi is largely dependent upon road. Railways,
   including rapid transit systems like Delhi Metro, serve only 1% of the
   total demand. Major railway stations are Old Delhi, Hazrat Nizamuddin
   and New Delhi Railway Station. Road transportation in Delhi is
   maintained by MCD, NDMC, Delhi Cantonment Board, Public Works
   Department and Delhi Development Authority. At 1749 km of road length
   per 100 km², Delhi has one of the highest road densities in India.
   Major roadways include the Ring Road and the Outer Ring Road which had
   a traffic of 110,000 vehicles per day in 2001. Delhi is well connected
   to other parts of India by 5 National Highways: NH-1, -2, -8, -10 and
   -25. In 2001, more than 3.45 million vehicles were plying on Delhi's
   roads and the demand for transportation rose by 6.7% while the number
   of motor vehicles in Delhi rose by 14.7%.

   Delhi's high population growth rate, coupled by high economic growth
   rate has resulted in ever increasing demand for transportation creating
   excessive pressure on the city's existent transport infrastructure.
   Like many other cities in the developing world, the city faces acute
   transport management problems leading to air pollution, congestion and
   resultant loss of productivity. In order to meet the transportation
   demand in Delhi, the State and Union governmet started the construction
   of an ambitious mass rapid transit system, known as Delhi Metro. As of
   2005, the metro operates 3 lines with a total length of 156 km and 150
   stations while several other lines are under construction. The MCD and
   PWD also launched several traffic decongestion programmes. In 2001, the
   MCD alone started the construction of 21 flyovers at busy intersections
   throughout Delhi.
   A completed portion of the still-in-progress Delhi Metro.
   Enlarge
   A completed portion of the still-in-progress Delhi Metro.

   Due to high traffic congestion, Delhi's pollution levels increased
   drastically during the mid-1990s. In 1998, the Supreme Court of India
   ordered all public transport vehicles, including buses, taxis and
   auto-rickshaws, to use compressed natural gas as fuel instead of diesel
   and other hydro-carbons. The DTC now operates the world's largest fleet
   of environmentally friendly CNG buses. Though pollution due to road
   transportation has decreased in recent years, it remains alarmingly
   high. The World Bank has ranked Delhi as the world's most polluted
   city. Besides expanding the Delhi Metro, the government is currently
   considering several other means such as Trolleybus, Monorail and
   Integrated Freight Complexes to meet transport demand and reduce
   traffic congestion and pollution levels in the city.

   Indira Gandhi International Airport (IGI) serves Delhi for both
   domestic and international connections, and is situated in the
   southwestern corner of the city. In 2005-2006, IGI recorded a traffic
   of more than 16.2 million passengers(Both Domestic and International),
   making it one of the busiest airports in South Asia. Two other airports
   are Palam (now part of the IGI complex) and Safdarjung Flying Club.

Demographics

   Most of the people in Delhi follow Hinduism. Shown here is the popular
   Laxminarayan Temple of Delhi
   Enlarge
   Most of the people in Delhi follow Hinduism. Shown here is the popular
   Laxminarayan Temple of Delhi

   Delhi is a very cosmopolitan city due to the multi-ethnic and
   multi-cultural presence of the vast Indian bureaucracy and political
   system, and now expanding economy. There are more than 160 embassies
   and an ever-growing expatriate population. In 2003, the National
   Capital Territory of Delhi had a population of 14.1 million people
   making it the second largest metropolitan area in India after Mumbai.
   This figure includes about 295,000 people living in New Delhi and
   125,000 in Delhi Cantonment. There are 821 women per 1000 men; the
   literacy rate is 81.67% and approximately 91% of the population is
   urban. Delhi is the most densely populated state in India with 9294
   persons per km². In 1999, Delhi recorded a birth rate, death rate and
   infant mortality rate (per 1000 population) of 22.15, 6.06 and 23.18
   respectively. According to the Economic Survey of Delhi held in 2001,
   2.6 million people were living in slum designated areas across Delhi
   while 1.7 million and 3.3 million were living in regularised and
   planned colonies respectively.

   Hinduism is practised by 82% of Delhi's population. There are also
   large, vibrant communities of Muslims (11.7%), Sikhs (4.0%), Jains
   (1.1%) and Christians (0.9%). Other minorities include Buddhists and
   Jews. Hindi is the principal spoken and written language. Other
   commonly spoken languages are English, Punjabi and Urdu (English being
   an associate official language, and Punjabi and Urdu being second
   official languages). Since Delhi is the capital, linguistic groups from
   all over India are well represented including Tamil, Kannada, Telugu,
   Bengali, Marathi and many others.

   Delhi has one of the highest living standards in India with a per
   capita income of (at current prices for the year 2000-2001) 38864 INR.
   Due to relatively high employment opportunities and better living
   conditions, Delhi has attracted millions of people from rural areas in
   neighbouring Haryana, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. As a
   consequence, Delhi's demographics has changed drastically in the past
   few years. In 1999, the population of Delhi increased by 259,000 due to
   migration whereas the natural increase in population was 209,000.
   Punjabis, Gujjars and Jats are large ethnic communities, however a
   collage of peoples from almost every Indian state inhabits the city.
   According to the United Nations, by 2015, Delhi will be the 3rd largest
   agglomeration in the world after Tokyo and Mumbai, with an estimated
   population of 20.1 million people.

Culture

   The Bahá'í House of Worship, also known as Lotus Temple, is an example
   of modern Indian architecture.
   Enlarge
   The Bahá'í House of Worship, also known as Lotus Temple, is an example
   of modern Indian architecture.

   Delhi was the capital of several Hindu, Mughal, Rajput, Turkic and
   Afghan empires in ancient India. As a consequence, Delhi has a unique
   history of blending itself with several different cultures. After Delhi
   was declared as the capital of the Republic of India, several people
   from every corner of the country have made Delhi their home, adding to
   its cultural diversity. Delhi's art and crafts industry is as diverse
   as the city's culture. Delhi is the home of Zardozi, an embroidery done
   with gold thread and Meenakari, the art of enamelling. Delhi has
   several art and crafts museums like the Pragati Maidan and Dilli Haat.
   Pragati Maidan showcases rare and exquisite pieces of art and craft
   from all over India and hosts a 13-day long International Trade Fair
   every year in November.

   A direct consequence of Delhi's rich history is its magnificent
   monuments. The Old City is the site where the Mughals and the Turkic
   rulers constructed several architectural marvels like the Jama Masjid
   and Lal Qila while the Birla Mandir and Chattarpur Temple represent a
   blend of North and South Indian architectural styles. The
   Archaeological Survey of India recognises more than 172 monuments in
   Delhi as national heritage sites. Two World Heritage Sites, the 72.5
   meters tall Qutab Minar and Humayun's Tomb, are located in Delhi. Other
   famous monuments include the India Gate,the Jantar Mantar, an 18th
   century astronomical observatory, and the Purana Qila, a 16th century
   fortress. The Lotus Temple, a symbol of Delhi's religious tolerance and
   unity, is the most visited edifice in the world with more 50 million
   visitors annually. Delhi offers a glimpse of India's religious
   diversity. The largest mosque in India, the Jama Masjid and one of the
   most visited Vaishnavite temples in the world, the Birla Mandir, are
   located in Delhi. New Delhi, a spacious, well-designed district of
   Delhi, houses several government buildings and official residences
   reminiscent of the British colonial architecture. Important structures
   include the Rashtrapati Bhavan, the Secretariat, the Rajpath, the
   Parliament of India and the Vijay Chowk.

   Delhi is a noted centre of performing arts. Several theatres and cinema
   halls are located here. However, the cinema industry in the city is
   virtually non-existent. The India Habitat Centre provides a physical
   environment which would serve as a catalyst for a synergetic
   relationship between individuals and institutions working in diverse
   habitat related areas.

   Due to Delhi's lively and colorful religious and cultural diversity,
   several events are held in the city throughout the year. Being the
   capital of India, several national events such as Republic Day,
   Independence Day and Gandhi Jayanti are celebrated with great zeal and
   enthusiasm in Delhi. Most of Delhites celebrate the Indian Independence
   Day by flying kites as they are considered a symbol of freedom. The
   Republic Day Parade, held on 26 January, the day India became a
   republic, is a large cultural and military parade showcasing India's
   cultural diversity and military might. Every year on 15 August, the day
   India achieved independence from Britain, the Prime Minister of India
   addresses the nation on Delhi Fort. The Hindu religious and cultural
   festivals like Durga Puja, Diwali, Holi, Lohri, and Shivratri and
   Muslim festivals like Eid and Bakrid are also celeberated with great
   fervour. Diwali, also known as Deepavali, is by far the most popular
   cultural and religious festival in Delhi during which millions of
   Hindus and Sikhs lit traditional lamps, known as diyas, and make
   rangolis, a colorful pattern drawn on floor. Fireworks (Hindi:
   Patakhas) are also an integral part of Diwali festivities. Buddha
   Jayanti, a festival celebarating the birth of Gautama Buddha is also a
   popular festival in Delhi. Several other famous events such as Kite
   Flying Festival, International Mango Festival and Basant Panchami or
   Spring Festival are held every year in Delhi. The Qutub Festival is a
   cultural event organized by Delhi Tourism Department every year in
   October during which performances of musicians and dancers from all
   over India are showcased at night, with the 12th-century Qutub Minar as
   the chosen backdrop of the event.

   Spicy and oil-rich Punjabi cuisine is popular throughout the city.
   Bengali sweetdishes like Rossogulla and Sandesh can be found in most
   sweet shops in Delhi. Mughlai delicacies like Kababs and Biryanis
   remain popular in several parts of Delhi, especially the Old City. Due
   to Delhi's large cosmopolitan population, cuisines from every part of
   India, including Rajasthani, Maharashtrian and Hyderabadi cusines, are
   very popular. Local delicacies includes Chaat and Dahi-Papri. South
   Indian food items too, like Idli, Sambhar and Dosa have a huge
   following in Delhi. There are several food outlets in Delhi serving
   Italian, Chinese and other foreign cuisines. Fast food has also become
   very popular in Delhi. One can find fast food chains like McDonald's
   and Pizza Hut in every part of the city.

   Historically, Delhi has always remained an important trading centre in
   northern India. Chandni Chowk, a three century old shopping area, is
   perhaps the most famous commercial area in India. Connaught Place, a
   major commercial centre in the heart of New Delhi, is not only a
   shopper's paradise but also offers a glimpse of Colonial-era
   architecture. The central market of Lajpat Nagar offers quality Indian
   handicrafts and garments. Other major shopping areas include Sarojini
   Nagar, Sabzi Mandi, Karol Bagh and Greater Kailash market. Dilli Haat
   and Hauz Khas village offer a variety of cultural Indian handicrafts
   and handlooms. Delhi's retail industry is one of the fastest growing
   industries in Delhi. Several western-style shopping malls have opened
   across Delhi's metropolitan area. The main market in South Delhi offers
   quality garments and footwear and have outlets of almost all the top
   international brands. Many travellers view Delhi as a bargain hunter's
   paradise, as the city offers a wide variety of quality products
   available at a fraction of the cost in Europe and the United States.

Education

   The Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi
   Enlarge
   The Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi

   Schools and educational institutions in Delhi are either run by the NCT
   government or by private organizations. According to the economic
   survey of Delhi in 2001, there were a total of 2416 primary, 715 middle
   and 1576 secondary schools in Delhi while there were 131 colleges
   including 5 medical colleges and 8 engineering colleges. In addition,
   Delhi has four universities, seven deemed universities and one open
   university. Delhi has a literacy rate of 81.2%.

   The Directorate of Education of the National Capital Territory of Delhi
   operates state schools in Delhi .

   Private schools in Delhi typically use English or Hindi as the medium
   of instruction and are affiliated to either the Indian Certificate of
   Secondary Education (ICSE) or the Central Board for Secondary Education
   (CBSE). In 2001, about 1.47 million students were enrolled in primary
   schools, .32 million in middle schools, while 1.31 million students
   were enrolled in secondary schools across Delhi. During the fiscal year
   2000-01, the Delhi government spent 30.1 billion INR on education.
   Females represented 51% of the total enrollment.

   The top 5 universities in Delhi are Delhi University, Jawaharlal Nehru
   University, Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University, Jamia Millia
   Islamia and Indira Gandhi National Open University. Delhi attracts
   students from all over India. A number of government and private
   colleges offer quality education in science, engineering, medicine,
   arts, law and management. The government sponsors as many as 40 Delhi
   University colleges. The prestigious All India Institute of Medical
   Sciences is among the best medical institutions in India. Other notable
   educational and research institutes include Indian Institute of
   Technology, Delhi, Delhi School of Economics, Shri Ram College of
   Commerce, Lady Shri Ram College for Women, Netaji Subhas Institute of
   Technology, Delhi College of Engineering and St Stephen's College. In
   2001, Delhi University had 220,000 students, making it one of the
   largest universities in Asia. It has 14 faculties, 86 academic
   departments and 79 colleges spread all over the city.

Sports

   The Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium
   Enlarge
   The Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium

   Cricket is the most popular sport in the city. There are several
   cricket grounds (locally known as maidan) across Delhi. The local Delhi
   cricket team is one of the top cricket teams in the Ranji Trophy,
   India's top domestic cricket tournament. One of the oldest cricket
   grounds in India to be granted international status, the Feroz Shah
   Kotla, is situated in Delhi. But other sports, particularly soccer,
   tennis, golf, badminton, swimming, kart racing, weightlifting and table
   tennis are becoming more popular. Field Hockey is also popular, even
   though cricket has overtaken it by a long way in terms of popularity.

   Delhi has hosted several domestic and international sporting events.
   New Delhi was the venue of the First and the Ninth Asian Games. The
   city is known for its excellent sports infrastructure. The Jawharlal
   Nehru Stadium and the Indira Gandhi Indoor Stadium are one of the
   largest sports complexes in South Asia. Delhi will be the site for the
   next 2010 Commonwealth Games, the largest multi-sport event ever held
   in the city. The Delhi Development Authority and the Indian Olympic
   Association are constructing several stadiums and other sporting
   facilities across the city for the event at a cost of 1.15 billion USD.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delhi"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
