   #copyright

Despotism

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Politics and government

   Despotism is a form of government by a single authority, either an
   individual or tightly knit group, which rules with absolute political
   power. On its classical form, a despotism is a state where one single
   man wields all the power and authority, and everyone else is considered
   as his slave. This form of despotism was the first known form of
   statehood and civilization; the Pharaoh of Egypt is a hallmark of a
   classical despot.

   The term now implies tyrannical rule. However, under the concept of
   benevolent or enlightened despotism, which came to prominence in 18th
   century Europe, absolute monarchs used their authority to institute a
   number of reforms in the political systems and societies of their
   countries. This movement was probably largely triggered by the ideals
   of the Enlightenment.

   Even though the word has modern pejorative meaning, it was once a
   legitimate title of office in the Byzantine Empire. Just as the word
   "Byzantine" is often used in a pejorative way (for specific reasons by
   certain Enlightenment authors wishing to express disapproval of that
   period in history), the word Despot was equally turned around for
   negative meaning. In fact, a Despot was an Imperial title, first used
   under Manuel I Komnenos (1143–1180) who created it to his appointed
   heir Alexius-Béla. According to Gyula Moravcsik this title was a simple
   translation of Béla's Hungarian title 'úr', but other historians
   believe it comes from the ancient greek, despotes (literally, 'the
   master').

   It was typically bestowed on sons-in-law and later sons of the Emperor,
   and beginning in the 13th century it was bestowed to foreign princes.
   The Despot wore an elaborate costume similar to the Emperor's and had
   many privileges. Despots ruled over parts of the empire called
   Despotates. In the Orthodox Liturgy, if celebrated in Greek, the priest
   is addressed by the deacon as "despot" even today.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Despotism"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
