   #copyright

Dewey Square

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: North American Geography

   Dewey Square is a square in downtown Boston, Massachusetts, USA. It
   lies at the intersection of Atlantic Avenue, Summer Street, Federal
   Street, Purchase Street and Surface Artery, with the Central Artery (
   I-93) passing underneath in the Dewey Square Tunnel and Big Dig. South
   Station is on the southeast corner of the square, with MBTA Commuter
   Rail services, as well as Red Line subway trains and Silver Line bus
   rapid transit.

History

   By 1867, Dewey Square was the intersection of four streets. Federal
   Street ran straight through, with its south exit running straight to
   the current location of the Dorchester Avenue Bridge, and Summer
   Street, Purchase Street and Broad Street (renamed Atlantic Avenue ca.
   1870) ended. The New York and New England Railroad's passenger terminal
   was on the east side of the square, just south of where Summer Street
   is now. In 1872, the Union Freight Railroad came through down the
   middle of Atlantic Avenue and Federal Street.

   Summer Street was later extended east as a local road, and in 1899 the
   Summer Street Bridge was built across Fort Point Channel. Also in 1899,
   Federal Street was closed south of Dewey Square to make way for the new
   South Station, and Atlantic Avenue was extended along the west side of
   the new terminal along with a realignment of the Union Freight
   Railroad. The Atlantic Avenue Elevated came in 1901 with a station
   (South Station) one block south of Dewey Square. It was closed in 1938
   and torn down in the early 1940s; the Union Freight Railroad lasted
   until 1970.

   The next major change came in the 1950s when the Central Artery was
   built. The whole area on the north and south sides of the square was
   cleared, and the Artery was built underground via the Dewey Square
   Tunnel. Atlantic Avenue became one-way north and Purchase Street one
   way south to the north of the square, and the new Surface Artery came
   in as a two-way road above the tunnel heading southwest from the
   square. Between 1969 and 1978, Boston closed both Federal Street and
   Summer Street for a block west of the square (they had formerly
   operated as a one-way pair). Summer Street has since reopened (as a
   two-way road), but Federal Street is still a pedestrian mall.

   The Big Dig in the late 1990s and early 2000s kept the one-way
   configurations north of the square, but now Atlantic Avenue continues
   as one-way north south of the square, and Surface Artery is one-way
   south.

   For some time, an intercity bus depot was located just north of Dewey
   Square over the Central Artery; it was relocated in 1993 to a nearby
   location just south of South Station.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dewey_Square"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
