   #copyright

Dik-dik

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mammals

                  iDik-dik
         Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Mammalia
   Order:   Artiodactyla
   Family:  Bovidae
   Genus:   Madoqua
            Ogilby, 1837

                                   Species

   Madoqua guentheri
   Madoqua kirkii
   Madoqua piacentinii
   Madoqua saltiana

   Dik-diks, named for the sound they make when alarmed, are small
   antelopes of the Genus Madoqua that live in the bush of southern and
   eastern Africa. Dik-diks stand 30–40 cm at the shoulder and weigh
   3–5 kg. They have an elongated snout and a soft coat that is gray or
   brownish above and white below. The hair on the crown forms an upright
   tuft that sometimes partially conceals the short, ringed horns of the
   male.

Physical characteristics

   Female dik-diks are somewhat larger than males. The males have horns,
   which are small (about 3 in or 7.5 cm), slanted backwards. The head of
   the dik-dik often seems disproportionate to the animal's small body.
   The upper body is gray- brown, while the lower parts of the body,
   including the legs, belly, crest, and flanks, are tan. Many dik-diks
   have a pale ring around their eyes.

Habitat

   Dik-diks prefer habitats with plentiful supply of edible grasses and
   shrubs, but prefer foliage that is not so tall as to obstruct their
   sight lines. They live in open plains amongst other grass-eaters such
   as the Giraffes and the Antelopes. Dik-Diks live in many various places
   like a dense forest or open plain, but they must have good cover and
   not too much tall grass or plants. They will move when the grass grows
   too tall for them to not see over. They usually live in pairs over a
   12-acre territory. The territories are often in low, shrubby bush along
   dry, rocky streambeds where there are plenty of hiding places. Dik-Diks
   have a series of runways through and around the borders of their
   territories to block off other Dik-Diks, mainly females. They live in
   east Africa.

Behaviour

   Dik-diks live in monogamous pairs in fixed territories of up to 12
   acres (0.05  km²). They prefer to be semi- nocturnal, feeding mostly at
   night, especially right before dawn and after dusk. They live
   permanently with their mate, in pairs. It is often believed that if one
   of the two in a pair dies, then the other will die of stress.

Diet

   Dik-diks are herbivores, consuming foliage, shoots, fruit and berries.
   Dik-diks consume sufficient amounts of water for hydration, making
   drinking unnecessary. Their special shaped head gives them the ability
   to eat the leaves between the spikes on the Acacia trees, and the
   ability to feed while still keeping their head high for observation for
   predators.

Social Structure

   Dik-diks form monogamous relationships within defined territories. At
   birth fawns weigh about 1.5 lb (0.7 kg), and reach sexual maturity in
   six to eight months.

Predators

   Dik-diks are hunted primarily by monitor lizards, eagles, pythons,
   smaller cats such as the caracal, as well as lions, cheetahs, hyenas,
   wild dogs, jackals and humans.

Classification

   There are four species of dik-dik:
     * Madoqua guentheri Günther, 1894 — Günther's Dik-dik
     * Madoqua kirkii ( Thomas, 1880) — Kirk's Dik-dik
     * Madoqua piacentinii Drake-Brockman, 1911 — Silver Dik-dik
     * Madoqua saltiana ( Desmarest, 1816) — Salt's Dik-dik

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dik-dik"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
