   #copyright

Dill

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Plants

                     iDill
           Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Plantae
   Division: Magnoliophyta
   Class:    Magnoliopsida
   Order:    Apiales
   Family:   Apiaceae
   Genus:    Anethum
   Species:  A. graveolens

                                Binomial name

   Anethum graveolens
   L.
   Dried Dill-umbel
   Enlarge
   Dried Dill-umbel

   Dill (Anethum graveolens) is a short-lived annual herb, native to
   southwest and central Asia. It is the sole species of the genus
   Anethum, though classified by some botanists in the related genus
   Peucedanum as Peucedanum graveolens (L.) C.B.Clarke.

   It grows to 40-60 cm tall, with slender stems and alternate, finely
   divided, softly delicate leaves 10-20 cm long. The ultimate leaf
   divisions are 1-2 mm broad, slightly broader than the similar leaves of
   Fennel, which are threadlike, less than 1 mm broad, but harder in
   texture. The flowers are white to yellow, in small umbels 2-9 cm
   diameter. The seeds are 4-5 mm long and 1 mm thick, and straight to
   slightly curved with a longitudinally ridged surface.

Cultivation and uses

   Dill has long been cultivated as a herb throughout Europe and north
   Africa as well as in its native Asia. It was used by Egyptian doctors
   5000 years ago and traces have been found in Roman ruins in Great
   Britain. In the Middle Ages it was thought to protect against
   witchcraft.

   In Semitic languages it is known by the name of Shubit. The Talmud
   requires that tithes shall be paid on the seeds, leaves, and stem of
   dill. The Bible states that the Pharisees were in the habit of paying
   this tithe (Matthew 23:23) ; Jesus Christ is said to have rebuked them
   for tithing dill but omitting mercy.

   The name dill is thought to have originated from a Norse or Anglo-Saxon
   word 'dylle' meaning to soothe or lull, the plant having the
   carminative property of relieving gas.

   Like caraway, its fernlike leaves are aromatic, and are used to flavour
   many foods, such as gravlax (pickled salmon), borscht and other soups
   and pickles. The seeds are also used to flavour pickles. Dill are best
   when used fresh, as they lose their flavour rapidly if dried; however,
   freeze-dried dill leaves preserve their flavour relatively well for a
   few months. Even so, it is better to grow a supply of plants rather
   than store the leaves.

   Dill oil can be extracted from the leaves, stems and seeds of the
   plant.

   Successful cultivation requires warm to hot summers with high sunshine
   levels; even partial shade will reduce the yield substantially. It also
   prefers rich, well drained soil. The seeds are viable for 3-10 years.
   Plants intended for seed for further planting should not be grown near
   fennel, as the two species can hybridise.

   The seed is harvested by cutting the flower heads off the stalks when
   the seed is beginning to ripen. The seed heads are placed upside down
   in a paper bag and left in a warm dry place for a week. The seeds then
   separate from the stems easily for storage in an airtight container.

   In some English speaking countries, it is sometimes called Dillby.

Dill in pop culture

   In Beavis and Butt-Head 'Dillweed' is used as a common insult.

                              Herbs and spices
     Herbs Basil · Bay leaf · Boldo · Borage · Chervil · Chives ·
        Coriander leaf (cilantro) · Curry leaf · Dill · Epazote ·
   Eryngium foetidum (long coriander) · Fennel · Holy basil · Houttuynia
                    cordata · Lavender · Lemon grass ·
   Limnophila aromatica (rice paddy herb) · Lovage · Marjoram · Mint ·
Oregano · Parsley · Perilla · Rosemary · Rue · Sage · Savory · Sorrel ·
        Stevia · Tarragon · Thyme · Vietnamese coriander (rau ram)
    Spices African pepper · Ajwain (bishop's weed) · Allspice · Amchur
  (mango powder) · Anise · Asafoetida · Caraway · Cardamom · Cardamom,
  black · Cassia · Celery seed · Chili · Cinnamon · Clove · Coriander
     seed · Cubeb · Cumin · Cumin, black · Dill seed · Fenugreek ·
 Galangal · Garlic · Ginger · Grains of paradise · Horseradish · Juniper
 berry · Liquorice · Mace · Mahlab · Mustard, black · Mustard, white ·
 Nigella (kalonji) · Nutmeg · Paprika · Pepper, black · Pepper, green ·
    Pepper, pink · Pepper, white · Pomegranate seed (anardana) · Poppy
 seed · Saffron · Sarsaparilla · Sassafras · Sesame · Sichuan pepper ·
      Star anise · Sumac · Tamarind · Turmeric · Wasabi · Zedoary

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dill"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
