   #copyright

Double-decker bus

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Road transport

   A London AEC Routemaster, RML 2473 (JJD 473D), on route 7 approaching
   Ladbroke Grove tube station in April 2002.
   Enlarge
   A London AEC Routemaster, RML 2473 (JJD 473D), on route 7 approaching
   Ladbroke Grove tube station in April 2002.
   Kowloon Motor Bus' latest bus model in 2006.
   Enlarge
   Kowloon Motor Bus' latest bus model in 2006.

   A double-decker bus is a bus that has two levels. While double-decker
   long-distance coaches are in widespread use around the world,
   double-decker city buses are less common. Double-decker buses are
   popular in some European cities and in some parts of Asia, usually in
   former British colonies. Many towns around the world have a few that
   specialise in short sight-seeing tours for tourists for, as William
   Gladstone observed, "the way to see London is from the top of a 'bus'"

Locations

   Cities listed here use double-decker buses as part of their regular
   mass transit fleet. Cities with only tourist and sightseeing
   double-decker buses are excluded.

London, United Kingdom

   The most famous bus of this type, a typical red London double-decker
   bus, seats between 60 and 80 passengers. They are between 10.5 and 10.9
   metres in length and are a common reference item for describing very
   large objects; for example, a blue whale is about as long as three
   double-decker buses. They were created as a means of carrying large
   numbers of passengers without exceeding legal limits on vehicle length.
   A particularly iconic example was the Routemaster bus, which had been a
   staple of the public transport network in London for nearly half a
   century following its introduction in 1956. Citing difficulties
   accommodating disabled passengers, the last remaining examples in use
   finally retired in 2005, although Transport for London has established
   two "heritage routes", which will continue using Routemasters .

Berlin, Germany

   Double decker buses in Berlin are operated by Berliner Verkehrsbetriebe
   (BVG) and are currently 13.5 metres (44.29 feet) long and hold around
   95 passengers. The replacements, which are supplied by Neoman, are 1.8
   meters (5.92 feet) longer. The new buses are able to hold 128
   passengers.

Colombo, Sri Lanka

   In the 1950s, double-decker buses of the South Western Bus Company
   plied on the Galle Road in Colombo, Sri Lanka. These were taken over by
   the Ceylon Transport Board (CTB) when all bus services were
   nationalised in 1958. In the 1960s, second-hand Routemaster double
   decker buses were imported by the CTB from London Transport and ran in
   their original red livery, but with the CTB logo painted on the sides.
   These buses were phased out beginning in the mid- 1970s, but a handful
   still run in the Greater Colombo area. One Routemaster bus is run by
   the Sirasa TV and radio station. In 2005 a new batch of double decker
   buses were imported by the Sri Lanka Transport Board, as the
   reconstituted CTB is known, which run mainly on the Galle Road in
   Colombo.

Davis, California, United States of America

   Unitrans, the student-run bus company of University of California,
   Davis, operates six double-decker buses imported from London. One of
   these buses has been converted to run on compressed natural gas.

   There was also the prototype GX-1 Scenicruiser of Greyhound, which
   enters from the 1st floor: The second floor contains the driver's
   compartment and more seats.

Dunedin, New Zealand

   Two Routemaster double-decker buses are operated on a tourist circuit
   around the city of Dunedin in southern New Zealand.
   Double-decker buses are commonly seen in Hong Kong.
   Enlarge
   Double-decker buses are commonly seen in Hong Kong.

   Christchurch, Queenstown and Wellington also have similar services with
   more of the famous red buses.

Hong Kong, People's Republic of China

   Double-decker buses were first introduced in Hong Kong in 1949 by
   Kowloon Motor Bus. They have become very popular since then, and they
   are currently found in large numbers among the fleets of the
   territory's major bus operators (see below). By law, double-decker
   buses in Hong Kong are limited to a length of 12 meters. There are more
   than 4000 double-decker buses running in Hong Kong now.

Mumbai, India

   Mumbai has operated double-decker buses since 1937. They are operated
   by the Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport Undertaking. They are
   modelled on the London buses.
   A Dennis Trident with Duple Metsec DM5000 bodywork, part of the newer
   fleet of low-floor buses, in Singapore.
   Enlarge
   A Dennis Trident with Duple Metsec DM5000 bodywork, part of the newer
   fleet of low-floor buses, in Singapore.

Singapore, Republic of Singapore

   In October 1953, a single AEC Regent III double-decker from the fleet
   of General Transport Company, Kuala Lumpur (KL), was sent to Singapore
   for demonstration. It was used on service by the Singapore Traction
   Company for two weeks. After that, it was inspected by two other bus
   companies and then sent back to KL. However, no orders for
   double-deckers were to ensue at this point in time.

   Singapore Bus Service (SBS, now known as SBS Transit), the current
   operator of double-decker buses in Singapore, launched their first
   double-decker bus service on 13 June 1977 with 20 Leyland Atlanteans.
   This time, the double-decker buses were here to stay and the fleet grew
   steadily, with the further introduction of the Mercedes-Benz O305 and
   the Leyland Olympian. The first air-conditioned double-decker bus,
   named the "Superbus" in recognition of its record-breaking 12m length,
   was launched in 1993. The first stepless, ultra low floor "Superbus"
   was launched in 1999. Today, SBS Transit has a fleet of over 700
   double-decker buses, most of which are air-conditioned.
   An Alexander Dennis Enviro 500 equipped with bike rack, servicing
   Victoria, British Columbia.
   Enlarge
   An Alexander Dennis Enviro 500 equipped with bike rack, servicing
   Victoria, British Columbia.

Victoria, British Columbia, Canada

   In 2000, Victoria became the first city in North America to use double
   decker buses in its public transit system. Imported from the United
   Kingdom and operated by BC Transit and the Greater Victoria Transit
   Authority, these buses have proven to be very popular amongst both
   locals and tourists. The buses are mainly used on routes that go from
   downtown to the suburbs, including the Victoria International Airport
   and the BC Ferries terminal near Sidney, B.C. They can also be found on
   routes that head to the University of Victoria and the Western
   Communities.

   As of July 2006, double-decker buses similar to those in Victoria are
   being tested in Ottawa, Ontario.

Las Vegas, Nevada, United States of America

   Citizens Area Transit, the transit authority in the Las Vegas area,
   introduced a fleet of double-deckers to serve the Las Vegas Strip route
   in October 2005. The route is branded as " The Deuce".

Operators of double decker buses

     * Sri Lanka Transport Board
     * Kowloon Motor Bus
     * China Motor Bus - company lost franchise to First Bus in 1998
     * Citybus (Hong Kong)
     * New World First Bus
     * London Transport
     * Gray Line
     * Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport
     * SBS Transit (Singapore)
     * BC Transit
     * Unitrans
     * Dublin Bus
     * Bus Éireann
     * Ulsterbus
     * Metro
     * Travel West Midlands
     * GMPTE
     * IETT
     * East Yorkshire Motor Services
     * Translink (Northern Ireland)
     * City of Johanessburg
     * City of Tswhane

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Double-decker_bus"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
