   #copyright

Dr. Seuss

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Writers and critics

                   Dr. Seuss
   Dr. Seuss in 1957, with some of his books.
   Born March 2, 1904
        Springfield, Massachusetts, USA
   Died September 24, 1991
        La Jolla, California

   Theodor Seuss Geisel ( March 2, 1904 – September 24, 1991), better
   known by his pen name, Dr. Seuss, was a famous American writer and
   cartoonist, best known for his children's books such as The Cat in the
   Hat, Green Eggs and dick, How the Grinch Stole Christmas and other
   classics. His books have become staples for many children and their
   parents. Seuss' trademark was his rhyming text and outlandish
   creatures. He also wrote under the pen names Theo. LeSieg and Rosetta
   Stone.

Life and work

   Geisel was born on March 2, 1904 in Springfield, Massachusetts. He grew
   up at 74 Fairfield Street, an ideal location for a youngster, as it was
   only six blocks from the zoo where his father worked and three blocks
   from the library. He graduated from Dartmouth College in 1925, where he
   was a member of Sigma Phi Epsilon, the Casque & Gauntlet Society, and
   wrote for the Dartmouth Jack-O-Lantern humor magazine.

   Even at this early stage, Geisel had started using the pen name "Dr.
   Seuss," as well as his own name. His first work signed as "Dr. Seuss"
   appeared six months into his work for Judge. Seuss was his mother's
   maiden name; as an immigrant from Germany, she would have pronounced it
   more or less as "zoice" (as it is pronounced in German). According to
   Alexander Liang, who served with Geisel on the staff of the Jack O'
   Lantern, and was later a professor at Dartmouth:

          You're wrong as the deuce
          And you shouldn't rejoice
          If you're calling him Seuss.
          He pronounces it Soice.

   Today, however, the name is universally pronounced in English with an
   initial s sound and rhyming with "juice". Geisel also used the pen name
   Theo. LeSieg (Geisel spelled backwards) for books he wrote but others
   illustrated.

   He entered Lincoln College, Oxford, intending to earn a doctorate in
   literature. At Oxford he met Helen Palmer, married her in 1927, and
   returned to the United States without earning the degree. The "Dr." in
   his pen name is an acknowledgment of his father's unfulfilled hopes
   that Seuss would earn a doctorate at Oxford.

   He began submitting humorous articles and illustrations to Judge (a
   humor magazine), The Saturday Evening Post, Life, Vanity Fair, and
   Liberty. One notable "Technocracy Number" made fun of Technocracy, Inc.
   and featured satirical rhymes at the expense of Frederick Soddy. He
   became nationally famous from his advertisements for Flit, a common
   insecticide at the time. His slogan, "Quick, Henry, the Flit!" became a
   popular catchphrase. Geisel supported himself and his wife through the
   Great Depression by drawing advertising for General Electric, NBC,
   Standard Oil, and many other companies. He also wrote and drew a
   short-lived comic strip called Hejji in 1935.

   In 1936, while Seuss was again on an ocean voyage to Europe, the rhythm
   of the ship's engines inspired the poem that became his first book, And
   to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street. Seuss wrote three more
   children's books before World War II (see list of works below), two of
   which are, atypically for him, in prose.

   As World War II began, Dr. Seuss turned to political cartoons, drawing
   over 400 in two years as editorial cartoonist for the left-wing New
   York City daily newspaper, PM. Dr. Seuss's political cartoons opposed
   the viciousness of Hitler and Mussolini and were highly critical of
   isolationists, most notably Charles Lindbergh, who opposed American
   entry into the war. Some cartoons depicted all Japanese Americans as
   latent traitors or fifth-columnists, while at the same time other
   cartoons deplored the racism at home against Jews and blacks that
   harmed the war effort. His cartoons were strongly supportive of
   President Roosevelt's conduct of the war, combining the usual
   exhortations to ration and contribute to the war effort with frequent
   attacks on Congress (especially the Republican Party), parts of the
   press (such as the New York Daily News and Chicago Tribune), and others
   for criticism of Roosevelt, criticism of aid to the Soviet Union,
   investigation of suspected Communists, and other offenses that he
   depicted as leading to disunity and helping the Nazis, intentionally or
   inadvertently. In 1942, Dr. Seuss turned his energies to direct support
   of the U.S. war effort. First, he worked drawing posters for the
   Treasury Department and the War Production Board. Then, in 1943, he
   joined the Army and was commander of the Animation Dept of the First
   Motion Picture Unit of the United States Army Air Forces, where he
   wrote films that included "Your Job in Germany," a 1945 propaganda film
   about peace in Europe after World War II, "Design for Death," a study
   of Japanese culture that won the Academy Award for Best Documentary in
   1947, and the Private Snafu series of adult army training films. While
   in the Army, he was awarded the Legion of Merit. Dr. Seuss's
   non-military films from around this time were also well-received;
   Gerald McBoing-Boing won the Academy Award for Best Short Subject
   (Animated) in 1950.

   Despite his numerous awards, Dr. Seuss never won the Caldecott Medal
   nor the Newbery. Three of his titles were chosen as Caldecott
   runners-up (now referred to as Caldecott Honour books): McElligot's
   Pool (1947), Bartholomew and the Oobleck (1949), and If I Ran the Zoo
   (1950).

   After the war, Dr. Seuss and his wife moved to La Jolla, California.
   Returning to children's books, he wrote what many consider to be his
   finest works, including such favorites as If I Ran the Zoo, (1950),
   Scrambled Eggs Super! (1953), On Beyond Zebra! (1955), If I Ran the
   Circus (1956), and How the Grinch Stole Christmas! (1957).

   At the same time, an important development occurred that influenced
   much of Seuss's later work. In May 1954, Life magazine published a
   report on illiteracy among school children, which concluded that
   children were not learning to read because their books were boring.
   Accordingly, Seuss's publisher made up a list of 400 words he felt were
   important and asked Dr. Seuss to cut the list to 250 words and write a
   book using only those words. Nine months later, Seuss, using 220 of the
   words given to him, completed The Cat in the Hat. This book was a tour
   de force—it retained the drawing style, verse rhythms, and all the
   imaginative power of Seuss's earlier works, but because of its
   simplified vocabulary could be read by beginning readers. A rumor
   exists, that in 1960, Bennett Cerf bet Dr. Seuss $50 that he couldn't
   write an entire book using only fifty words. The result was supposedly
   Green Eggs and Ham. The additional rumor that Cerf never paid Seuss the
   $50 has never been proven and is most likely untrue. These books
   achieved significant international success and remain very popular.

   Dr. Seuss went on to write many other children's books, both in his new
   simplified-vocabulary manner (sold as " Beginner Books") and in his
   older, more elaborate style. In 1982 Dr. Seuss wrote " Hunches in
   Bunches". The Beginner Books were not easy for Seuss, and reportedly he
   labored for months crafting them.

   At various times Seuss also wrote books for adults that used the same
   style of verse and pictures: The Seven Lady Godivas; Oh, The Places
   You'll Go!; and You're Only Old Once.

   During a very difficult illness, Dr. Seuss' wife, Helen Palmer Geisel,
   committed suicide on October 23, 1967. Seuss married Audrey Stone
   Dimond on June 21, 1968. Seuss himself died, following several years of
   illness, in La Jolla, California on September 24, 1991.

   In 2002 the Dr. Seuss National Memorial Sculpture Garden opened in his
   birthplace of Springfield, Massachusetts; it features sculptures of Dr.
   Seuss and of many of his characters.

Poetic meters

   Dr. Seuss wrote most of his books in a verse form that in the
   terminology of metrics would be characterized as anapestic tetrameter,
   a meter employed also by Lord Byron and other poets of the English
   literary canon.(It is also the meter of the famous Christmas poem A
   Visit From St. Nicholas.) Abstractly, anapestic tetrameter consists of
   four rhythmic units (anapests), each composed of two weak beats
   followed by one strong, schematized below:

          x x X x x X x x X x x X

   Often, the first weak syllable is omitted, or an additional weak
   syllable is added at the end. A typical line (the first line of If I
   Ran the Circus) is:

          In ALL the whole TOWN the most WONderful SPOT

   Seuss generally maintained this meter quite strictly, until late in his
   career, when he was no longer able to maintain strict rhythm in all
   lines. The consistency of his meter was one of his hallmarks; the many
   imitators and parodists of Seuss are often unable to write in strict
   anapestic tetrameter, or are unaware that they should, and thus sound
   clumsy in comparison with the original.

   Seuss also wrote verse in trochaic tetrameter, an arrangement of four
   units each with a strong followed by a weak beat.

          X x X x X x X x

   An example is the title (and first line) of One Fish, Two Fish, Red
   Fish, Blue Fish. The formula for trochaic meter permits the final weak
   position in the line to be omitted, which facilitates the construction
   of rhymes.

   Seuss generally maintained trochaic meter only for brief passages, and
   for longer stretches typically mixed it with iambic tetrameter:

          x X x X x X x X

   which is easier to write. Thus, for example, the magicians in
   Bartholomew and the Oobleck make their first appearance chanting in
   trochees (thus resembling the witches of Shakespeare's Macbeth):

          Shuffle, duffle, muzzle, muff

   then switch to iambs for the oobleck spell:

          Go make the oobleck tumble down
          On every street, in every town!

   In Green Eggs and Ham, Sam-I-Am generally speaks in trochees, and the
   exasperated character he proselytizes replies in iambs.

   While most of Seuss's books are either uniformly anapestic or
   iambic-trochaic, a few mix triple and double rhythms. Thus, for
   instance, Happy Birthday to You is generally written in anapestic
   tetrameter, but breaks into iambo-trochaic meter for the "Dr. Derring's
   singing herrings" and "Who-Bubs" episodes.

   Dr. seuss also inspired other authors to write in his story way and
   taught kids many things like reading.

Artwork

   Seuss's earlier artwork often employed the shaded texture of pencil
   drawings or watercolors, but in children's books of the postwar period
   he generally employed the starker medium of pen and ink, normally using
   just black, white, and one or two colors. Later books such as The Lorax
   used more colors.

   Seuss's figures are often somewhat rounded and droopy. This is true,
   for instance, of the faces of the Grinch and of the Cat in the Hat. It
   is also true of virtually all buildings and machinery that Seuss drew:
   although these objects abound in straight lines in real life, Seuss
   carefully avoided straight lines in drawing them. For buildings, this
   could be accomplished in part through choice of architecture. For
   machines, for example, If I Ran the Circus includes a droopy hoisting
   crane and a droopy steam calliope.

   Seuss evidently enjoyed drawing architecturally elaborate objects. His
   endlessly varied (but never rectilinear) palaces, ramps, platforms, and
   free-standing stairways are among his most evocative creations. Seuss
   also drew elaborate imaginary machines, of which the
   Audio-Telly-O-Tally-O-Count, from Dr. Seuss's Sleep Book, is one
   example. Seuss also liked drawing outlandish arrangements of feathers
   or fur, for example, the 500th hat of Bartholomew Cubbins, the tail of
   Gertrude McFuzz, and the pet for girls who like to brush and comb, in
   One Fish, Two Fish, Red Fish, Blue Fish.

   Seuss's images often convey motion vividly. He was fond of a sort of
   "voilà" gesture, in which the hand flips outward, spreading the fingers
   slightly backward with the thumb up; this is done by Ish, for instance,
   in One Fish, Two Fish when he creates fish (who perform the gesture
   themselves with their fins), in the introduction of the various acts of
   If I Ran the Circus, and in the introduction of the Little Cats in The
   Cat in the Hat Comes Back. Seuss also follows the cartoon tradition of
   showing motion with lines, for instance in the sweeping lines that
   accompany Sneelock's final dive in If I Ran the Circus. Cartoonist's
   lines are also used to illustrate the action of the senses (sight,
   smell, and hearing) in The Big Brag and even of thought, as in the
   moment when the Grinch conceives his awful idea.

   Interestingly enough, there is some thought that Seuss's Imagery,
   especially that of The Cat in the Hat was a metaphor for "sweeping out"
   communism and cleaning out the "red".

Recurring images

   Seuss's early work in advertising and editorial cartooning produced
   sketches that received more perfect realization later on in the
   children's books. Often, the expressive use to which Seuss put an image
   later on was quite different from the original. The examples below are
   from the website of the Mandeville Special Collections Library of the
   University of California, San Diego.
     * An editorial cartoon of July 16, 1941 depicts a whale resting on
       the top of a mountain, as a parody of American isolationists,
       especially Charles Lindbergh. This was later rendered (with no
       apparent political content) as the Wumbus of On Beyond Zebra
       (1955). Seussian whales (cheerful and balloon-shaped, with long
       eyelashes) also occur in McElligot's Pool, If I Ran the Circus, and
       other books.

     * Another editorial cartoon from 1941 shows a long cow with many legs
       and udders, representing the conquered nations of Europe being
       milked by Adolf Hitler. This later became the Umbus of On Beyond
       Zebra.

     * The tower of turtles in this editorial cartoon from 1941 prefigures
       a similar tower in Yertle the Turtle.

     * Seuss's earliest elephants were for advertising and had somewhat
       wrinkly ears, much as real elephants do. With And to Think that I
       Saw it on Mulberry Street (1937) and Horton Hatches the Egg (1940),
       the ears became more stylized, somewhat like angel wings and thus
       appropriate to the saintly Horton. During World War II, the
       elephant image appeared as an emblem for India in four editorial
       cartoons. Horton and similar elephants appear frequently in the
       postwar children's books.

     * While drawing advertisements for Flit, Seuss became adept at
       drawing insects with huge stingers, shaped like a gentle S-curve
       and with a sharp end that included a rearward-pointing barb on its
       lower side. Their facial expressions depict gleeful malevolence.
       These insects were later rendered in an editorial cartoon as a
       swarm of Allied aircraft (1942), and later still as the Sneedle of
       On Beyond Zebra.

Politics

   1941 cartoon by Dr. Seuss depicting Charles Lindbergh.
   Enlarge
   1941 cartoon by Dr. Seuss depicting Charles Lindbergh.

   His early political cartoons show a passionate opposition to fascism,
   and he urged Americans to oppose it, both before and after the entry of
   the United States into World War II. (By contrast, his cartoons tended
   to regard the fear of communism as overstated, finding the greater
   threat in the Dies Committee and those who threatened to cut America's
   "life line" to Stalin and Soviet Russia, the ones carrying "our war
   load".) Seuss' cartoons also called attention to the early stages of
   the Holocaust and denounced discrimination in America against black
   people and Jews. Seuss himself experienced anti-semitism: in his
   college days, he was refused entry into certain circles because of a
   (mis)perception that he was Jewish. Seuss' racist treatment of the
   Japanese and of Japanese Americans, mentioned above, has struck many
   readers as a strange moral blind spot in a generally idealistic man.

   In 1948, after living and working in Hollywood for years, Seuss moved
   to La Jolla, California. It is said that when he went to register to
   vote in La Jolla, some Republican friends called him over to where they
   were registering voters, but Ted said, "You my friends are over there,
   but I am going over here [to the Democratic registration]." Seuss had
   since been a lifelong Democrat.

   Seuss' children's books also express his commitment to social justice
   as he perceived it:
     * The Lorax (1971), though told in full-tilt Seussian style, strikes
       many readers as fundamentally an environmentalist tract. It is the
       tale of a ruthless and greedy industrialist (the " Once-ler") who
       so thoroughly destroys the local environment that he ultimately
       puts his own company out of business. The book is striking for
       being told from the viewpoint (generally bitter, self-hating, and
       remorseful) of the Once-ler himself. In 1989, an effort was made by
       lumbering interests in Laytonville, California, to have the book
       banned from local school libraries, on the grounds that it was
       unfair to the lumber industry.

     * The Sneetches (1961) is commonly seen as a satire of racial
       discrimination.

     * The Butter Battle Book (1984) written in Seuss's old age, is both a
       parody and denunciation of the nuclear arms race. It was attacked
       by conservatives as endorsing moral relativism by implying that the
       difference between the sides in the Cold War were no more than the
       choice between how to butter one's bread.

     * The Zax can be seen as a parody of all political hardliners.

     * Yertle the Turtle (1958) is often interpreted as an allegory of
       tyranny. It also encourages political activism, suggesting that a
       single act of resistance by an individual can topple a corrupt
       system.

     * Shortly before the end of the Watergate scandal, Seuss converted
       one of his famous children's books into a polemic. " Richard M.
       Nixon, Will You Please Go Now!" was published in major newspapers
       through the column of his friend Art Buchwald. Nine days later,
       Nixon went.

     * Seuss's values also are apparent in the much earlier How the Grinch
       Stole Christmas (1957), which can be taken (partly) as a polemic
       against materialism. The Grinch, thinking he can steal Christmas
       from the Whos by stealing all the Christmas gifts and decorations,
       attains a kind of enlightenment when the Whos prove him wrong.

     * Thidwick the Big-Hearted Moose (1948) is often considered to be
       making a statement about hunting.

     * Horton Hears a Who! is said to be a response to the atomic bomb.
       Also, one of its lines, "A person is a person, no matter how
       small," has been used as rhetoric against abortion rights. However,
       Seuss threatened to sue an anti-abortion group for their use of the
       phrase. His widow, also strongly pro-choice, has reiterated these
       criticisms. A lawsuit was filed in Canada in 2001 on this issue.

Adaptations of Seuss's work

   For most of his career, Dr. Seuss was reluctant to have his characters
   marketed in contexts outside of his own books. However, he did allow a
   few animated cartoons, an art form in which he himself had gained
   experience during the Second World War.

   In 1966, Seuss authorized the eminent cartoon artist Chuck Jones, his
   friend and former colleague from the war, to make a cartoon version of
   How the Grinch Stole Christmas!. Seuss, as "Ted Geisel", is credited as
   a co-producer along with Jones. This cartoon was very faithful to the
   original book. It is considered a classic by many to this day, and is
   in the large catalog of annual Christmas television specials. Several
   more animated specials based on Seuss' work followed, including cartoon
   versions of Horton Hears a Who! , The Lorax and The Cat in the Hat in
   1971, but the latter was considered less successful.

   Toward the end of his life, Seuss seems to have relaxed his policy, and
   several other cartoons and toys were made featuring his characters,
   usually the Cat in the Hat and the Grinch. When Seuss died of cancer at
   the age of 87 in 1991, his widow Audrey Geisel was placed in charge of
   all licensing matters. She approved a live-action film version of How
   the Grinch Stole Christmas starring Jim Carrey, as well as a
   Seuss-themed Broadway musical called Seussical (both released in 2000).
   A live-action film based on The Cat in the Hat was released in 2003,
   featuring Mike Myers as the title character."The Grinch" is now in a
   limited engagement run on Broadway. Audrey Geisel was said to have been
   very vocal in her dislike of the film, and is believed to have said
   there would be no further live-action adaptations of Seuss'
   books.{{MS-NBC "Seussentenial: 100 years of Dr. Seuss Geisel's widow
   continues to nutures writer's cast of characters" Updated: 11:42 a.m.
   PT Feb 26, 2004}}

   Dr. Seuss' books and characters also now appear in an amusement park:
   the Seuss Landing 'island' at the Islands of Adventure theme park in
   Orlando, Florida. Product tie-ins (cereal boxes, and so on) have also
   been implemented.

   In November 2004, an edition of MAD Magazine ( Mad #447) featured a
   cover story in which lines from Seuss' books were compared with
   supposedly similar lines from speeches made by George W. Bush. It was
   titled "The Strange Similarities Between the Bush Administration and
   the World of Dr. Seuss." The cover drawing was of a Cat in the Hat that
   resembled Bush.

   An episode of My Life As a Teenage Robot, " Dreamscape," is an homage
   to Dr Seuss cartoons.

Trivia

     * On the season premiere of Saturday Night Live following Dr. Seuss'
       death, the Reverend Jesse Jackson was a special guest during the
       News segment. He declared that "rather than reading from First or
       Second Samuel, I will read from 'Sam I Am' by the Prophet Seuss,"
       whereupon he read Green Eggs and Ham in the style of a preacher
       giving an impassioned sermon.
     * On December 1, 1995 The University Library Building at the
       University of California, San Diego was renamed Geisel Library in
       honour of Audrey and Theodor Geisel for the generous contributions
       they have made to the library and their devotion to improving
       literacy. The Geisels were long-time residents of La Jolla, where
       UC San Diego is located. A sculpture of Dr. Seuss decorates the
       grounds of the library. Its Mandeville Special Collections Library
       contains many of his papers.
     * Dr Seuss was frequently confused, by the US Postal Service among
       others, with Dr Suess (cf Hans Suess) his contemporary living in
       the same locality, La Jolla. Ironically, both names have been
       posthumously linked together: The personal papers of Hans Suess are
       housed in the Geisel Library at UCSD .
     * Dr. Seuss was a friend and drinking partner of crime author Raymond
       Chandler, who was also a resident of La Jolla.
     * The National Education Association celebrates March 2nd, Dr. Seuss'
       Birthday, as Read Across America Day. Also known as some version of
       'Read Dr. Seuss Day', some adopt the civic as well as fun
       responsibility to read a Dr. Seuss book to another.
     * Was a member of the Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod
     * Theodor Geisel was right-handed
     * The new High in the Sky Seuss Trolley Train Ride at Islands of
       Adventure in Orlando, FL lists as its last train stop on its
       schedule as Springfield, in honour of the birthplace of Dr. Seuss.
     * Name checked in the popular R.E.M. song 'The Sidewinder Sleeps
       Tonite'

List of books

     * And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street New York: Beginner
       Books, Vanguard Press, Random House, 1937 1983 B-Extra 1
     * The 500 Hats of Bartholomew Cubbins New York: Beginner Books,
       Vanguard Press, Random House, 1938 1984 B-Extra 2
     * The King's Stilts New York: Random House, 1939
     * The Seven Lady Godivas New York: Random House, 1939
     * Horton Hatches the Egg New York: Random House, 1940
     * McElligot's Pool New York: Random House, 1947. Caldecott Honour
       Book
     * Thidwick the Big-Hearted Moose New York: Random House, 1948
     * Bartholomew and the Oobleck New York: Random House, 1949. Caldecott
       Honour Book
     * If I Ran the Zoo New York: Random House, 1950. Caldecott Honour
       Book
     * Scrambled Eggs Super! New York: Random House, 1953
     * Horton Hears a Who! New York: Random House, 1954
     * On Beyond Zebra! New York: Random House, 1955
     * If I Ran the Circus New York: Random House, 1956
     * How the Grinch Stole Christmas! New York: Random House, 1957
     * The Cat in the Hat New York: Beginner Books, Random House, 1957
       1985 B-1
     * The Cat in the Hat Comes Back New York: Beginner Books, Random
       House, 1958 1986 B-2
     * Yertle the Turtle and Other Stories New York: Random House, 1958
     * Happy Birthday to You! New York: Random House, 1959
     * One Fish Two Fish Red Fish Blue Fish New York: Beginner Books,
       Random House, 1960 1988 B-13
     * Green Eggs and Ham New York: Beginner Books, Random House, 1960
       1988 B-16
     * The Sneetches and Other Stories New York: Random House, 1961
     * Dr. Seuss's Sleep Book New York: Random House, 1962
     * Dr. Seuss's ABC New York: Beginner Books, Random House, 1963 1991
       B-30
     * Hop on Pop New York: Beginner Books, Random House, 1963 1991 B-29
     * Fox in Socks New York: Beginner Books, Random House, 1965 1993 B-38
     * I Had Trouble in Getting to Solla Sollew New York: Random House,
       1965
     * The Cat in the Hat Song Book New York: Beginner Books, Random
       House, 1967 1994 B-Extra 3
     * The Foot Book New York: Bright & Early Books, Random House, 1968
       1996 BE-1
     * I Can Lick 30 Tigers Today! and Other Stories New York: Random
       House, 1969
     * My Book about ME New York: Beginner Books, Random House, 1970 - Roy
       McKie 1995 B-Extra 4
     * I Can Draw It Myself New York: Beginner Books, Random House, 1970
       1996 B-Extra 5
     * Mr. Brown Can Moo! Can You?: Dr. Seuss's Book of Wonderful Noises!
       New York: Bright & Early Books, Random House, 1970 1996 BE-7
     * The Lorax New York: Random House, 1971. National Council for the
       Social Studies Notable Children's Trade Book / Social Studies
     * Marvin K. Mooney Will You Please Go Now! New York: Bright & Early
       Books, Random House, 1972 1997 BE-13
     * Did I Ever Tell You How Lucky You Are? New York: Random House 1973
     * The Shape of Me and Other Stuff New York: Bright & Early Books,
       Random House, 1973 1997 BE-16
     * There's a Wocket in My Pocket! New York: Bright & Early Books,
       Random House, 1974 1997 BE-18
     * Great Day for Up! New York: Bright & Early Books, Random House,
       1974 - (Pictures by Quentin Blake) 1998 BE-19
     * Oh, the Thinks You Can Think! New York: Beginner Books, Random
       House, 1975. (Story and Pictures by Dr. Seuss) 1996 B-62
     * The Cat's Quizzer New York: Beginner Books, Random House, 1976 1993
       B-75
     * I Can Read with My Eyes Shut! New York: Beginner Books, Random
       House, 1978 1996 B-64
     * Oh Say Can You Say? New York: Beginner Books, Random House, 1979
       1996 B-65
     * Hunches in Bunches New York: Beginner Books, Random House, 1982
       1996 B-Extra 6
     * The Butter Battle Book New York: Random House, 1984
     * You're Only Old Once! : A Book for Obsolete Children New York:
       Random House, 1986.
     * I Am NOT Going to Get Up Today! New York: Random House, 1987 -
       (illustrated by James Stevenson) 1996 B-74
     * Oh, the Places You'll Go! New York: Random House, 1990
     * Daisy - Head Mayzie New York: Beginner Books, Random Housen 1995
       1997 B-Extra 7
     * Hooray for Diffendoofer Day! New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1998. By
       Dr. Seuss with some help from Jack Prelutsky & Lane Smith
       (posthumous)
     * My Many Colored Days New York : Alfred A. Knopf: Distributed by
       Random House, 1996. by Dr. Seuss, paintings by Steve Johnson with
       Lou Fancher (posthumous)
     * Gerald McBoing-Boing New York: Random House, 2000 (posthumous)

Omnibus Volumes

     * A Hatful of Seuss: Five Favorite Dr. Seuss Stories
          + Bartholomew and the Oobleck (1949), If I Ran the Zoo (1950),
            Horton Hears a Who! (1954), The Sneetches and Other Stories
            (1961), and Dr. Seuss's Sleep Book (1962)
     * Your Favorite Seuss : A Baker's Dozen by the One and Only Dr. Seuss
       Molly Leach (Designer)
          + And To Think That I Saw It On Mulberry Street, Horton Hears a
            Who!, McElligot's Pool, If I Ran the Zoo, Happy Birthday to
            You!, Dr. Seuss's Sleep Book, Yertle the Turtle, The Cat in
            the Hat, How the Grinch Stole Christmas!, Green Eggs and Ham,
            The Lorax, The Sneetches, and Oh, the Places You'll Go!
     * Six By Seuss: A Treasury of Dr. Seuss Classics
          + And To Think That I Saw It On Mulberry Street, The 500 Hats of
            Bartholomew Cubbins, Horton Hatches the Egg, Yertle the Turtle
            and Other Stories, How the Grinch Stole Christmas, and The
            Lorax

Writing as Theo. LeSieg

   LeSieg is Geisel spelled backwards.
     * Ten Apples up on Top!. Illustrated by Roy McKie. ©1961, 1989–2004,
       B-19
     * Come over to My House. Illustrated by Richard Erdoes. ©1966, B-44;
       2006, B-Bonus Book
     * In a People House. Illustrated by Roy McKie. ©1972, 1997–2007,
       BE-12
     * Wacky Wednesday. Illustrated by George Booth. ©1974, 1996–2006 B-59
     * Would You Rather Be a Bullfrog?. Illustrated by Roy McKie. ©1975,
       1998–2006, BE-21
     * Hooper Humperdink...? Not Him!. Illustrated by Charles E. Martin.
       ©1976, 1998–2006, BE-22
     * Maybe You Should Fly a Jet! Maybe You Should Be a Vet!. Illustated
       by Michael J. Smollin. ©1980, 1996–2009, B-Extra 8
     * The Tooth Book. Illustrated by Joe Mathieu/Roy McKie. 2000/1989,
       BE-25
     * The Eye Book. Illustrated by Joe Mathieu/Roy McKie. 1999/1996, BE-2
     * I Wish that I Had Duck Feet. 1994–2006, B-40
     * Please Try to Remember the First of Octember!. Illustrated by Art
       Cummings. 1977, 1997–1999, B-63
     * The Many Mice of Mr. Brice. (A pop-up book) BE-15
     * I Can Write. Illustrated by Roy McKie. BE-Extra 2
     * Are you my Mother?

Writing as Rosetta Stone

     * Because a Little Bug Went Ka-choo! illustrated by Michael Frith.
       New York: Beginner Books, 1975 1996 B-61

Film, television, and theatre adaptations

     * Horton Hatches the Egg: a 1942 Warner Brothers cartoon, an early
       Seuss adaptation, which includes the elephant (and his son, at the
       end) singing a popular nonsense tune of that time, "The Hut-Sut
       Song" .
     * The 5,000 Fingers of Dr. T: a 1953 feature-length live-action
       movie, with sets that look like classic Seuss drawings and
       screenplay by Dr. Seuss
     * How the Grinch Stole Christmas: a 1966 animated television special
       directed by Chuck Jones for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
     * Horton Hears a Who!: a 1970 animated television special directed by
       Chuck Jones for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
     * The Cat in the Hat: a 1971 animated television special directed by
       Hawley Pratt for DePatie-Freleng Enterprises and CBS
     * The Lorax: a 1972 animated television special directed by Hawley
       Pratt for DePatie-Freleng Enterprises and CBS
     * Dr. Seuss on the Loose: a 1973 animated television special and
       Movie directed by Hawley Pratt for DePatie-Freleng Enterprises and
       CBS, Dr. Seuss; this special included the stories The Sneetches,
       The Zax, and Green Eggs and Ham
     * The Hoober-Bloob Highway: a 1975 animated television special
       directed by Alan Zaslove for DePatie-Freleng Enterprises and CBS
     * Halloween Is Grinch Night: a 1977 animated television special
       directed by Gerard Baldwin for DePatie-Freleng Enterprises and ABC
     * Pontoffel Pock, Where Are You?: a 1980 animated television special
       directed by Gerard Baldwin for DePatie-Freleng Enterprises
     * The Grinch Grinches The Cat in the Hat: a 1982 animated television
       special directed by Bill Perez for DePatie-Freleng Enterprises,
       Marvel Productions Ltd.
     * The Butter Battle Book: a 1989 animated television special by Ralph
       Bakshi for Turner Entertainment
     * In Search of Dr. Seuss: a 1994 television biopic outlining Seuss's
       life along with his books
     * Daisy-Head Mayzie: a 1995 animated television special by
       Christopher O'Hare for Hanna-Barbera Productions (posthumous)
     * Kids for Character: a 1996 animated television special by Character
       Counts!
     * How the Grinch Stole Christmas!: a 2000 live-action film
       (posthumous)
     * Seussical: a 2001 Broadway musical (posthumous)
     * The Cat in the Hat: a 2003 live-action film (posthumous)
     * Horton Hears a Who! (film): a 2008 CGI film (posthumous)

Beginner Books & Audio Cassettes

     * The Cat in the Hat
     * The Cat in the Hat Comes Back
     * One Fish Two Fish Red Fish Blue Fish
     * Green Eggs and Ham
     * Dr. Seuss's ABC
     * Hop on Pop
     * Fox in Socks
     * My Book about ME
     * I Can Draw It Myself
     * Oh, the Thinks You Can Think!
     * The Cat's Quizzer
     * I Can Read with My Eyes Shut!
     * Oh Say Can You Say?
     * I Am NOT Going to Get Up Today

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dr._Seuss"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
