   #copyright

Dresden

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: European Geography

   Coordinates: 51°02′N 13°44′E
                                 Dresden
   Coat of arms of Dresden Location of Dresden in Germany
     __________________________________________________________________

   Country                 Germany
   State                   Saxony
   Administrative region   Dresden
   District                urban district
   Population              500,068 (2006)
   Area                    328.30 km²
   Population density      1.523 / km²
   Elevation               113 m
   Coordinates             51°02′ N 13°44′ E
   Postal code             01001-01462
   Area code               0351
   Licence plate code      DD
   Mayor                   Lutz Vogel (stand-in for Ingolf Roßberg)
   Website                 dresden.de

   Dresden ( Sorbian: Drježdźany; etymologically from Old Sorbian
   Drežďany, meaning people of the riverside forest) is the capital city
   of the German Federal Free State of Saxony. It is situated in a valley
   on the River Elbe. The city's population is 500,000 (2006) and the
   population in greater Dresden is 1.1 million. Dresden is part of the
   Saxon Triangle metropolitan area, with an overall population of over
   3.2 million.

   Dresden has a long history as the capital and royal residence for the
   Kings of Saxony, who for centuries furnished the city with
   extraordinary cultural and artistic splendor. The controversial Bombing
   of Dresden in World War II and 40 years of GDR changed the face of the
   city dramatically.

   Since German re-unification, Dresden has been a cultural, political,
   and economic centre in the eastern part of the Federal Republic of
   Germany.

Geography

Location

   View over Dresden from the south-eastern slopes
   Enlarge
   View over Dresden from the south-eastern slopes

   Dresden lies on both banks of the river Elbe, mostly in the Dresden
   Elbe Valley Basin, with the further reaches of the eastern Ore
   Mountains to the south, the steep slope of the Lusatian granitic crust
   to the north and the Elbe Sandstone Mountains to the east at an
   altitude of about 113 meters. The northern parts of Dresden are in the
   West Lusatian highlands (Westlausiter Berg- und Hügelland). The depth
   influx valleys and the higher areas in the south of Dresden
   characterise the change to the eastern foothills of the Ore Mountains.
   The Elbe valley basin is a part of the Saxon Elbe Landscape. The
   highest point of Dresden is the Triebenberg, at about 384 meters in
   altitude. With a pleasant location and a mild climate on the Elbe, as
   well as Mediterranean architecture, Dresden was given the sobriquet
   "Elbflorenz" (Florence of the Elbe).

   After a series of incorporation of larger country communities in the
   past, Dresden became the fourth largest city in area in Germany. Only
   Berlin, Hamburg and Cologne are larger in area.

   The most important river in Dresden is the Elbe river, the only
   navigable body of water to flow through the city. There are also a
   number of tributaries such as the river Weißeritz.

Surroundings

   The nearest German cities are Chemnitz (80 km to the southwest),
   Leipzig (100 km to the northwest) and Berlin (200 km to the north). The
   Czech capital Prague is about 150 km to the south; the Polish city of
   Wrocław is about 200 km to the east. There are some medium-sized towns
   such as Pirna (40,000 inhabitants), Freital (40,000), Radebeul (33,000
   inhabitants) and Meißen (28,000 inhabitants) in the borough of Dresden.
   Riesa and Freiberg are not far away.

   Greater Dresden, which spreads in the neighbouring districts of Kamenz,
   Meissen, Riesa-Großenhain, Sächsische Schweiz, Weißeritzkreis and in
   small parts in the district of Bautzen, has a population of arround
   1.250.000 inhabitants.

Nature

   63 % of Dresden is green areas
   Enlarge
   63 % of Dresden is green areas

   Due to the many rural districts it has incorporated, among other
   things, Dresden is one of the greenest cities in Europe, with 63% of
   the city being green areas and forests. The Dresden Heathland
   ("Dresdner Heide") in the north of Dresden is a cohesive forest of 50
   km² in size. There are four nature reserves in Dresden. The additional
   Special Areas of Conservation cover an area of 18 km². The protected
   gardens, parkways, parks and old graveyards host 110 natural monuments
   in the city. The Dresden Elbe Valley is a world heritage site which is
   focused on the conservation of the cultural landscape in Dresden. One
   important part of that landscape is the Elbe meadows which cross the
   city, 20 kilometre long.

Climate

   Winter time in Dresden.
   Enlarge
   Winter time in Dresden.

   Most of the city is in the Elbe valley, where the micro-climate differs
   from that on the slopes and in the highlands. Klotzsche, at 227 metres
   above sea level, is one of the higher districts of the city. Klotzsche
   hosts Dresden weather station. According to experience, the weather in
   Klotzsche is about 1° to 2° Celsius colder than the inner city's
   climate. The average temperature in January is -0.7° Celsius and in
   July 18° Celsius. Summers are hotter in Dresden and winters are colder
   than the German average. Dresden lies in a climate zone of
   cold-moderate climate crossing over to a continental climate. The inner
   city's average monthly temperatures are almost the same as those in
   cities in southwest Germany. In hot summers, Dresden is between the hot
   Lusatia and the milder Ore Mountains. Both regions are characterised by
   strong winters: temperatures of -20° Celsius are not unusual in
   Dresden. The driest months are February and March, with precipitation
   of 40 mm. Spring months have often been arid in the last couple of
   years (with less than 10 mm of precipitation). The most precipitation
   falls in July and August, at 60 mm.

Flood protection

   Dresden is often endangered by floods
   Enlarge
   Dresden is often endangered by floods

   Due to its location on the banks of the Elbe and where some water
   sources from the Ore Mountains flow to, flood protection is an
   important aspect of the city's development. Large areas are kept free
   of buildings to provide a floodplain. Two additional trenches of about
   50 metres in width have been built to keep the inner city free of water
   from the Elbe river by dissipate the water downstream the inner city's
   gorge portion. Flood regulation systems like detention basins and water
   reservoirs are almost all outside the city area.

   However many locations and areas have to be defended by walls and sheet
   pilings. A number of districts in Dresden become waterlocked if the
   Elbe river is flooding some of its old bayous.

City structuring

   City structuring (cadastral map)
   Enlarge
   City structuring (cadastral map)

   Dresden is a spacious city, not only due to the most recent
   incorporations in the 1990s. The districts of the city differ in their
   structure and appearance. Many parts of city still contain an old
   village core, while some quarters are almost completely preserved as
   rural settings. Other characteristic kinds of urban areas are the
   historic outskirts of the city, the former suburbs with dotted housing.
   In Socialist times a lot of apartment blocks were built . Not
   unsurprisingly, the districts in Dresden are a mix of all these kinds
   of area.

   The original parts of the city are almost all in the districts of
   Altstadt (Old town) and Neustadt (New town). Growing outside the city
   walls, the historic outskirts were built in the 18th century. They were
   planned and constructed on the instruction of the Saxon monarchs, which
   is why the outskirts are often named after the sovereigns. From the
   19th century the city only grew by incorporating other districts.
   Dresden was divided into the five city districts "Mitte" (centre),
   "Ost" (east), "West", "Süd" (south) and "Nord" (north) between 1958 and
   1991.

   Since 1991 Dresden has been divided into ten districts called
   "Ortsamtsbereich" and nine former boroughs ("Ortschaften") which have
   been incorporated. An "Ortsamtsbereich" hosts subunits of the Dresden
   community's political and administrative institutions. The
   "Ortschaften" are granted a higher degree of political self-rule. The
   district with the largest population is Blasewitz; the largest in area
   is Loschwitz. The largest "Ortschaft" is Schönfeld-Weißig covering an
   area called "Schönfelder Hochland" (Highlands of Schönfeld). The inner
   city includes the districts of Altstadt and Neustadt.

History

Early and pre-war history

   The Fürstenzug — the Saxon sovereigns
   Enlarge
   The Fürstenzug — the Saxon sovereigns
   Architecture according to the Dresden school.
   Enlarge
   Architecture according to the Dresden school.

   An ancient Slavic settlement known as Drežďany (" alluvial forest
   dwellers") on the northern bank of the river was joined in 1206 by a
   German town on the southern bank, the heart of the present day Altstadt
   ("old town"), while the Slavic part is called Neustadt ("new town").
   The founder of the city was Dietrich, Margrave of Meissen.

   Since 1270, starting with Henry the Illustrious, Dresden became the
   capital of the margravate. After his death, however, the city became
   the property of the King of Bohemia and , later, the Margraves of
   Brandenburg. It was restored to the Wettin dynasty in about 1319. From
   1485 it was the seat of the dukes of Saxony, and from 1547 the electors
   as well.

   From 1697- 1706 and 1709- 1733 Elector Frederick Augustus I ruled from
   Dresden as King August the Strong of Poland; the city is also known as
   Drezno in Poland. Because he planned to make Dresden the most important
   royal residence, Augustus set out to discover the Chinese secret of
   porcelain (‘white gold'); under his rule, European porcelain was
   invented in Dresden and Meißen. He gathered many of the best architects
   and painters from all over Europe to Dresden; the city also experienced
   a vibrant blossoming of musical life at this time, particularly under
   the direction of Johann Adolph Hasse. His reign marked the beginning of
   Dresden's emergence as a leading European city for technology and art.
   His son Frederick August II also reigned from Dresden as Augustus III
   of Poland from 1734- 1763: during his reign the city was seat of a
   treaty that ended the Second Silesian War, and suffered heavy
   destructions in the Seven Years' War ( 1756-1763).

   Between 1806 and 1918 the city was the capital of the Kingdom of Saxony
   (which was a part of the German Empire from 1871). During the
   Napoleonic Wars the French emperor made it his base of operation,
   winning here a famous battle on August 27 of that year.

   During the 19th century, the city became a major center of industry,
   including automobile production, food processing, and the production of
   medical equipment. The city also developed into an important centre for
   the international sale of art works and antiques. The city's population
   quadrupled from 95,000 in 1849 to 396,000 in 1900 as a result of
   industrialization.

   In the early 20th century Dresden was particularly well-known for its
   camera works, such as Ihagee and Pentacon, which produced the Praktica,
   and the cigarette factories, one of which was in the impressive
   Yenidze, a building with a multicoloured glass roof shaped like a
   mosque which still stands today.
   Image of Dresden before its World War II destruction.
   Enlarge
   Image of Dresden before its World War II destruction.

   The city has suffered repeated destruction: by fire in 1491, from
   bombardment by the Kingdom of Prussia in 1760, and during the
   suppression of the constitutionalist May Uprising in 1849 and the
   destructive Allied bombing raid of February 1945.

World War II

   The city was bombed by Allied forces in the early hours of Valentine's
   Day, 13-14 February 1945. The Altstadt ("old town") side of the Elbe
   River, full of cultural treasures, was the most damaged. Because the
   raging fires stopped at the river, the newer Neustadt ("new town")
   sustained less damage and became the older side of modern-day Dresden.

   To the Allies, Dresden was 22nd on the RAF's list of top 100
   military/industrial targets, and had a rail network which had been
   virtually untouched up to that point in the war. The German forces,
   however, fortified the city poorly, believing it strategically
   unimportant. Early in the war it had been considered too distant for
   the Allied bombers to reach in safety, but even after it had been
   bombed the majority of Dresden's anti-aircraft defenses were redeployed
   elsewhere in Germany.

   Dresden's reputation for culture is better known than its highly
   developed optics industry. Dresden was the home of Zeiss Ikon (which
   became Praktica), for example. Optics factories in Dresden produced
   precision aiming devices during the war. In addition many peacetime
   factories, such as the cigarette factories, had been converted to
   ammunition factories as part of the policy of " total war". These
   factories employed mainly local workers but also used Jewish slave
   labor. Some 300 Jews were kept as slave laborers at a camp in Dresden,
   of these the majority were killed before the war ended, along with
   almost all of the 6,000 Jews who lived in Dresden before the war (a
   famous survivor was Dresden native and writer Victor Klemperer).
   However these targets were not the main reason for the city being
   bombed. The Red Army was approaching from the East and Dresden was one
   of two key rail routes with marshalling yards. Although key industrial
   facilities were destroyed by the bombing, the main objective was to
   create a firestorm.

   Civilian death estimates vary wildly, largely as a result of propaganda
   figures which received widespread publicity at the time. However the
   most recently available evidence from Friedrich Reichart of Dresden
   City Museum points to 25,000 deaths, fewer than the number that died in
   Hamburg. Numbers between 25,000 — 140,000 have been used in official
   statistics, with the Communist authorities of Dresden increasing their
   estimates across time; estimates in Nazi Germany by the Ministry of
   Propaganda varied between 350,000 and 400,000. At that time, Dresden's
   population was 600,000, but up to 200,000 refugees were living in
   cramped apartments and passing through Dresden as the Russians were now
   only fifty miles away. The entire inner city (15 square kilometers) was
   utterly devastated, and other quarters were damaged to some degree.

   Many of the higher estimates are based on a discredited TB47 report,
   which has been visibly altered by adding a zero to the end of the
   totals. However the West German Federal Archive in Koblenz discovered a
   genuine copy of TB47. The official "Final Report and Situation (TB47)"
   produced by Reich Commander of the Order Police a month after the
   bombings. "TB47" is probably a reasonable guide to the order of
   casualty numbers. It states definite figures of between 18,000 and
   22,000 with estimates of final numbers of 25,000 and includes the
   interesting sentence "Since rumors far exceed the reality, open use can
   be made of the actual figures."

   Fortunately, much of the city's beauty has been restored, thanks to the
   zeal of the populace in recreating the architecture of old Dresden.
   Today Dresden has a strong partnership with the English city of
   Coventry, which was heavily damaged by German air attacks. The
   camaraderie is deeply supported by the populace in both cities.
   The city and the River Elbe
   Enlarge
   The city and the River Elbe

Post-war period (communist rule)

   After the Second World War, Dresden became a major industrial centre in
   socialist East Germany with a great deal of research infrastructure.
   Many important historic buildings were rebuilt, although the communists
   leaders of the city chose to reconstruct large areas of the city in a
   bland socialist modern style for economical and ideological reasons,
   namely to break away from the city's past as the royal capital of
   Saxony and a stronghold of the German bourgeoisie. However, some of the
   bombed-out ruins of churches were razed by Soviet authorities in the
   1960s instead of being repaired.

   Among East Germans, Dresden also earned the nickname "the valley of the
   clueless" because the city's location in a valley prevented its
   residents from watching West German TV, an illegal but popular pastime
   among East Germans.

   On 3 October 1989, (the so-called "battle of Dresden"), a convoy of
   trains carrying East German refugees from Prague passed through Dresden
   on its way to West Germany. Local activists and residents, joined in
   the growing civil disobedience movement spreading across East Germany
   by staging demonstrations and demanding the removal of the
   non-democratic government.

Post-reunification

   The Dresden Frauenkirche, a few days prior to its consecration.
   Enlarge
   The Dresden Frauenkirche, a few days prior to its consecration.

   Dresden has experienced dramatic changes since the reunification of
   Germany in the early 1990s. The city still has many of its wounds from
   the bombing raids of 1945 but Dresden has undergone significant
   reconstruction in recent years. The most important urban
   renewal/reconstruction project was the reconstruction of the
   Frauenkirche ("Church of Our Lady") and the surrounding Neumarkt
   district. The church, once the city's symbol and considered the world's
   finest Protestant church, was rebuilt following German reunification in
   1991 from the remaining pile of rubble of the original church's ruins
   thanks to private and corporate donations. It was completed in 2005, a
   year before Dresden's 800th birthday. The new Frauenkirche was rebuilt
   according to historical drawings and photographs and is now open to
   public service since Reformation Day 2005. Despite the inner city's
   almost total destruction in World War II, many areas in the central
   city have been restored to their former glory. The urban renewal
   process in Dresden will continue for many decades but public and
   government interest remains high and there are numerous large budget
   projects underway — both historic reconstructions and modern plans —
   that will continue the city's recent architectural renaissance.

   In 2002, torrential rains caused the Elbe to flood 9 m, past its 1845
   record height, damaging many landmarks (See 2002 European flood). The
   destruction from this "millennium flood" is no longer visible, due to
   the rapidity of reconstruction. Disaster relief for the millennial
   flood came from around the world.

   In 2004 the United Nation's cultural organization UNESCO declared
   Dresden and the surrounding section of Elbe river valley to be a "World
   Heritage" site.

   Dresden remains a major cultural centre of historical memory, owing to
   the city's destruction in World War II. Every year on 13 February, the
   anniversary of the major British fire-bombing raid that destroyed most
   of the city, tens of thousands of demonstrators gather to commemorate
   the event. Similar ceremonies held during the period of communism were
   specifically directed at demonizing the Western Allies, above all the
   United States. Since reunification, the tone of the ceremonies has
   taken on a more neutral and pacifist tone. In recent years, however,
   right-wing extremist skinheads have tried to instrumentalize the event
   for their own political ends. Affiliated with the radical right
   National Democratic Party of Germany (NPD), they cite the bombing of
   Dresden in order to portray Germans as the real victims of the Second
   World War, and try to take advantage of anti-American sentiment to do
   it. In 2005, Dresden was host to the largest Neo-Nazi demonstration in
   the post-war history of Germany. Between five and eight thousand
   Neo-Nazis took part, mourning what they call the Allied bomb-holocaust
   (German: Alliierter Bombenholocaust).

Government and politics

Municipality and city council

City council

   The city council is defining the basic principles of the municipality
   by decrees (Stadtverordnungen) and statutes (Satzungen). Both are
   decisions of legislating. The council gives orders to the burgomaster
   by voting for resolutions (Beschlüsse) and has some kind of executive
   power in this way. It is elected by the citizenry for a legislature of
   five years by an election system of three votes per citizen. There a
   advisory councils for local affairs of seniors and immigrants. The ten
   Ortsamtsbereiche (districts) have a advisory councils which has to be
   heard in affairs of the district. The Ortschaften (former boroughs)
   still have smaller councils, which can decide even more freely in
   affairs of the Ortschaften.

   The current city council of Dresden has 70 seats. It was elected in
   2004 and constists of six political factions:
     * 21 mandats of the Christian Democratic Union
     * 17 mandats of the Left Party
     * 9 mandats of the Alliance '90/The Greens
     * 8 mandats of the Social Democratic Party of Germany
     * 7 mandats of the Free Democratic Party and German Social Union
     * 6 mandats of the Bürgerfraktion (Citizen Faction) (Bürgerliste,
       Freie Bürger, Volkssolidarität; in each case two seats)

   The three mandats of the Nationale Bündnis (National Pact which is
   related to the far-right National Democratic Party of Germany) do not
   build up a faction.

   There is no persistent governing majority in the city council of
   Dresden. Decision and majorities of the council are changing in context
   of the political subjects.

Burgomasters

   The Supreme Burgomaster is directly elected by the citizen for a term
   of seven years. Executive functions are normally elected indirectly in
   Germany. However the Supreme Burgomaster shares a lot of executive
   rights with the city council. Governing majorities can be in opposition
   to the Supreme Burgomaster. He is the head of municipality, responsible
   for the city's operative affairs and ceremonial representant of the
   city. The highest departments of the municipality are managed by seven
   burgomasters. The First Burgomaster (currently the burgomaster of
   culture) is also the deputy to the Supreme Burgomaster.

   The current Supreme Burgomaster Ingolf Roßberg was convicted in the
   criminal cases of infidelity and assistance of bankruptcy in first
   instance. He is in furlough and suspended by a higher authority. The
   First Burgomaster and burgomaster of culture Lutz Vogel is stand-in for
   him.

Municipality

   The municipality is divided into seven departments and the Mayor's
   Office.
     * The department of general administration is responsible for the
       municipality's personal, information technology and for the
       administration of the schools in the city.

     * The department of finance and real estates is responsible for the
       city treasury. The city agencies of real estates, taxes and civil
       engineering as well as the central bureau of placing are
       responsible to that department.

     * The department of public order and security is responsible for fire
       and civil protection, food control and for the hospitals in the
       city. The city agencies of public order and law as well as the
       civil registry office are responsible to that department.

     * The department of culture is responsible for the municipal museums
       and libraries. The agency of monument conservation is responsible
       to that department. A lot of the cultural institutions in Dresden
       are directly responsible to the Free State of Saxony as there are
       the state art collections and the opera house.

     * The department of social affairs is responsible for the municipal
       kindergardens. The agencies of youth welfare, health and social
       welfare is responsible to that department. Social welfare is a
       matter of the cities and communities in Germany.

     * The department of urban development is responsible for mobility and
       central technical services. The agency of city development,
       construction inspection, land surveying and streets and excavation
       are responsible to that department.

     * The department of economy is responsible for the wastewater and the
       cemeteries. The agencies of business development, green spaces and
       wasting as well as the environmental agency are responsible to that
       department.

   The City of Dresden owns a lot of institutions and enterprises. Some of
   them are private companies (for example the Dresdner Verkehrsbetriebe
   (Transport authorities), the DREWAG (public services and energy
   supply), the Messe Dresden (fair ground) or the Zoo Dresden (which is a
   non-profit GmbH). The city's company of apartment estates was sold
   under intensive attention to the us-american Fortress Investment Group.

Local affairs

   Architecture (like the deconstructivistic fire escape on the baroque
   Landhaus) is a persistent subject of controversials in Dresden
   Enlarge
   Architecture (like the deconstructivistic fire escape on the baroque
   Landhaus) is a persistent subject of controversials in Dresden

   The subjects of local affairs in Dresden are often about the urban
   development of the city. Esspecially architecture and design of public
   places is often controversial discussed. The reconstruction of
   completely destroyed buildings around the Frauenkirche at the Neumarkt
   square is aslike the completely moderne Wiener Platz square in front of
   the Hauptbahnhof train station critised. The discussion of the
   Waldschlößchenbrücke, which is a planned bridge crossing the Elbe
   river, reached an international attention due to it is crossing the
   Dresden Elbe Valley World Heritage Site. Supporter of the bridge are
   hazarding the consequences of losing the status of World Heritage to
   get the construction started.

   Dresden sold its company of apartment housings to the Fortress
   Investment Group. The city gained some 982 Million Euro and paid off
   almost all of its loans. On the one side Dresden became the first
   german city free of dept, on the other side Dresden lost all of its
   control on the subsidized housing market. The risks in long term were
   even in nationwide media discussed as well as chances of such solds
   were surveyed in other cities.

   Other topics pertaining to the funding and expanding of cultural
   institutions. The construction of a new stadium is planned for years
   but not realised yet. Start of the upgrading of the
   Rudolf-Harbig-Stadion is in spring 2007 soonest.

Sister cities

   Along with its twin city Coventry, Dresden was one of the first cities
   to twin with a foreign city. The two cities became twins after World
   War II in an act of reconciliation as both had been nearly destroyed by
   bombing during the war.
     * United Kingdom Coventry, United Kingdom, since 1959
     * Russia Saint Petersburg, Russia, since 1961
     * Poland Wrocław, Poland, since 1963
     * Republic of Macedonia Skopje, FYR Macedonia, since 1967
     * Czech Republic Ostrava, Czech Republic, since 1971
     * Republic of the Congo Brazzaville, Congo, since 1975
     * Italy Florence, Italy, since 1978
     * Germany Hamburg, Germany, since 1987
     * Netherlands Rotterdam, Netherlands, since 1988
     * France Strasbourg, France, since 1990
     * Austria Salzburg, Austria, since 1991
     * United States Columbus, Ohio, USA, since 1992

Coat of arms

   Blazon: Party per pale on a golden shield showing a black lion to
   dexter and two black pales to sinister. The lion is looking to dexter
   and has a red tongue. The city's colours are derivatively black and
   yellow ( Or).

   Meaning: The lion was representing the Margraviate of Meissen and the
   pales called the Landsberger Pfähle were representing the Mark
   Landsberg both ruling the city of Dresden. Since 1309 both coat of arms
   in combination are verifiably in use. The pales were originally blue
   but converted to black to differentiate from the two other important
   Saxon cities of Leipzig and Chemnitz having very similar coat of arms.

Culture and architecture

   Dresden is attempting to take up its old cultural importance among the
   European cities that it had from the 19th century to the 1920s when it
   was a centre of fine and visual arts, of architecture and music. In
   that era famous artists like Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, Otto Dix, Oskar
   Kokoschka, Richard Strauss and Gret Palucca were active in the city.
   Dresden is home to several precious art collections, world-famous
   musical ensembles and important buildings of many eras. Dresden is also
   a location of festivals. Culture is often to be found interacting with
   technology in many art collections and examples of architecture.

Theatre

   The stage of the Saxon State Opera
   Enlarge
   The stage of the Saxon State Opera

   The Saxon State Opera is the most important theatre institution in
   Dresden. It is descended from the opera group of the old Saxon
   electors. Its first own opera house, the first Semperoper, was opened
   in 1842. In particular, many operas by Richard Strauss had their
   premiere at the Saxon State Opera. The performances of the opera are
   often sold out months in advance.

   The State Theatre Dresden runs a number of smaller theatres. The
   theatre at the Zwinger is the largest theatre of dramatic art in
   Dresden. Still next to the Zwinger Palace, the theatre in Dresden
   castle is even smaller.

   The Dresden State Operetta is the only independent operetta in Germany.
   Due to the destruction of the inner city in 1945, it was built in
   Leuben in the outskirts of Dresden, in a rural hotel. It is not owned
   by the Free State (as the name of the ensemble suggests) but the city.
   Today the city council is trying to move the Operetta to a planned
   building next to the main train station.

   Other theatres are:
     * The Herkuleskeule ( Hercules' club), an important site in the
       German-speaking political cabaret
     * The Theatre der Jungen Generation (Theatre of the Young
       Generation), running modern interpretations of plays in the context
       of present social problems and issues
     * Many small theatres like "Das Societätstheater" or "die Bühne" are
       run by private cultural societies

Musical ensembles

   The " Sächsische Staatskapelle Dresden" is the orchestra of the Saxon
   State Opera and was founded in 1548. It is one of the oldest orchestras
   and is known as Strauss-Orchestra. Nevertheless the musical ensemble
   was also moulded by Carl Maria von Weber and Richard Wagner conducting
   the orchestra.

   The Kreuzchor (Choir of The Cross) is a boy's choir. It consists of
   pupils of the Kreuzschule, which is a grammar school today; the
   Kreuzchor is the choir of the Kreuzkirche. Choir, church and school
   were first mentioned in the 13th century and are as old as the city of
   Dresden. The "Dresdner Kapellknaben" (which are not related to the
   Staatskapelle) are the choir of the Catholic cathedral.

   The Dresden Philharmonic Orchestra is the orchestra of the city of
   Dresden. It was founded in 1870, called the Gewerbehausorchestra, and
   renamed in 1915.

   The Dresdner Sinfoniker are a symphony orchestra and newcomers to the
   international musical ensembles in Dresden. The orchestra was founded
   in 1996 and became famous for its crossover of classic and modern music
   and for its cooperation with the Pet Shop Boys dubbing The Battleship
   Potemkin film and releasing the album of that name.

Museums, presentations and collections

   "Moor with emerald plate" in the Grünes Gewölbe which is the former
   royal Schatzkammer or treasury
   Enlarge
   "Moor with emerald plate" in the Grünes Gewölbe which is the former
   royal Schatzkammer or treasury

   Dresden hosts the Staatlichen Kunstsammlungen Dresden (Dresden State
   Art Collections) which is one of the world's most important museums and
   collections. The art collections consist of eleven museums of which the
   Gemäldegalerie Alte Meister and the Grünes Gewölbe are the best known.
   The art collection is owned by the Free State of Saxony and mostly uses
   the Zwinger Palace and Dresden Castle. Some of the museums, such as the
   Mathematisch-Physikalischer Salon, exhibit art within the context of
   technology, such as precious globes, measuring equipment and
   chronographs which are artistically formed and perfect in function.

   Other museums and collections owned by the Free State of Saxony in
   Dresden are:
     * The Landesmuseum für Vorgeschichte (State Museum of Prehistory)
     * The Staatliche Naturhistorische Sammlungen Dresden (State
       Collection of Natural History)
     * The Museum für Völkerkunde Dresden (Museum of Ethnology)
     * The "Universitätssammlung Kunst + Technik" (Collection of Art and
       Technology of the Dresden University of Technology)
     * Verkehrsmuseum Dresden (Transport Museum)

   The Deutsche Hygiene-Museum was found for mass education in hygiene,
   health, human biology and medicine. It stood in context of the Dresden
   industry of medicine and hygiene products and was founded by the
   industrialist Karl August Lingner, who produced Odol hygiene products.
   The museum's Transparent Woman, showing the organs of human beings as a
   see-through sculpture, became world famous. Dresden also hosts the
   Military Historical Museum of the Bundeswehr in the former garrison in
   the Albertstadt.

   The former convention house of the farmer's estate (called the
   Landhaus) is now home of the Dresden City Museum, which exhibits a
   collection of historical objects and has a smaller collection of
   paintings. The city has some museums specialising in artists who lived
   in the city (for example the "Carl Maria von Weber Museum" and the
   Kügelgenhaus. Another museum, the Technische Sammlungen (Technical
   Collection) was established in the Pentacon building, the old factory
   where Praktika cameras were once built. The collection includes
   historic cameras, computing technology and entertainment technology.

Architecture

   Although Dresden is often said to be a Baroque city, its architecture
   is influenced by more than one style. Other eras of importance are the
   Rennaissance and Historism as well as the contemporary styles of
   Modernism and Postmodernism.

Royal household

   Bridge at the Kronentor (crowned gate) of the Zwinger Palace
   Enlarge
   Bridge at the Kronentor (crowned gate) of the Zwinger Palace

   The royal buildings are among the most impressive buildings in Dresden.
   The Dresden castle was once the home of the royal household. The wings
   of the building have been renewed, built upon and restored many times.
   Due to this segued integration of styles, the castle is made up of
   elements of the Renaissance, Baroque and Classicist styles.

   The Zwinger Palace is just on the other side of the road from the
   castle. It was built on the old stronghold of the city and was
   converted to a centre for the royal art collections and a place to hold
   festivals. Its gate (surmounted by a golden crown) by the moat is a
   very famous part of the building.

   Another famous site is also on the former city wall: Brühl's Terrace
   was a gift to Heinrich, count von Brühl and became an ensemble of
   buildings. It was opened to the public in the 19th century; previously
   the whole area was closed off for the nobility. The ensemble includes
   the Albertinum, the Ständehaus and the Secundogenitur (home of the
   second son of the electors and kings).
   The Dresden Elbe Valley
   Enlarge
   The Dresden Elbe Valley

   August the Strong was very impressed by Venice with its Canale Grande
   and decided to model the Dresden Elbe Valley on this example using the
   Elbe's ample bends. Nevertheless he initiated the creation of a
   cultural landscape which has been a World Heritage Site since 2004 and
   which differs from the Canale Grande with its meadows and forested
   yards. This landscape hosts vineyards not far away from the inner city.
   The World Heritage Site passes through almost the whole city. Due to
   conflicts involving a modern bridge to be built across the river at a
   sensitive spot, the site has been added to the list of endangered World
   Heritage sites.

   Pillnitz Castle was built as a summer residence in the style of
   Chinoiserie alongside the Elbe on the southern side and the slopes and
   vineyards on the other.

Sacral buildings

   The Hofkirche
   Enlarge
   The Hofkirche

   The Hofkirche was the church of the royal household. August the Strong,
   who wanted to became King of Poland, was forced to convert to the
   Catholic religion, as the Polish king had to be Catholic. At that time
   Dresden was strictly Protestant. August the Strong ordered the building
   of the Hofkirche (1739 to 1755) to establish a sign of religious
   importance in Dresden. The church is the cathedral "Sanctissimae
   Trinitatis" since 1980. The staggered facade is completed by two
   balustrades that are decorated width 74 statues of saints. The church
   hosts the crypt of the Wettin Dynasty.

   The Frauenkirche was build almost contemporaneously by the citizens of
   Dresden between 1726 and 1743. It is said to be the greatest cupola
   building in Central and North Europe. Furthermore, the Frauenkirche is
   the largest church in Dresden, leading Dresden to be one of the few
   places where a cathedral is not the largest Christian sacral building.
   The Basilica di Santa Maria della Salute in Venice is said to be an
   archetype for the Frauenkirche whose cupola firstly was planned to be a
   timber construction. In that era of the Dresden architecture style was
   enormously inspired by Venice and Florence especially by the landmarks
   in northern Italy.

   The Kreuzkirche is another main church of the Protestants and is
   according to the location the oldest church of Dresden. The community
   of the Frauenkirche, which is in fact a few years older, is a former
   outskirt of the city. The Kreuzkirche has often been destroyed by
   conflagration and wars. The preserved style of architecture is that of
   the baroque edition supplemented by the elements of the Art Nouveau.

Contemporary architecture

   The „Palace of Culture“ in context of the historic castle
   Enlarge
   The „Palace of Culture“ in context of the historic castle

   Dresden has been an important site for the development of contemporary
   architecture for centuries, and this trend has naturally extended into
   the 20th and 21st centuries.
   The Deutsches Hygiene-Museum was built during the transition from
   Historicism to Modernism
   Enlarge
   The Deutsches Hygiene-Museum was built during the transition from
   Historicism to Modernism

   Historicist buildings made their presence felt on the cityscape until
   the 1920s. One of the youngest buildings of that era is the
   Hygiene-Museum, which is designed in an impressively monumental style
   but employs plain facades and simple structures. It is often but
   wrongly attributed to the Bauhaus school.

   The Bauhaus was, in fact, active in Dresden. It designed several public
   buildings of which the old part of the Saxon State Parliament is the
   most famous. Other modern architectural styles were built among more
   historical structures, especially along the razed city wall. The tower
   block at the Albertplatz is one of the buildings of the New Objectivity
   or Expressionist architecture that still exists. Garden cities and
   housing space collectives were developed in the 1920s and 1930s,
   raising the quality of life for of lower income residents.
   New Terrace (the Saxon State Parliament, the Erlweinspeicher and the
   Congress Center)
   Enlarge
   New Terrace (the Saxon State Parliament, the Erlweinspeicher and the
   Congress Centre)

   The architectural plans of the National Socialist regime were not
   realised. As in Berlin, where Nazi architects planned the monumental
   restructuring of the city as "Germania, Capital of the World",
   large-scale buildings next to the Großer Garten park were meant to
   establish Dresden as a subsidiary, regional capital. Some of the
   contemporary buildings were found to be "un-German". Among them is the
   famous Kugelhaus (Globe House) which was torn down. Along with the
   older construction many modern buildings were destroyed in the Second
   World War.

   Most of the present cityscape of Dresden was built up after 1945, a mix
   of reconstructed or repaired old buildings and new buildings of the
   modern and postmodern styles of the second half of the 20th century.

   Under the German Democratic Republic, from 1945 and 1990, Dresden was
   planned and reconstituted as a model socialist city. Streets were
   arranged to keep chimneys of the industry in sight. Wide streets and
   squares were cut into the landscape. Central public spaces, such as the
   Altmarkt, were surrounded by neoclassical Socialist Realist structures
   of relatively high quality. Other structures were built with less
   sensitivity toward their historic or geographic context. (for example
   the housing block at Prager Straße) of industrial housing construction.
   Other buildings, including the the Kulturpalast or the
   Centrum-Warenhaus (a large department store), represent the
   international style. Much of the new public architecture was influenced
   by public outcry and protest; the Kulturpalast, for example, was first
   planned as monumental tower like the Warsaw Palace of Culture and
   Science but arranged in a flatter form in context of the historic
   buildings.

   After 1990 and German reunification, new styles emerged. The Saxon
   State Parliament was under construction until 1993 and uses the old
   part of the former financial ministry in combination with a new wing of
   glass and steel in classic modern style. It represents the beginning of
   the so-called New Terrace (extending Bruel's Terrace). The youngest
   building of that ensemble alongside the river Elbe is the International
   Congress Centre Dresden which is a postmodern building mirroring motifs
   of the historic terrace and of the Elbe landscape.
   The New Synagogue
   Enlarge
   The New Synagogue

   The New Synagogue, at the other end of the old city, is another
   award-winning contemporary structure. Built almost completely of stone,
   its vertical edges are sloped, to reflect Jewish religious practices.
   The locally controversial UFA-Palast
   Enlarge
   The locally controversial UFA-Palast

   The nearby UFA-Kristallpalast cinema is a recent design by the firm
   Coop Himmelb(l)au. With its tall cube of class it is one of the largest
   deconstructivist buildings in Germany. Another deconstructivist project
   been planned for Dresden by Daniel Libeskind: the military history
   museum in the classicist Arsenal building which is currently under
   reconstruction. Libeskind has designed an arrow breaking through the
   building in the direction of the inner city, symbolising the flight
   formations during the bombardment of Dresden 1945- appropriate to the
   context of the military museum that has existed in that building since
   1918.
   The roof of the Dresden Hauptbahnhof
   Enlarge
   The roof of the Dresden Hauptbahnhof

   Norman Foster is responsible for the last acts of the reconstruction of
   the Dresden Hauptbahnhof train station. He designed a new teflon roof
   using the old steel girders and a new glass cupola of the entrance
   hall. The large white housetop is a unique landmark that can be seen
   from many positions on the slopes above the Elbe valley.

   The Saxon State Library was build between 1998 and 2002 on the campus
   of the Technische Universität Dresden. It is mainly underground, with
   two cuboids rising up from under it. While the walls are of other
   substances, glass is used extensively in the roof portion of the
   building. The central reading room extends two stories underground.

Technical buildings

   View over the Blue Wunder Elbe bridge from the upper station of the
   Schwebebahn Dresden
   Enlarge
   View over the Blue Wunder Elbe bridge from the upper station of the
   Schwebebahn Dresden

   Dresden is also known for a couple of technical buildings. Most of them
   were build in the second half of the 19th century and at the beginning
   of the 20th century. A centre of technical buildings are the
   Schillerplatz and the Körnerplatz. This two places are named after
   Friedrich Schiller and Carl Theodor Körner and are connected by the "
   Blue Wonder" Elbe bridge. This bridge is one of the oldest cantilever
   russ bridges in Germany. It is often said to be called Wonder due to
   the static without a pillar in the river or due to its colour, that
   changed from green to blue.

   Nearby two mountain railways are connecting the Körnerplatz with two
   quarters of villas. The Standseilbahn Dresden is funicular railway
   overcoming a height in difference of 95 metres. It connects Loschwitz
   and Weißer Hirsch. The Schwebebahn Dresden is the oldest suspension
   railway of the world and connects Loschwitz and the upper parts of
   Loschwitz.

   The city's building officer Hans Erlwein is the architect of a couple
   of industrial buildings that were build in the inner city. His storage
   building nearby the Semperoper is adapted to its neighbourhood by its
   dissected roof. Another building planned by Hans Erlwein is the
   slaughterhouse complex. This location became famous by the novel
   Slaughterhouse-Five by Kurt Vonnegut.
   The Yenidze Cigarette Factory build in 1908 and 1909
   Enlarge
   The Yenidze Cigarette Factory build in 1908 and 1909

   Also a landmark of technical buildings is the Yenidze which was build
   as a cigarette factory. Its architecture is enormously influenced by
   marketing and orientally styled to associate to the provenance of tabac
   products. Even the smokestacks are styled like minarets. The
   architecture was controversial discussed but is now under monument
   conservation. The building is used as a block of offices.
   The waterwork Saloppe at the Elbe river bank is extracting water
   running down from the Dresdner Heide
   Enlarge
   The waterwork Saloppe at the Elbe river bank is extracting water
   running down from the Dresdner Heide

   The Fernsehturm Dresden-Wachwitz is the TV tower of the city. It is 252
   metres high and towers the valley above in 373 metres in height. There
   is a pumped-storage power station in the western part Niederwartha. It
   has a rated output of 120 MW and was build between 1927 and 1930 at a
   slope of the valley. The ground basin is nearby the Elbe river. The
   difference in altitude is about 143 metre. The capacity of energy given
   by the volume of the upper basin is about 560 MWh. This power station
   is reloading its capacity over night and produces electricity over day.

   There are also a couple of water stations in the city. Most of them are
   using the bank filtered water of the Elbe river. One of the oldest
   water station is the Saloppe which is extracting fresh water from small
   rivers of the Dresdner Heide forest.

Bridges

   Marienbrücke
   Enlarge
   Marienbrücke

   The place of the Augustusbrücke between Altstadt and Neustadt in the
   centre of the city is the location of the oldest bridges in Dresden. A
   bridge at that place is already reported in the 13th century. Also
   reported are the plural demolitions of that bridges in floods of the
   past as appeared the last time yet in the march floods of 1845.

   The first bridge passed by the river is the Loschwitzer Brücke
   (famously known as Blaues Wunder, see above). The Albertbrücke at the
   border of the inner city is some kilometre downstream. The following
   bridges Carolabrücke, Augustusbrücke and Marienbrücke are in short
   distances.

   The Marienbrücke is divided into a road/tram bridges and a railway
   bridge. It connects the two train station of most importance in Dresden
   Hauptbahnhof and Dresden-Neustadt railway station on the historic
   Leipzig-Dresdner railway and is aslike the Carolabridge which hosts
   four lines of an important road and an extra double-track of the tram.

Sculptures, monuments and fountains

   The "Nymphenbad" in the Zwinger
   Enlarge
   The "Nymphenbad" in the Zwinger

   There are about 300 fountains and springs in Dresden were they are
   often placed in parks or on squares. The wells only serve in a
   decorative function since there is a fresh water system in Dresden.

   The Artesian aquifer at Albertplatz is the only spring in Dresden that
   is run all-the-year due to its warm water. It was planned to produce
   fresh water for the Neustadt districts. About 3900 litre per hour are
   flowing upwards the 240 metre depth well naturally by pressure.
   The equestrian sculpture of August the Strong
   Enlarge
   The equestrian sculpture of August the Strong

   A lot of the springs in Dresden are historic monuments like the
   "Nymphenbad" in the Zwinger or the "Cholerabrunnen". The
   "Cholerabrunnen" was founded by Eugen von Gutschmid in thanks that
   Dresden was untroubled by the cholera epidemics in the 1940s years.

   Springs and fountains are also elements in contemporary cityspaces:
   Modern springs are arranged along the Prager Straße. Due to their
   styles of fountain, they are called "blowballs". The springs alongside
   the Hauptbahnhof train station are above the glass ceiling of a
   underground parking.

   The most famous sculpture in Dresden is the golden equestrian sculpture
   of August the Strong called the "Goldener Reiter" (Golden Cavalier) on
   the Neustädter Markt square. It shows August at the beginning of the
   Hauptstraße (Main street) on its way to Warsaw where he was King of
   Poland in personal union. Another sculpture is the memorial of Martin
   Luther in front of the Frauenkirche.

Others

     * Kunsthofpassage in the Outer Neustadt
     * Dresden Fair Ground in the New Slaughterhouses in the Ostragehege
     * Rudolf-Harbig-Stadion and Heinz-Steyer-Stadion
     * The Old Slaughterhouses
     * Pfunds Molkerei
     * Gasometer in Reick

Cinemas and cinematics

   There still a lot of small cinemas and theatres of cinematic arts
   offering a programme of cult films and current films of low budget or
   weak promotion that were selected by their cultural worth. Dresden also
   has a couple of Multiplex Cinemas of which the Rundkino is the oldest.
   The cinema build in a circular building is today out of order.

   Dresden has been a centre in the production of animated films and of
   the optical cinematic techniques. The Dresden Filmfest hosts a contest
   of short subjects which is among the most endowed contests in Europe.

Lifestyle

   Filmnächte am Elbufer − Film night at the Elbe river banks
   Enlarge
   Filmnächte am Elbufer − Film night at the Elbe river banks

   Dresden's heterogene cityspace is strongly influencing the lifestyle in
   the city. Lifestyle in Dresden can be very urban and very rural in just
   a short distance. Dresden hosts a lot of events and concerts.

   The inner city splits its function to a couple of districts. The
   historic town centre serves as the most important touristic area and
   offers a lot of restaurants, bars and pubs that are visited by tourists
   as well as by inhabitants. The Seevorstadt south of the historic town
   centre is the most important shopping area in Dresden. It is crossed by
   the famous Prager Straße shopping street with large department stores
   and smaller shops. The tangents of the Altmarkt, which is the oldest
   market place in Dresden, extend this shopping area into the town
   centre. The Seevorstadt with the main station and an important tram hub
   in close distances is also a very urban area of Dresden. The Neustadt
   is divided into the touristic Inner Neustadt, which also offers a lot
   of gastronomy and retails as well as important cultural institutions,
   and the Outer Neustadt which is very important in the night life of
   Dresden. The Outer Neustadt is the centre of subcultural and youth
   cultural Dresden with a lot of clubs, bars, small stages and
   alternative culture institutions.

   Also green areas of Dresden are involved in the lifestyle. The huge
   Parks as well as the long Elbe meadows are used at day and at night for
   sport, party and cultural activities. Local recreation takes place in
   the National Park Saxon Switzerland, in the Eastern Ore Mountains or in
   the flat Moritzburg lakeland which are all not far away. The cultural
   landscape of the Dresden Elbe Valley is a world heritage site but also
   part of the everyday life of many inhabitants. The landscape crosses
   the city and is passed through by commuter traffic, used in leisure
   time or hosts habitation of ten thousands of residents.

   Dresden is a city of undergraduates with an own infrastructure of event
   locations and cultural institutions. There are 16 student clubs in the
   Altstadt and Südvorstadt near the Universities.

   Due to the Elbe river, rowing and canoeing are leisure activities in
   Dresden. Dresden is a centre of chess and host city of the Chess
   Olympiad 2008. Night events in skating are proffered weekly in the
   summer period.
   Rural setting along the Elbe river
   Enlarge
   Rural setting along the Elbe river

   Habitation differs strongly in Dresden. In some cases old village cores
   are only a few minutes away from urban districts. The inner city is
   enormously displaced to the southern border of the city. The Outer
   Neustadt with the highest density of inhabitants is just a kilometre
   away from the Dresdner Heide forest in the North. The large area in the
   south eastern and its outskirts are the places of residence with the
   most inhabitants. Districts like Blasewitz or Striesen are arranged in
   chequer and are covered with dotted housings and small garden areas
   around the houses. The Elbe slopes are covered with expensive villas.
   There are also couple of Plattenbau areas in Dresden where good
   lifestyle and life standard is hard to receive.

Infrastructure and economy

   In 1990 Dresden — an important industrial centre of East Germany — had
   to struggle with the economic collapse of the Soviet Union and the
   other export markets in eastern Europe. East Germany had been the
   richest Communist country but was faced with competition from western
   Germany after reunification. After 1990 a completely new law and
   currency system was introduced in the wake of Communism's downfall, and
   eastern Germany's infrastructure was largely rebuilt with funds from
   western Germany. Dresden as a major urban centre has developed much
   faster and more consistently than most other regions in the former East
   Germany, but the city still faces many social and economic problems
   which stem from the collapse of the communist system, including high
   unemployment levels.

Infrastructure

Transport

   Bundesautobahn 17 crossing the Weißeritz valley in southern Dresden
   Enlarge
   Bundesautobahn 17 crossing the Weißeritz valley in southern Dresden

   The Bundesautobahn 4 ( European route E40) crosses Dresden in the
   northwest. Along the A4 motorway, Dresden has five exits. The A4
   connects Dresden with Chemnitz and Frankfurt, and the A14 connects
   Leipzig and Hanover.

   The Bundesautobahn 17 leaves the A4 at the three-junction interchange
   "Dresden-West" in a south-eastern direction. In Dresden it begins to
   cross the Ore Mountains towards Prague and provides three exits in the
   southern parts of Dresden. The Bundesautobahn 13 leaves from the
   three-point interchange "Dresden-Nord" and goes to Berlin. The A13 and
   the A17 are on the European route E55.

   Bundesstraße roads crossing or running through Dresden are:
     * Bundesstraße 6 ( Cuxhaven - Görlitz border control at the border to
       Poland)
     * Bundesstraße 97 (Dresden - Guben border control at the border to
       Poland)
     * Bundesstraße 170 (Dresden - Zinnwald-Georgenfeld border control at
       the border to the Czech Republic)
     * Bundesstraße 172 (Dresden - Bad Schandau border control at the
       border to the Czech Republic)
     * Bundesstraße 173 (Dresden - Bamberg)

   There are two main inter-city transit hubs in the railway network in
   Dresden: Dresden Hauptbahnhof is the largest station in town granting
   access to the network to the southern parts include the Altstadt.
   Dresden-Neustadt railway station is located to the north of the river
   Elbe. The most important railway lines run to Berlin, Prague, Leipzig
   and Chemnitz. A commuter train system ( Dresden S-Bahn) operates on
   three lines alongside the long-distance routes.

   Dresden Klotzsche Airport is the international airport of Dresden,
   located at the north-western outskirts of the town in the district of
   Klotzsche. Its infrastructure has been improved by new terminals and a
   motorway access route.
   The longest trams in Dresdens set a record in length
   Enlarge
   The longest trams in Dresdens set a record in length

   Dresden has a large tramway network that is operated by the Dresden
   Transport Authority. Because the geological bedrock does not allow the
   building of underground railways, the tramway is very important in
   public transport in Dresden. The Transport Authority operates twelve
   lines on a 200 km network. On the major routes through the inner city,
   vehicles run every two minutes. The fleet is being renewed to replace
   the uncomfortable Czech Tatra trams. Today many of the low floor
   vehicles are up to 45 metres long and produced by Bombardier
   Transportation in Bautzen. The newest trams are vehicles of the Flexity
   Classic XXL series that are adjusted to the topography of Dresden.
   While many tracks in the system are on separated roadbeds (often with
   grass grown around them to avoid noise) some tracks are still placed on
   the streets especially in the inner city.
   CarGoTram
   Enlarge
   CarGoTram

   The CarGoTram is a tram that supplies Volkswagen's Transparent Factory,
   crossing the city. The two trams, up to 60 metre long, are the longest
   vehicles allowed to use roads in Dresden. The connection by tram was
   established to reduce the number of trucks used. The transparent
   factory is located not far from the city centre next to the city's
   largest park.

Public utilities

   The Sächsische Staatskanzlei (Saxon State Office) is the institution
   assisting the Minister-Presdident analogue the German Chancellery
   Enlarge
   The Sächsische Staatskanzlei (Saxon State Office) is the institution
   assisting the Minister-Presdident analogue the German Chancellery

   Dresden is the capital of a German state. It is home of the political
   parts of the Saxon utilities which are the legislative-body of Landtag
   of Saxony and the executive-bodies of all ministries of the Saxon
   Government. The controlling judiciary-body of Constitutional Court of
   Saxony has been established in Leipzig. The highest Saxon court in
   civil and criminal law, the Higher Regional Court of Saxony has its
   home in Dresden.

   Most of the Saxon state authorities are located in Dresden. Dresden is
   home of the Regional Commission Dresden which is a controlling
   authority of the Saxon Government. It has a judicial superintendence
   over eight districts, two other district-free towns and the city of
   Dresden.

   As many cities in Germany Dresden is also home of a local court and it
   has a Chamber of Crafts as like as a Chamber of Industry and Trade and
   many subsidiaries of federal agencies (like the federal labour office
   or the Federal Agency for Technical Relief). Additionally Dresdens
   hosts some substations of the German Customs and the Federal Waterways
   Directorate East.

   Dresden is also home of a military subdistrict command but has no more
   large military units as it had in the past. Dresden is the traditional
   location of the army officer education in Germany which is today
   realised in the Offizierschule des Heeres.

Economy

   Factories of AMD
   Enlarge
   Factories of AMD

   Until famous entreprises like Dresdner Bank left Dresden in the
   socialists era to avoid their nationalization, Dresden has had a huge
   importance among german cities. The period of the GDR until 1990 was
   characterised by low economic growth in comparison to west german
   cities. The entreprises and production sites break down almost
   completely as they entered the social market economy. Since then the
   economy of Dresden is on a way of recreation.

Facts and figures

   The unemployment rate fluctuates between 13 and 15% and is still
   relatively high today. Nevertheless, Dresden is the city that has
   developed the most effectively in all of East Germany and has raised
   its GDP per capita to 31,100 Euro, which is equal to the GDP per capita
   of some poor West German communities (the average of the 50 biggest
   cities is around 35,000 Euro).

   The economy of Dresden involves extensive public funding. Due to
   extensive public funding of technology, the rate of highly-qualified is
   arround 20%. Due to its dynamism, among other factors, the economy of
   Dresden is ranked among the best ten cities in Germany to live in.

Enterprises

   Three major sectors can be seen as dominating the Dresden economy:
   Transparent Factory owned by VW.
   Enlarge
   Transparent Factory owned by VW.

   The semiconductor industry was built up in 1969. Major enterprises
   today are AMD, Infineon Technologies (now partly owned by Qimonda), ZMD
   and Toppan Photomasks. Their factories attract many suppliers of
   material and cleanroom technology enterprises to Dresden.

   The pharmaceutical sector came up at the end of the 19th century. The
   Sächsisches Serumwerk Dresden (Saxon Serum Plant, Dresden), which is
   owned by GlaxoSmithKline, is a world leader in vaccine production.
   Another traditional pharmacy producer is the Arzneimittelwerke Dresden
   (Pharmaceutical Works, Dresden).

   A third (traditional) branch is that of mechanical and electrical
   engineering. Major employers are the Volkswagen Transparent Factory,
   EADS Elbe Flugzeugwerke (Elbe Aircraft Works), Siemens and
   Linde-KCA-Dresden.

   Tourism is another branch with high revenue and many employees. There
   are 87 Hotels in Dresden, which is a famous site of heritage tourism.

Education and science

   Dresden is home to a number of renowned universities, but among German
   cities is a more recent location for academic education.

   The Technische Universität Dresden with almost 35,000 students (
   2004)was founded in 1828 and is among the oldest and largest
   Universities of Technology in Germany. It is currently the university
   of technology in Germany with the highest count of students but also
   has many courses in social studies, economics and other non-technical
   sciences. It offers a huge spectrum of 126 courses.

   The University of Applied Sciences Dresden was founded in 1992 and had
   about 5,300 students in 2005.

   The Hochschule für Bildende Künste Dresden was founded in 1764 and is
   famously known for its former professors and artists such as George
   Grosz, Sascha Schneider, Otto Dix, Oskar Kokoschka, Canaletto,
   Carl-Gustav Carus, Caspar David Friedrich and Gerhard Richter.

   The Palucca School of Dance was founded by Gret Palucca in 1925 and is
   a major European school of free dance.

   The Carl Maria von Weber University of Music was founded in 1856.
   Hochschule für Bildende Künste Dresden
   Enlarge
   Hochschule für Bildende Künste Dresden

   Other universities include the "Hochschule für Kirchenmusik", a school
   specializing in church music, the "Evangelische Hochschule für Sozial
   Arbeit", an education institution for social work, the "Fachhochschule
   der Wirtschaft" and the "Offizierschule des Heeres". The "Dresden
   International University" is a privately founded post-graduate
   university, founded a few years ago in cooperation with the Dresden
   University of Technology.

   Moreover, Dresden hosts many research institutes of which some have
   gained an international standing. The domains of most importance are
   micro- and nanoelectronics, transport and infrastructure systems,
   material and photonic technology as well as bio-engineering. The
   institutes are well connected among one other as well as with the
   academic education institutions.
   Max Planck Institute for Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics
   Enlarge
   Max Planck Institute for Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics

   The Max Planck Society focuses on fundamental research. In Dresden
   there are three Max Planck Institutes (MPI); the " MPI of Molecular
   Cell Biology and Genetics", the "MPI for Chemical Physics of Solids"
   and the "MPI for the Physics of Complex Systems"

   The Fraunhofer Society hosts institutes of applied research that also
   offer mission-oriented research to enterprises. With eleven
   institutions or parts of institutes, Dresden is the largest location of
   the Fraunhofer Society worldwide. The Fraunhofer Society has become an
   important location factor and is seen as a serviceable part of the
   "knowledge infrastructure".

   Dresden is home to the
     * Fraunhofer Institute for Ceramic Technologies and Sintered
       Materials IKTS
     * Fraunhofer Institute for Electron and Plasma Technology FEP
     * Fraunhofer Institute for Integrated Circuits IIS (developers of the
       MP3 audio format)
     * Fraunhofer Institute for Material and Beam Technology IWS
     * Fraunhofer Centre Nanoelectronic Technologies CNT (in cooperation
       with Qimonda and Advanced Micro Devices)
     * Fraunhofer Institute for Photonic Microsystems IPMS,
     * Fraunhofer Applications Centre for Processing Machinery and
       Packaging Technology AVV
     * Fraunhofer Institute for Transport and Infrastructure Systems IVI
       as well as
     * branches of other Fraunhofer Institutes headquartered elsewhere in
       Germany.

   The Leibniz-Gemeinschaft operates a research centre in Rossendorf which
   is the largest complex of research facilities in Dresden, located a
   short distance outside the urban areas. It still focuses on nuclear
   medicine. "Leibniz Institute for Polymer Research" and the "Leibniz
   Institute for Solid State and Materials Research" are in the material
   and high technology domain while the "Leibniz Institute of Ecological
   and Regional Development" is focused on more fundamental research into
   urbanism.

Dresden and fine arts

   Bernardo Bellotto (Canaletto): Zwingerhof (Backyard of the Zwinger from
   the perspective of the fortress, 1752)

   Carl Gustav Carus: View at Dresden from the Bruehl-Terrace (Blick auf
   Dresden von der Bruehlschen Terrasse, 1830/31)

   Caspar David Friedrich: The big enclosure (Das grosse Gehege, 1832)

   Gerhard Richter: View on the city of Dresden (Stadtbild, 1956)
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dresden"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
