   #copyright

Dubai

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; Middle Eastern
Countries

            City of Dubai (مدينة دبيّ)
   The Emirates Towers in Dubai
   The Emirates Towers in Dubai

   Official flag of City of Dubai

   Flag

   Location of City of Dubai
           Coordinates: 25°16′N 55°20′E
      Emirate     Dubai
       Sheikh     Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum
        Area
       - City     4,114 km²
     Population
    - City (2006) 1,241,000
      - Density   293.94 /km²
              Website: City of Dubai

   Dubai (in Arabic: دبيّ, IPA: [ðʊ'bej], generally /dʊ'baɪ/ in English)
   refers to either:
     * one of the seven emirates that make up the United Arab Emirates on
       the Persian Gulf, or
     * that emirate's main city, sometimes called "Dubai City" to
       distinguish it from the emirate.

   Dubai is the most populous and second largest emirate of the United
   Arab Emirates after Abu Dhabi. Dubai is distinct from other members of
   the UAE in that revenues from oil account for only 6% of its gross
   domestic product. A majority of the emirate's revenues are from the
   Jebel Ali Free Zone (JAFZ) and increasingly from tourism.

   With enormous construction and development in various industries, Dubai
   has attracted world attention through innovative real estate projects,
   sports events, conferences and Guinness records. However, this
   increased attention, coinciding with its emergence as a world business
   hub have also highlighted potential human rights quagmires concerning
   its largely immigrant workforce.

Archaeology

   There are many archaeological sites in the Emirate of Dubai. The most
   famous of these is the Al Qusais settlement which dates back to the
   period 2600 BC to 2000 BC. A second settlement is in the Al Sofouh area
   near the present Dubai Media and Internet City. It is a round tomb that
   dates back to the period 2500 BC to 2000 BC and it is part of the Umm
   Al Nar civilization which inhabited this region during this period. A
   third location is the Hatta Valley, 115km south-east of Dubai city near
   the Omani border. In this location a few stones, called sharlos, with
   different images and writings dating back to the third millenium were
   found. They are now kept in the Dubai Museum.

History

   Dubai City as seen from space
   Enlarge
   Dubai City as seen from space

   The oldest place where the name of Dubai was mentioned is in Arabic
   book called "Mojam Ma Ostojam men Asmae Al belaad wal Mawadhea" (معجم
   ما استعجم من أسماء البلاد والمواضع) by Abdullah Bin Abdu Aziz Al Bakri
   Al Andalasi in the year 1095 AD as a name of a vast place. Later, in
   the year 1587 AD, the Venetian pearl merchant Gaspero Balbi mentioned
   the name of Dubai as one of the places where its people work in the
   field of pearl diving.

   There are records of the town of Dubai from 1799. Earlier in the 18th
   century the Al Abu Falasa lineage of Bani Yas clan established itself
   in Dubai which was a dependent of the settlement of Abu Dhabi until
   1833.

   On 8 January 1820, the sheikh of Dubai was a signatory to the British
   sponsored "General Treaty of Peace" (the General Maritime Treaty).

   In 1833, the Al Maktoum dynasty of the Bani Yas tribe left the
   settlement of Abu Dhabi and took over the town of Dubai, "without
   resistance". From that point on, Dubai, a newly independent emirate,
   was constantly at odds with the emirate of Abu Dhabi. An attempt by the
   Qawasim to take over Dubai was thwarted. In 1835, Dubai and the rest of
   the Trucial States signed a maritime truce with Britain and a
   "Perpetual Maritime Truce" about two decades later. Dubai came under
   the protection of the United Kingdom (keeping out the Ottoman Turks) by
   the Exclusive Agreement of 1892. Like four of its neighbours, Abu
   Dhabi, Ras al-Khaimah, Sharjah and Umm al-Qaiwain, its position on the
   route to India made it an important location.

   In March 1892, the Trucial States (or Trucial Oman) were created.

   The rulers of Dubai fostered trade and commerce, unlike the town's
   neighbours. The town of Dubai was an important port of call for foreign
   tradesmen (chiefly Indians), who settled in the town. Until the 1930s,
   the town was known for its pearl exports.

   After the devaluation of the Gulf Rupee in 1966, Dubai joined the newly
   independent state of Qatar to set up a new monetary unit, the
   Qatar/Dubai riyal. Oil was discovered 120 kilometres off the coast of
   Dubai, after which the town granted oil concessions.

   On 2 December 1971 Dubai, together with Abu Dhabi and five other
   emirates, formed the United Arab Emirates after former protector
   Britain left the Persian Gulf in 1971. In 1973, Dubai joined the other
   emirates to adopt a single, uniform currency: the UAE dirham.

   The following is a list of rulers of Dubai, going back at least to
   1833.
     * ... - 9 June 1833 Sheikh `Ubayd ibn Said
     * 9 June 1833 - 1852 Sheikh Maktoum I ibn Bati ibn Suhayl (d. 1852)
     * 1852 - 1859 Sheikh Said I ibn Bati (d. 1859)
     * 1859 - 22 November 1886 Sheikh Hushur ibn Maktoum (d. 1886)
     * 22 November 1886 - 7 April 1894 Sheikh Rashid I ibn Maktoum (d.
       1894)
     * 7 April 1894 - 16 February 1906 Sheikh Maktoum II ibn Hushur (b.
       18.. - d. 1906)
     * 16 February 1906 - November 1912 Sheikh Bati ibn Suhayl (b. 1851 -
       d. 1912)
     * November 1912 - 15 April 1929 Sheikh Saeed II bin Maktum (1st time)
       (b. 1878 - d. 1958)
     * 15 April 1929 - 18 April 1929 Sheikh Mani ibn Rashid
     * 18 April 1929 - September 1958 Sheikh Saeed II bin Maktum (2nd
       time)
     * September 1958 - 7 October 1990 Sheikh Rashid II ibn Said Al
       Maktoum (b. 1912 - d. 1990)
     * 7 October 1990 - 4 January 2006 Sheikh Maktoum III bin Rashid Al
       Maktoum (b. 1943 - d. 2006)
     * 4 January 2006 - Present Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum (b.
       1949)

   The current ruler of Dubai is H.H. Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al
   Maktoum. Like the preceding ruler, his older brother H.H. Sheikh
   Maktoum bin Rashid Al Maktoum, he is also the Vice President and the
   Prime Minister of the UAE.

Demographics

   Dubai is unusual in that its population is comprised mainly of
   expatriates, with UAE nationals (Emiratis) constituting the minority.
   The majority of these expatriates come from South Asia and South East
   Asia. A quarter of the population reportedly trace their origins to
   neighbouring Iran. Dubai is also home to some 100,000 British and other
   western expatriates. The UAE government does not allow any form of
   naturalization or permanent residence to expatriates. However,
   foreigners are permitted to purchase and own property without a local
   partner or sponsor.

   Nearly all of the commercial establishments are run by expatriates with
   a silent local partner who merely "rents" the business license for a
   negotiated annual fee without taking part in any capital investment.
   The numerous free trade zones allow for full expatriate ownership.

   There is an increasing number of "freehold" villas and apartments on
   artificial islands such as the Palm Islands and in many parts of Dubai
   for example The Greens, Dubai Marina, International City, etc.
   Ownership is either permanent or on a 99 year lease depending on which
   area—freehold areas were announced in the press in July 2006. Ownership
   or lease of a completed residence allows the owner to apply for (but
   not guarantee) a residency visa on a three year renewable basis. The
   Federal Government does not state whether foreigners may or may not own
   property and has left individual emirates to formulate their own
   property laws.
   Picture of the Marina development
   Enlarge
   Picture of the Marina development

Language and religion

   The official language is Arabic but English, German, Hindi/ Urdu,
   Malayalam, Tamil, Persian, and Tagalog are also widely spoken. Islam is
   the majority religion of the Emiratis and while a vast majority of the
   locals are Sunnis, there is a significant Shiite minority. There are
   also minority Hindus, Sikhs, and Christians. Dubai is the only emirate
   that has Hindu temples and a Sikh Gurdwara.

   In early 2001, ground was broken for the construction of several
   additional churches on a parcel of land in Jebel Ali donated by the
   government of Dubai to four Protestant congregations and a Roman
   Catholic congregation. Construction on the first Greek Orthodox Church
   in Dubai (to be called St. Mary's) began at the end of 2005. The land
   for the construction of the church was also donated by the government
   to the Greek Orthodox community of Dubai.

   Financial support to non-Muslim groups from the Dubai government comes
   in the form of donated land for the construction of churches and other
   religious facilities, including cemeteries. They are permitted to raise
   money from among their congregants and to receive financial support
   from abroad. Christian churches are permitted to openly advertise
   church functions.

Economy

   Oil reserves in Dubai are less than one-twentieth those of Abu Dhabi,
   and oil income represents a small proportion of the emirate's income.

   Dubai and its twin across the Dubai creek, Deira (independent at that
   time), became important ports of call for Western manufacturers. Most
   of the new city's banking and financial centres were headquartered in
   the port area. Dubai maintained its importance as a trade route through
   the 1970s and 1980s. The city of Dubai has a free trade in gold and
   until the 1990s was the hub of a "brisk smuggling trade" of gold ingots
   to India, where gold import was restricted.

   Today, Dubai is an important tourist destination and port ( Jebel Ali,
   constructed in the 1970s, has the largest man-made harbour in the
   world), but also increasingly developing as a hub for service
   industries such as IT and finance, with the new Dubai International
   Financial Centre (DIFC). Transport links are bolstered by its
   rapidly-expanding Emirates Airline, founded by the government in 1985
   and still state-owned; based at Dubai International Airport, it carried
   over 12 million passengers in fiscal year 2005.

   The government has set up industry-specific free zones throughout the
   city. Dubai Internet City, now combined with Dubai Media City as part
   of TECOM (Dubai Technology, Electronic Commerce and Media Free Zone
   Authority) is one such enclave whose members include IT firms such as
   EMC Corporation, Oracle Corporation, Microsoft, and IBM, and media
   organisations such as MBC, CNN, Reuters, ARY and AP. Dubai Knowledge
   Village (KV),an education and training hub, is also set up to
   complement the Free Zone’s other two clusters, Dubai Internet City and
   Dubai Media City, by providing the facilities to train the clusters'
   future knowledge workers. Internet access is restricted in most areas
   of Dubai with a proxy server filtering out sites deemed to be against
   cultural and religious values of the UAE - this includes any .il
   (Israeli) domains. However, areas served by TECOM (an internet service
   provider) are currently not filtered.

Real estate and property

   The Jumeirah Palm island.
   Enlarge
   The Jumeirah Palm island.

   The government's decision to diversify from a trade-based but
   oil-reliant economy to one that is service- and tourism-oriented has
   made real estate more valuable, resulting in the property boom from
   2004-2006. Construction on a large scale has turned Dubai into one of
   the fastest growing cities in the world, equalled only by the large
   Chinese cities.

   The property boom is largely driven by Mega-Projects -

   Off-shore such as Palm Islands , The World (archipelago)

   Inland such as Dubai Marina , The Burj Dubai Complex , Dubai Waterfront
   , Business Bay and Dubailand .
   Skyscrapers along Sheikh Zayed Road
   Enlarge
   Skyscrapers along Sheikh Zayed Road

   The aspirations of the ruling sheikh are reflected by the ultra-modern
   architecture of the city; home to iconic skyscrapers such as Emirates
   Towers, which are the 12th and 24th tallest buildings in the world, and
   the Burj al-Arab located on its very own island in the Persian Gulf and
   currently the tallest hotel in the world.

   Emaar Properties is currently constructing what will become the world's
   tallest structure, the Burj Dubai. The final height of the skyscraper
   is a closely guarded secret - an indication of the developer's resolve
   to attain the title of the world's tallest building and its intention
   to hold on to it for as long as possible - but estimates so far point
   to a height upwards of 810m. Burj Dubai is expected to be completed in
   2008. Burj Dubai's neighbour is another behemoth under construction:
   the world's largest shopping mall - the Dubai Mall.

   Also under construction is what is planned to become Dubai's new
   Central Business District, named Business Bay. The project, when
   completed, will feature a phenomenal 500 skyscrapers built around an
   artificial extension of the existing Dubai Creek.

   In February 2005, the construction of Dubai Waterfront was announced,
   it will be 2½ times the size of Washington D.C., roughly seven times
   the size of the island of Manhattan. Dubai Waterfront will be a mix of
   canals and islands full of hotels and residential areas that will add
   800 km (500 miles) of man-made waterfront. It will also contain Al
   Burj, another one of the tallest buildings in the world.

   Dubai has also launched Dubiotech. This is a new park to be targeted at
   Biotech companies working in pharma, medical fields, genetic research
   and even biodefense. The aim of this park is to foster the growth of
   this sector in Dubai and to utilize the region's talent in addressing
   this rapidly growing sector.

   The International Media Production Zone is a project targeted at
   creating a hub for printers, publishers, media production companies,
   and related industry segments. Launched in 2003, the project is
   scheduled to be completed in 2006.

   A new project was announced on May 1, 2006 by the authorities. It is
   named Bawadi and will consist of a 27 billion US-dollar investment
   intended to increase Dubai's number of hotel rooms by 29,000, doubling
   it from the current figure offers now. The largest complex will be
   called Asia, Asia and will be the largest hotel in the world with more
   than 6,500 rooms.

   The first villa freehold properties that were occupied by non-UAE
   nationals were The Meadows, The Springs, and The Lakes (high-end
   neighbourhoods designed by Emaar Properties, collectively called
   Emirates Hills).

   Expatriates of various nationalities have been pouring capital into
   Dubai in the past several years, greatly contributing to the city's
   prosperity. Iranian expatriates alone are estimated to have invested up
   to US$200 Billion in Dubai.

   Dubai interests have also purchased large amounts of real estate in
   foreign countries, in particular snapping up trophy properties in
   global centers like New York and London. Purchases in 2005 included New
   York's 230 Park Avenue (formerly known as the New York Central Building
   or the Helmsley Building) and Essex House on Central Park South.

   See the Dubai Department of Tourism and Commerce Marketing's list of
   developments in Dubai for more information.
   Cranes dominate the sky over Dubai.
   Enlarge
   Cranes dominate the sky over Dubai.

Construction

   Since 2000, Dubai's municipality has initiated a plethora of
   construction phases and plans across the entire city of Dubai,
   predominantly in the Mina Seyahi area, located further from Jumeirah,
   towards Jebel Ali. In many areas, it is not easy to see Dubai's sky
   without at least one crane in your view; Industry experts cautiously
   estimate that 15% to 25% of the world's cranes are in Dubai.
   Construction in Dubai and the UAE in general is a much faster process
   than in any Western country. This is partly because labourers from the
   Indian subcontinent accept lower wages than those from other countries.

   One of the main reasons for the boom in construction in Dubai is its
   drive to diversify the economy. The Dubai government does not want to
   depend on its oil reserves which are largely believed to become
   exhausted by 2010 and, as such, has diversified its economy to attract
   revenues in the form of expanding commercial and corporate activity.
   Tourism is also being promoted at a staggering rate with the
   construction of Dubailand and other projects that include the making of
   mammoth shopping malls, theme parks, resorts, stadiums and various
   other tourist attractions.

   Another reason for the construction boom is the recent reversal of a
   law in 2002 that allows non-nationals of the UAE to own property (not
   land) in Dubai (albeit freehold and 99 year leases are actually sold to
   people with ownership still remaining with private companies). The
   larger of the property tycoons are Al Nakheel and Emaar Properties. In
   Dubai, demand is currently outstripping supply by a significant margin
   and is showing no signs of slowing in the near future. Rents have
   skyrocketed with the recent inflow of professionals and companies from
   around the world who are attracted by Dubai's no-tax benefits although
   rises have been capped to 15% per annum up to 2006 under a directive
   from Sheikh Mohammad. Legislation in this area is still developing as
   the property market for foreigners is relatively new.

Human rights and labour

   People born in the United Arab Emirates are not considered citizens
   unless their parents are citizens. Thus those born in the UAE to
   expatriates are also considered expatriates. The massive construction
   projects currently in Dubai have required more construction workers
   than there are citizens of the city (note: over 80% of Dubai's
   population consists of expatriates/non-citizens). This has led to
   massive importation of low-wage workers, mostly from India and
   Pakistan. Most of these workers are forced to give up their passports
   upon entering Dubai, making it very difficult to return home. NPR
   reports that workers "typically live eight to a room, sending home a
   portion of their salary to their families, whom they don't see for
   years at a time." Others report that their salary has been withheld to
   pay back loans, making them little more than indentured servants. The
   BBC has reported that "local newspapers often carry stories of
   construction workers allegedly not being paid for months on end. They
   are not allowed to move jobs and if they leave the country to go home
   they will almost certainly lose the money they say they are owed. The
   names of the construction companies concerned are not published in the
   newspapers for fear of offending the often powerful individuals who own
   them.".

   In December 2005, the Indian consulate in Dubai submitted a report to
   the Government of India detailing labour problems faced by Indian
   expatriates in the emirate. The report highlighted delayed payment of
   wages, substitution of employment contracts, premature termination of
   services and excessive working hours as being some of the challenges
   faced by Indian workers in the city.

   On 21 March 2006, tensions boiled over at the construction site of the
   Burj Dubai as workers upset over low wages and poor working conditions
   rioted, damaging cars, offices, computers, and construction tools. A
   Dubai Interior Ministry official said the rioters caused approximately
   one million U.S. dollars in damage. On March 22 most workers returned
   to work but refused to work. The work stoppage also caused workers
   building a new terminal at Dubai International Airport to strike.

   The alleged labour injustices in Dubai have attracted the attention of
   various Human Rights groups. Mafi Wasta, for example, is a website
   created specifically for the purpose of persuading the government of
   the UAE to sign up to 2 of the ILO's (International Labour
   Organization) 7 core conventions - namely 87 and 98 - which allows for
   labour unions. The site lists examples of human rights violations in
   the country. Human Rights Watch said that the men were treated "less
   than human".

   However, the UAE government has denied any kind of labour injustices
   and has stated that the watchdog's (Human Rights Watch) accusations
   were misguided. Towards the end of March 2006, the government announced
   steps to allow construction unions. UAE labour minister Ali al-Kaabi
   said: "Labourers will be allowed to form unions."

   Prostitution, though illegal by law, is conspicuously present in the
   emirate because of an economy that is largely based on tourism and
   trade. There is a high demand for women from Eastern Europe. According
   to the World Sex Guide, a website catering to sex tourists, Russian and
   Ethiopian women are the most common prostitutes, while Indian
   prostitutes are part of a well organized trans-Oceanic prostitution
   network.

   Sources disagree on whether or not Jews are "banned" from Dubai; Der
   Spiegel writes that "all Jews are strictly banned from entering the
   country", while other sources suggest that only Israeli citizens have
   their visas routinely denied and that rejection of visa applications
   for Jews of non-Israeli citizenship is "expat urban legend."

   Residents are now required to take permission from their employers to
   obtain a driving licence. The Roads and Transport Authority (RTA),
   reinstating a rule abolished about four years ago, issued a circular to
   all driving schools in Dubai asking them to make it mandatory for
   applicants to obtain a no-objection-certificate (NOC) from their
   employers to take driving lessons. No one is allowed to learn driving
   with effect from October 1 without getting a NOC from his or her
   employer.

Transport

Roads

   Dubai has a fairly large bus system run by the Dubai Municipality. The
   bus system has 59 unique routes on weekdays and transports over 200,000
   people each week. Although the Public Transport bus system is large it
   is not large enough to accommodate the volume of people who would like
   to use it. The system has come under increasing criticism because of
   lack of capacity. The government has issued plastic, swipable "e-go"
   cards. There are also several discounts and period pass options
   available. Unfortunately though, the bus network is used extensively by
   lower income groups and does not do enough to attract higher income
   earners who would do well to use the bus transport system and ease
   traffic congestion that has recently become a major problem in Dubai
   and the United Arab Emirates. Traffic congestion has come about mainly
   due to lack of foresight on the recent rapid population increase, the
   relative ease of credit facilities for obtaining a car and the
   convoluted road networks that are constantly being changed, improved or
   reconstructed. Furthermore, Dubai has developed a reputation for having
   the most deaths and road accidents in the developed world clocking in
   with a statistic of having a minor road accident at least every 3
   minutes. Due to the frequency of such incidents, road networks are
   blocked and held up quite frequently.

   Dubai also has an extensive taxi system, by far the most frequently
   used means of public transport within the emirate. There are both
   government-operated and private cab companies. The Dubai Transport
   Corporation operates cream-coloured taxis. Some of the private cab
   companies are Cars Taxi, National Taxi, Cititaxi and Metro Taxi. Prices
   are reasonable (the meter begins as Dhs. 3, which is approximately
   50pence, or 1 USD), and are charged by distance, although if the cab
   stops for more than 1 minute, 1/2 a Dirham will be added to the meter.
   Taxi drivers will usually try to avert this happening in traffic queues
   by moving slightly forward every 30 seconds or so. Cabs can be found
   anywhere, any time although difficulties may be experienced during
   large events.

Trains

   There is currently a $3.89 billion Dubai Metro project under
   construction for the emirate. The Metro system is expected to be
   partially operational by 2009 and fully operational by 2012. The
   construction contract for the project was given to Dubai Rapid Link
   (DURL), a consortium led by Mitsubishi Heavy Industries. Also involved
   are two other Japanese corporations, Obayashi and Kajima, and a Turkish
   company, Yapi Merkezi. The metro will comprise two lines: the Green
   Line from Rashidiya to the main city centre and the Red Line from the
   airport to Jebel Ali. The Dubai Metro (Green and Blue Lines) will have
   70 kilometres of track and 43 stations, 33 above ground and ten
   underground. Trains are expected to run every 90 seconds when the
   project is completed. Recently, the Blue Line connecting Dubai
   International Airport to the new Jebel Ali Port and Dubai World Central
   International Airport was announced. The route will run 47 km through
   Dubailand, but the exact number of stations is unknown. Dubai is
   building this train system to ease congestion on its road network and
   to meet the transportation demands of its growing population. Seven
   monorails are also slated to be constructed to help feed the Metro
   system, connecting various places such as Dubailand, Palm Jumeirah, et
   al, to the main track.
   A water taxi in Dubai.
   Enlarge
   A water taxi in Dubai.

Ports and water travel

   Dubai is serviced by several commercial ports and Dubai Creek is still
   used by local traders in Dhows:
     * Mina' Rashid (Port Rashid)
     * Jebel Ali

   One of the more traditional methods of getting across Bur Dubai to
   Deira is through abras, small boats that ferry passengers across the
   Dubai creek, between abra stations in Bastakiya and Bani Yas Road, for
   a nominal charge of 50 fils (1/2 AED).

Air

   The Dubai International Airport is a hub for Emirates airlines and has
   a large Duty Free shopping centre. The airport has won numerous awards
   for its excellence in design and services. A third terminal is
   currently under construction and is due to open in 2006. The new
   terminal will be dedicated to Emirates airlines and will fully support
   the new Airbus A380. When completed this will double the capacity of
   the airport.

   A second airport located at Jebel Ali — (which has been renamed as
   Dubai World Central International Airport although still retaining the
   IATA code of JXB) and a new free trade area within Dubai, marking the
   centrepiece of the Jebel Ali Airport City — was announced in 2004 and
   construction began in January 2005. The first part is expected to be
   completed by 2008. Although initially intended as a predominantly cargo
   airport, plans are afoot for the new Jebel Ali airport to handle some
   120 million passengers per annum within 20 years, and would likely
   surpass Atlanta's Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport, currently
   the world's busiest airport, which handles 88.4 million passengers as
   of 2005.

   Dubai is investing heavily in developing the reach of its airline,
   Emirates. The idea is to develop Dubai's air transportation ability so
   that passengers from any city can fly direct to Dubai. When Emirates
   Airline receives the Boeing 777-200LR Worldliner series aircraft, it
   will be able to offer direct access to virtually any major city in the
   world. The airline has placed an order of 45 of Airbus's A-380
   'superjumbo' doubledecker aircraft, the largest of which has a capacity
   of 641 passengers. The A380 aircraft have already been charted to fly
   from 2007 onwards. In addition, Emirates has placed an order of 42 of
   the new Boeing 777 aircraft in November 2005.

   Dubai's location makes it unique in its international connectivity and
   access.

Postal system

   In parts what is being dubbed as "New Dubai," or some parts of Dubai
   that range west from Sheikh Zayed Road to Jebel Ali Free Zone, the
   formal addressing system is: sector number, community number, street
   number and building number. In common practice, an address consists of:
   street number, building number and community name although the order
   may vary. For example:
Street 1a, Villa 2

Umm Suqeim 3

Dubai, United Arab Emirates

   In older parts of Dubai (Deira, Bur Dubai), or what comprises Dubai
   City and the newer commercial/business area of Dubai, street or sector
   addresses, historically, tend not be used; however, use of the official
   street map will show that all sectors and thoroughfares have been
   designated. Location tends to be identified via building name and a
   landmark, which may very well mean that a person not familiar with or
   new to Dubai may be unable to find his/her destination. For example:
Suite 803, City Tower 2

Opposite Emirates Hotel

Sheikh Zayed Road

Dubai, United Arab Emirates

   The UAE post is delivered to post office boxes. There is no home
   delivery.

History of the postal system

   A post office of British India was opened August 19, 1909. It used the
   stamps of India on mail, with postmark "Dubai Persian Gulf", until
   India's independence in 1947, then stamps of Pakistan until March 31,
   1948. When Pakistan came into existence, the British government set up
   a postal administration for Eastern Arabia and used overprinted British
   stamps until January 7, 1961, when Dubai issued its own stamps
   inscribed "Trucial States". Despite the name, these were only on sale
   in Dubai's post office.

   The Dubai Post Department took over the postal service on June 14, 1963
   and the following day issued a series of stamps depicting sea life,
   views of Dubai, and Sheikh Maktoum bin Rashid Al Maktoum. This was the
   opening salvo of a barrage of stamp issues over the next few years. The
   emirate discovered that stamp collectors were willing to give it money
   for colored labels with "Dubai" printed on them, and by the time the
   postal system was merged with those of other emirates in mid-1972, it
   had issued over 400 stamps, few of which ever saw usage on mail.

Education

   English is the medium of instruction in most schools in Dubai. Annual
   fees for nursery and pre-school vary greatly.

   Some primary schools conduct entrance tests. Most schools cater to one
   or more expatriate communities. Our Own English High School, the Dubai
   Modern High School, and the Indian High School offer either a CBSE or
   an ICSE Indian syllabus. Dubai English Speaking School, Jumeirah
   Primary School, Jebel Ali Primary School, Jumeirah English Speaking
   School, King's School and the Horizon School all offer British primary
   education up to the age of eleven. Dubai College, English College, and
   Jumeirah College are all British eleven-to-eighteen secondary schools
   which offer GCSE and A-Levels. St. Mary's Catholic High School offers
   the British curriculum GSCE and A-Level programmes to the Dubai
   community. The Emirates International School, Wellington School and
   Cambridge International High School are also secondary schools that
   offer a combination of GCSE, IGCSE, and IB courses to the expatriate
   community. Cambridge International and St. Mary's are popular choices
   for the Indian expat community. The International School of Choueifat
   and Emirates International School offer both British and American
   curricula. Dubai English Speaking School and Jumeirah English Speaking
   School are the number one primary schools of choice for many expats,
   with Dubai College leading the list of secondary schools.

   A growing number of K-12 schools offer the American syllabus. The
   American School of Dubai (ASD), which is located in Jumeirah, and Dubai
   American Academy (DAA) in Al Barsha have been around the longest. ASD
   offers an accredited American high school diploma; DAA offers both an
   American-accredited high school diploma and the International
   Baccalaureate [IB] diploma. There are also some primary and high
   schools that offer Canadian and Japanese syllabi.

   Many expatriates tend to send their children back to their home country
   or to western countries for university education. However, a sizable
   number of foreign accredited universities have been set up in the city
   over the last ten years. Some of these universities include the
   American University in Dubai (AUD), The American College of Dubai, Al
   Ghurair University, Birla Institute of Technology and Science,
   Heriot-Watt University, Middlesex University, Dubai, the Higher
   Colleges of Technology ( Dubai Women's College and Dubai Men's College
   campuses, University of Wollongong in Dubai, Dublin's Dubai business
   school, European University College Brussels, Dubai, Mahatma Gandhi
   University, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali
   Bhutto Institute of Science and Technology, British University of
   Dubai, SP Jain Centre Of Management(part of India's reputed Business
   School SP Jain Institute of Management & Research) and Zayed
   University.

Cultural and Artistic Developments

   Dubai is quickly aspiring to enrich its cultural scene with the $13.6
   billion development of the Dubai Cultural Village. This development
   will include art museums and performing arts centers as well as
   libraries, schools for music and dance, rare book stores and open
   spaces for recreation.
     * Dubai has a growing number of stages including the Royal Hall at
       the Dubai Pearl, and the Dubai Community Theatre. The Madinat
       Theatre is also one of the most significant and luxurious theaters
       in the region, hosting many West-End productions.

     * The Dubai film festival is an annual film festival that attracts
       the stars from all over the world. Dubai is also developing the
       Dubai Studio City which aims to be a centre for artistic production
       on the screen.

     * Dubai is currently building an island opera house which has been
       designed by Zaha Hadid.

     * An art museum and a general museum are currently being built.

Twinning

   Dubai maintains cultural, economic and educational ties with:
     * Yerevan, Armenia
     * Istanbul, Turkey
     * Damascus, Syria
     * Detroit, USA
     * Osaka, Japan
     * Gold Coast, Australia
     * Shanghai, China
     * Casablanca, Morocco
     * Geneva, Switzerland
     * Dundee, United Kingdom

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dubai"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
