   #copyright

Duran Duran

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Performers and composers

   Duran Duran
   Duran Duran in 2003
   Duran Duran in 2003
   Background information
   Origin Birmingham, England
   Genre(s) Rock
   New Wave
   New Romantic
   Years active 1978–present
   Label(s) EMI / Capitol Records
   Hollywood Records
   Epic Records
   Website Duran Duran Official Website Duran Duran Official Fan Community
   Members
   Simon Le Bon
   Nick Rhodes
   John Taylor
   Roger Taylor
   Former members
   Andy Taylor
   Sterling Campbell
   Warren Cuccurullo
   Stephen Duffy
   Andy Wickett
   Simon Colley
   Alan Curtis
   Jeff Thomas

   Duran Duran are an English New Wave band notable for a long series of
   catchy, synthesizer-driven hit singles and vivid music videos. They
   were a leading band in the MTV-driven Second British Invasion of the
   United States, and the most commercially successful of the New Romantic
   bands. They are still often identified as an " Eighties band" despite
   continuous recording and chart success over their twenty-eight year
   history.

   The band has sold well over 70 million records worldwide, and has had
   eighteen singles in the Billboard Hot 100 chart, and thirty in the Top
   40 of the UK Singles Chart, including "Rio", "Hungry Like the Wolf",
   "Is There Something I Should Know?", "The Reflex" and the James Bond
   theme "A View to a Kill" in the 1980s, "Ordinary World" and "Come
   Undone" in the early- 1990s, and "Sunrise" and "What Happens Tomorrow"
   in the 2000s.

   Duran Duran was created by Nick Rhodes (keyboards) and John Taylor
   (bass), with the later addition of Roger Taylor (drums), Andy Taylor
   (guitar), and Simon Le Bon (lead vocals); none of the Taylors are
   related. Guitarist Warren Cuccurullo was also a member of the band from
   1989 to 2001, and drummer Sterling Campbell was a member from 1989 to
   1991.

   Although the group never disbanded, it went through several line-up
   changes over the years. The reunion of the original five members in the
   early 2000s created a stir among music media and the band's fans. Duran
   Duran released Astronaut from the reunited line-up in 2004.

   Andy Taylor dropped out of the band in October 2006 during work on a
   new album, but the band has since continued recording. Dom Brown, a
   session guitarist and songwriter from South London, is currently
   filling in for session work and tours. He has filled in for Andy Taylor
   on the road in '04 and another occassion in '05, other than filling in
   from '06 and beyond since Andy left Duran Duran.

   The next new Duran Duran album is expected to be released in mid-2007.

History of Duran Duran

1978–1980: Origins

   John Taylor and Nick Rhodes formed the band in Birmingham, England in
   1978, envisioning a group with the raw do-it-yourself energy of the Sex
   Pistols, the dance grooves of CHIC, and the elegant style of David
   Bowie and Roxy Music. Other influences the band have mentioned include
   Mick Ronson, The Clash, Kraftwerk, Japan, New York Dolls, Velvet
   Underground, Blondie and Visage. The band took their name from the evil
   character "Dr. Durand Durand", played by Milo O'Shea in Roger Vadim's
   sexy science-fiction cult film Barbarella. Their first singer was
   Stephen Duffy, who went on to lead Tin Tin, The Lilac Time, write songs
   for Barenaked Ladies and Steven Page, more recently has been
   co-authoring songs with Robbie Williams. The original bassist was Simon
   Colley. Several drummers and guitarists were subsequently tried, as
   well as a handful of vocalists after Duffy left Duran Duran early in
   1979.

   Finally, drummer Roger Taylor fell in with them at a party (after which
   John Taylor, originally on lead guitar, switched to bass). Guitarist
   Andy Taylor came south from Newcastle to audition after responding to a
   magazine advertisement, and London vocalist Simon Le Bon was
   recommended to the band by ex-girlfriend Fiona Kemp who worked at the
   Rum Runner nightclub, where the band rehearsed. The owners of the club,
   brothers Paul and Michael Berrow, became the band's management, and
   paid them to work as doormen, disc jockeys and glass collectors when
   they weren't rehearsing.

   The up-and-coming group were considered part of the New Romantic scene,
   along with other style-and-dance bands like Spandau Ballet and ABC.
   Over the course of 1980, they recorded two demo tapes and performed
   tirelessly in clubs around Birmingham and London. Touring in late 1980
   with Hazel O'Connor, the band attracted critical attention that
   escalated into a bidding war between EMI and PolyGram. "A certain
   patriotism" toward the label of The Beatles led them to sign with EMI
   in December. Nick Rhodes has since said, in a 1998 interview with
   Deluxe magazine, that the band was "appallingly ripped off".

   Like Depeche Mode, Duran Duran were among the earliest bands to work on
   their own remixes. Before the days of digital synthesizers and easy
   audio sampling, they created complex, multilayered arrangements of
   their singles, sometimes recording entirely different extended
   performances of the songs in studio. These "night versions" were
   generally available only on vinyl, as b-sides to 45 rpm singles or on
   12-inch club singles, until the release of the Night Versions: The
   Essential Duran Duran compilation in 1998.

   From the very beginning, the band had a keen sense of style, and worked
   with stylist Perry Haines and fashion designers such as Kahn & Bell and
   Antony Price to build a sharp and elegant image, soon growing beyond
   the ruffles and sashes of the pirate-flavoured New Romantic look. They
   may have suffered from the typical hair spray and mullet excesses of
   the 1980s, but have maintained a focus on presenting fashion as part of
   the package throughout their career. In the 1990s, they worked with
   Vivienne Westwood, and in the 2000s with Giorgio Armani. (One of the
   band's advertising taglines adopts the phrase "Styles change, style
   doesn't.") In addition they retained creative control of the band's
   visual presentation, and worked closely with graphic designer Malcolm
   Garrett and many others over the years to create album covers, tour
   programmes, and other materials.

   The band was relatively unusual in that all five members were pin-up
   pretty. Teen and music magazines in the UK latched onto their good
   looks quickly, and the U.S. soon followed. It was a rare month in the
   early eighties when there was not at least one picture of the band
   members in teen magazines such as Smash Hits or Tiger Beat, even if the
   sugary coverage was at odds with the band's titillating videos and
   sometimes dark lyrics. It helped that each member had a distinctive
   look and personality. John Taylor once remarked that the band was "like
   a box of Quality Street [chocolates]; everyone is somebody's favourite"
   – an effect that is now strategically planned in more recent boy bands.
   Duran Duran would later come to regret this early pin-up exposure, but
   at the time it helped gain them the national attention they sought.

1981–1982: A band is launched

   The band's first album, Duran Duran, was released in 1981. The first
   single, " Planet Earth", reached the United Kingdom's Top 20 at Number
   12. A follow-up, " Careless Memories," stalled at Number 37. However,
   it was their third single, "Girls On Film", that garnered them the most
   attention. The song went to Number 5 in the UK, before the notorious
   video was even filmed. That video (featuring topless women mud
   wrestling and other not-very-stylised depictions of sexual fetishes)
   was made with directing duo Godley & Creme, and was filmed in August
   just two weeks after MTV was launched in the United States, before
   anyone knew what an impact the music channel would have on the
   industry.. The band expected the " Girls On Film" video to be played in
   the newer nightclubs that had video screens, or on pay-TV channels like
   the Playboy Channel. The raunchy video created an uproar, and it was
   consequently banned by the BBC and heavily edited for MTV. The band
   unabashedly enjoyed and capitalised on the controversy, and the album
   peaked in the UK Top Twenty at Number 3. Adam Ant and Spandau Ballet
   were key rival artists at this time, often jockeying for position
   versus Duran Duran on the UK charts.

   Later in 1981, the band went on their first U.S. club tour, followed by
   more dates in Germany and the UK. This second tour of Britain coincided
   with a wave of riots sparked by unemployment and racial tension,
   including those of Moss Side and Toxteth; they played an eerily quiet
   Birmingham the day after the Handsworth riots.

   Duran Duran began to achieve worldwide recognition in 1982. In May,
   they released their second album, Rio, which scored four UK Top Twenty
   singles with " My Own Way", " Hungry Like the Wolf", " Save A Prayer",
   and the title song " Rio". A headlining tour of Australia, Japan, and
   the U.S. was followed by a stint supporting Blondie during that band's
   final American tour. Diana, Princess of Wales declared Duran Duran her
   favourite band, and the band was dubbed " The Fab Five" by the British
   press.

   However, the Rio album did not do well in the United States at first.
   EMI in England had promoted Duran Duran as a New Romantic band, but
   that genre was barely known in the U.S., and Capitol Records (EMI's
   American branch) was at a loss about how to sell them. After Carnival
   (an EP of Rio's dance remixes) became popular with DJs in the fall, the
   band arranged to have most of the album remixed by David Kershenbaum.
   Only after it was re-released in the U.S. in November, with heavy
   promotion as a dance album, did Rio begin to climb the American charts,
   six months after its European success. MTV placed "Hungry Like the
   Wolf" and then several other Duran Duran videos into heavy rotation,
   pushing that song and "Rio" into the top twenty on the U.S. charts in
   early 1983. The seduction ballad "Save A Prayer" also did well. In the
   end the album peaked at number 6 in U.S., and remained on the charts
   there for 129 weeks – almost two and a half years. In 2003, Rio was
   listed at number 65 in the NME 100 Greatest Albums Of All Time.

1983–1984: On top of the world

   Duran Duran began 1983 by playing the MTV New Year's Eve Rock'n'Roll
   Ball, with "Hungry Like The Wolf" still climbing the charts in the
   U.S., and the American reissue of the "Rio" single to follow in March.
   To satisfy America's newly awakened thirst for all things Duran, the
   band decided to re-release their self-titled first album in the U.S. in
   the middle of the year, with the addition of " Is There Something I
   Should Know?", a new single recorded for the release. This song went
   straight in at Number 1 in the UK (a rarity then, and their first chart
   topper in their home country), and reached Number 4 on the American
   charts. During the promotion of this album, Rhodes and Le Bon served as
   MTV guest VJs for a show, during which artist and admirer Andy Warhol
   dropped by to greet them. An autograph-signing session in Times Square
   got so far out of control that mounted police had to be called in to
   control the mob. The hysteria of their teenage fans accompanied them
   everywhere they went, drawing frequent comparisons to Beatlemania.

   Also in 1983, keyboardist Nick Rhodes produced the UK Number 1 and US
   Number 5 hit "Too Shy" for the English band Kajagoogoo, and Andy Taylor
   became the first member of Duran Duran to get married. The band's main
   rivals were now Culture Club and Wham!.

   Duran Duran spent the next year as tax exiles, returning to songwriting
   at a chateau in France in May 1983 before flying to Montserrat and then
   Sydney to record and mix their third album. The band was under enormous
   pressure to follow up the success of Rio, and the recording process
   took over six months as different band members went through bouts of
   perfectionism and insecurity.. A newly decadent lifestyle and substance
   abuse issues added complications as well. In the documentary film
   Extraordinary World, filmed a decade later, Rhodes described the effect
   on their sound as "barely controlled hysteria, scratching beneath the
   surface".

   At the end of 1983 the band finally released Seven and the Ragged
   Tiger. Many critics noted that the band was trying to break new
   territory. Also, creative differences were becoming evident on the new
   record. Some songs, such as "Of Crime And Passion" had a much harder
   sound than their earlier work, while others, such as "Tiger Tiger"
   explored more atmospheric territory.

   Seven and the Ragged Tiger included the late 1983 hit " Union of the
   Snake"; Duran Duran thus had Top Twenty hits off of three albums in a
   single year. They made music headlines by deciding to release the
   "Union of the Snake" video to MTV a full week before the single was
   released to radio, at a time when the industry feared video really
   might kill the radio star. They followed up with " New Moon on Monday",
   and then with " The Reflex", which became their first number one hit in
   the United States, where it remained for 5 weeks.

   The band then embarked on a massive global tour that continued
   throughout the first four months of 1984, including their first major
   stadium dates in America. The band was followed closely by a film crew
   led by director Russell Mulcahy. The resulting documentary film Sing
   Blue Silver (accompanied by concert film Arena) shows both the live
   music and the hard work of putting on a show, together with a variety
   of behind-the-scenes and "off-duty" moments with the band – including
   travel difficulties, practical jokes, sightseeing, and bassist John
   Taylor declaring, at a meeting with executives from their top tour
   sponsors Coca Cola, that he much preferred Pepsi!

   The live album Arena was also recorded during the tour, and was
   released with the new studio single " The Wild Boys", which went to
   Number 2 on both sides of the Atlantic. In February 1984, they appeared
   on the cover of Rolling Stone magazine, and won two Grammy awards in
   the brand-new Long Form and Short Form music video categories. After
   the tour concluded, Roger Taylor was married in Naples, Italy, and Nick
   Rhodes celebrated his marriage in London, famously wearing a pink
   velvet tuxedo and top hat.

   Halfway through the year, Duran Duran began a long break; however, as
   most of them remained in London and were active in celebrity circles,
   the band was never far from the tabloids or the public eye.

   At the end of the year, the group was featured on the Band Aid benefit
   single " Do They Know It's Christmas?" along with other music
   celebrities like George Michael, Boy George, Bono, Paul Weller, Paul
   Young and Sting.

1985: The band falls apart

   Duran Duran's hiatus, originally intended as a long break from the
   hectic Duran Duran lifestyle, continued through 1985. However, band
   members were soon anxious to record new music, leading to a supposedly
   temporary split into two side projects.

   John and Andy Taylor wanted to break away from the synth-rock of Duran
   Duran and further pursue the harder-rocking, Led Zeppelin-style
   material. As a result they joined forces with the frontman Robert
   Palmer and CHIC drummer Tony Thompson to form the supergroup known as
   Power Station. Their album Power Station peaked at Number 6 on the U.S.
   Charts and generated two Top 10 singles: "Some Like It Hot", and the T.
   Rex cover " Bang a Gong (Get It On)".

   Simon Le Bon and Nick Rhodes, on the other hand, wanted to further
   explore the atmospheric part of the Duran Duran sound. The two formed
   Arcadia, an experimental New Wave band which sounded completely
   opposite of the straight-rock sound of Power Station. Roger Taylor was
   primarily the drummer for Arcadia, but contributed some percussion to
   the Power Station album as well. Arcadia's So Red The Rose peaked at
   Number 23 on the charts, featuring the Top 10 single "Election Day".

   Duran Duran was never the same after the hiatus was over. According to
   Rhodes, the two side projects "were commercial suicide... But we’ve
   always been good at that." They created very different styles of music,
   which drastically changed the image of the band members. Andy and John
   Taylor had grown out their hair in the fashion of other American hard
   rock bands, while Le Bon, Rhodes, and Roger Taylor developed a more
   artsy proto- goth style, wearing dyed black hair and heavy make-up.
   Roger Taylor remarked that, "It wasn't a good atmosphere at all. We had
   split into the Power Station and Arcadia, and egos were rampant."

   As a result, the band's image as a whole was off-balance when they
   regrouped to contribute " A View to a Kill", for the 1985 James Bond
   movie of the same name. This single remains the only Bond theme to go
   to Number 1 on the U.S. charts, and it also remains the highest-placed
   Bond theme on the UK chart, reaching Number 2. The song was accompanied
   by a tongue-in-cheek "spy" video that had the band scampering all over
   the Eiffel Tower and it also included scenes from the movie. The lead
   singer ended the video by introducing himself as " Bon. Simon Le Bon."

   As a follow-up to the Christmas 1984 Band Aid single, Duran Duran
   performed in front of 90,000 people (and an estimated 1.5 billion TV
   viewers) at the Live Aid charity concert held at JFK Stadium in
   Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on July 13, 1985. It was not intended to be
   a farewell performance – the band planned only to take a break after
   four years of non-stop touring and public appearances – but the
   original five did not play live together again until July of 2003. With
   the Bond song holding at Number 1, and the band arguably suffering from
   overexposure, their Live Aid set became infamous for Le Bon
   inadvertently hitting a falsetto note in the chorus of "A View To A
   Kill" – an error gleefully noted in the press as "The Bum Note Heard
   'Round The World", and which the singer himself would later describe as
   the most humiliating of his career. Power Station also performed at
   Live Aid, with Michael Des Barres replacing their vocalist Robert
   Palmer.

   During the previous year, Le Bon had taken up the hobby of yachting. He
   again drew media attention when his maxi-yacht Drum capsized during the
   August 1985 Fastnet race, trapping him under the hull for an hour. He
   went on to participate in the 1986 Whitbread Round the World Race as
   well. At the end of 1985, he married model Yasmin Parvaneh.

1986–1991: Waning success

   Duran Duran's members had released five albums in five years, with each
   album release accompanied by heavy media promotion and lengthy concert
   tours. Suffering from fatigue and tensions among bandmates, the band
   lost two of its core members in 1986.

   After Live Aid and Arcadia, the ever-shy drummer Roger Taylor,
   exhausted by Duran Duran's hectic lifestyle, retired to the English
   countryside. His retirement was originally announced as a one year
   sabbatical, but it soon became clear that he would not be returning to
   the band.

   Guitarist Andy Taylor, on the other hand, led the remaining members to
   believe he would return to work on a new Duran Duran album even as he
   was signing a solo recording contract in Los Angeles. The band finally
   resorted to legal measures to get him into the studio, but after
   numerous delays, they let him go at last. He played on only a few
   tracks on the next album while the disagreements were being settled.

   Without a guitarist or a drummer, the three remaining members, Le Bon,
   Rhodes, and John Taylor had producer (and former CHIC guitarist) Nile
   Rodgers play a few tracks on guitar, and hired studio musicians to play
   drums while they searched for new members. Finally in September 1986,
   Warren Cuccurullo (formerly of Missing Persons and Frank Zappa's
   touring band) was hired as a replacement sessions guitarist. With Le
   Bon, Rhodes, and Taylor, he recorded the rest of their next album,
   titled Notorious, released in October, 1986. A black and white
   documentary film titled Three To Get Ready chronicled the recording of
   the album and the preparations for the tour.

   Although the title track went to number two in the U.S., the band found
   that they had lost much of the momentum and hysteria they had left
   behind in 1985. In the three years between the release of Seven and the
   Ragged Tiger and Notorious, many of their teenage fans had grown up,
   and the music was funkier, more mature, and less "pop", given the added
   experience garnered from their work with Arcadia and Power Station and
   the many gifted musicians they had encountered.

   Subsequently, Duran Duran's fame began to wane as they struggled to
   escape the teen idol image and gain critical success with more complex
   (and less confident) music. Another factor was the band's dismissal of
   early managers the Berrow brothers. There was no public reason given,
   but disagreements over money, and their involvement in Le Bon's
   yachting adventures (they were co-owners of Drum) were suspected to
   play a part. Whatever the reason, Duran Duran did not have consistent
   management through the latter part of their career, switching managers
   frequently and going through periods of self-management. In addition,
   EMI (which fired its president and went through a major corporate
   restructuring that summer) seemed to have lost interest in promoting
   the band.. Many casual fans never heard that the band had released
   anything after Notorious, and assumed that the band had broken up.

   The next album Big Thing (1988) yielded the singles "I Don't Want Your
   Love", " Do You Believe In Shame?" and "All She Wants Is" (the last a
   top ten hit in the UK). The record was very experimental, taking
   inspirations from house music and rave music and mixing it with Duran's
   atmospheric synth pop and more mature lyrics (the juvenile title track
   notwithstanding). The album prominently featured Cuccurullo's creative
   guitar work. By the next year, after touring for the album finished,
   Duran Duran would regain a five-man membership as Cuccurullo and tour
   drummer Sterling Campbell were made full-time members of Duran Duran.

   Duran Duran would later allow the single " Do You Believe In Shame?" to
   be included on the soundtrack for Tequila Sunrise. Ironically, former
   guitarist Andy Taylor, still trying his hand at a solo career,
   contributed his own song, "Dead on the Money" for the soundtrack; it
   was the last time Taylor would appear on the same record with his
   former bandmates, until the release of Astronaut in 2004.

   A greatest hits album titled Decade: Greatest Hits was released late in
   1989, along with the megamix single "Burning The Ground" which
   consisted of woven snippets of the band's hits from the previous ten
   years. The single came and went with little fanfare, but the album
   became another major seller for the band.

   However, the tepid 1990 release Liberty (a retreat from the
   experimentation of Big Thing) failed to capitalize on any regained
   momentum – a pattern the band repeated regularly in their later years.
   The album entered the UK album chart in the top ten, but faded away
   quickly. The singles " Violence of Summer (Love's Taking Over)" and "
   Serious" were only mildly successful, and the album's low-key,
   R&B-flavoured soft rock did not fare well against contemporaries like
   Alice in Chains and Jane's Addiction, when Nirvana, Pearl Jam and the
   grunge revolution were just around the corner. For the first time,
   Duran Duran did not tour in support of an album, performing only a
   handful of club dates and on several TV talk and variety shows.

   Sterling Campbell left the band early in 1991, going on to work with
   Soul Asylum and David Bowie, leaving the band as a quartet. The line-up
   of Le Bon, Rhodes, Taylor, and Cuccurullo would remain intact for six
   more years.

   At the end of 1991, John Taylor (then 31) married nineteen-year-old
   model/actress Amanda De Cadenet, already pregnant with his daughter at
   the time.

1992–1996: A second climb, another fall

   In the early 1990s, the rise of the Internet fueled a resurgence in
   Duran Duran's popularity. Many of the older fans rediscovered the band
   through Usenet and a growing number of Duran Duran mailing lists and
   websites, and began "catching up" on the albums they had missed.

   In 1993, the band released a second self-titled album – this Duran
   Duran album is known as The Wedding Album (for Nick Egan's cover art
   featuring the wedding photos of the bands' parents) to distinguish it
   from the 1981 release. The swift commercial and critical success of
   this album (#4 in the UK, #7 in the U.S.) came as a surprise to many
   who considered Duran Duran to be a purely "Eighties" phenomenon which
   had already faded to oblivion. It hinged on two Adult Contemporary
   singles. The first, " Ordinary World", was forced onto radio playlists
   months earlier than planned by listener demand for the leaked single,
   and won a prestigious Ivor Novello Award award for songwriting.. It
   reached Number 3 on the U.S. chart, and Number 6 in the UK. " Come
   Undone" was a slinky number primarily written by Cuccurullo, with a
   memorable "underwater" video, which scored Number 7 in the U.S. and
   Number 13 on the UK chart. Both the band and the record label seemed to
   be caught by surprise, and bassist John Taylor, who had been
   considering leaving the band, agreed to stay (he does not play bass on
   "Come Undone"). The band's largest tour ever, which included stops in
   the Middle East, the recently de-embargoed South Africa, and South
   America, was halted after seven months when Le Bon suffered from
   strained vocal cords. After six weeks recuperation, the tour continued
   intermittently for another five months, including appearances in
   Israel, Thailand, and Indonesia.

   However, the band's upswing in momentum was once again swiftly curbed,
   this time by the poorly received covers album Thank You. The album was
   reportedly begun as a lighthearted tribute to the band's influences, in
   the vein of Bowie's Pin Ups – some of the tracks were recorded in
   borrowed studios (including Prince's Paisley Park) and make shift
   studios in hotel rooms (with the aid of programmer Mark Tinley) while
   the band was on tour, with the intent to have an album ready to release
   soon after the tour was finished, with another studio album to follow
   quickly afterwards. Original drummer Roger Taylor even returned from
   retirement to contribute to a few songs. However, conflicts within the
   band and between the band and Capitol/EMI created delay after delay;
   mix after mix was ordered and rejected, and by the time it finally came
   out in 1995, the band was not enthusiastic about supporting the album.

   Singles from Thank You included covers of Lou Reed's " Perfect Day" and
   Grandmaster Flash & the Furious Five's "White Lines" (which included
   backing vocals from the original artists). In a video interview
   included in the album's electronic press kit, Reed said that he
   considered Duran Duran's effort the best cover ever done of one of his
   songs. The title track was also included on the 1995 Led Zeppelin
   tribute album Encomium. Still, the critics lambasted the band's
   attempts at "911 is a Joke", " Lay Lady Lay", " Ball of Confusion" and
   " Crystal Ship", and the band only completed a 1995 summer tour of
   radio station festivals under duress.

   After that tour's completion, John Taylor co-founded the B5 Records
   label and recorded a solo album, as well as founding and touring with
   the supergroup Neurotic Outsiders along with Duff McKagan and Matt
   Sorum (formerly of Guns N' Roses} and ex- Sex Pistols guitarist Steve
   Jones. He also initiated a reunion of the Power Station, but the
   project went on without him when he had to withdraw to deal with his
   divorce from De Cadenet and rehabilitation for substance abuse.
   Finally, after struggling for months to record the next album
   Medazzaland, in January of 1997 Taylor announced at a Duran Duran fan
   convention that he was leaving the band "for good".. His departure
   reduced the band to two original members (Le Bon and Rhodes) and
   Cuccurullo. The trio decided to stay the course and keep recording
   under the name Duran Duran.

1997–2000: Soldiering on

   Freed from some internal writing conflicts, the band returned to the
   studio with programmer Mark Tinley to rewrite and re-record many of the
   songs on Medazzaland. (Taylor's work remains on only four tracks.) This
   album was a return to the layered experimentation of Big Thing, with
   intricate guitar textures and processed vocals. The track "Out of My
   Mind" was used as the theme song for the movie The Saint, but the only
   true single to be released in the United States was the quirky
   "Electric Barbarella". It was the first single ever to be sold online,
   as a 99-cent Internet download. The video for this single, featuring a
   sexy robot purchased and played with by band members, had to be
   censored before airing on MTV, but there was little of the controversy
   that had surrounded "Girls On Film". "Barbarella" peaked at #52 in the
   U.S. in October of 1997.

   Although Medazzaland was released in the U.S. in October 1997, the
   album was never released in the UK. This was due in part to lagging UK
   interest in the band, but also in part to record label politics, some
   of which involved Duran Duran's determination to make "Electric
   Barbarella" available as an Internet download before releasing the
   single through normal channels – another attempt to stay out in front
   of changing technologies. "Barbarella" was later released in the UK as
   a single from the 1998 Greatest compilation album, and it peaked at #23
   on the UK chart in January of 1999. The title track is the only song
   featuring Nick Rhodes' voice in Duran Duran's history. One standout
   track from Medazzaland, the haunting "Michael (You've Got A Lot To
   Answer For)," was originally written by Le Bon for his friend Michael
   Hutchence, lead singer of INXS, who was suffering through major turmoil
   in his private life at the time. The emotive vocal (which was recorded
   in one take) ends with the line "I know that you're going to call...if
   you need me." Hutchence apparently never made that call, and was found
   dead of an apparent (and possibly accidental) suicide less than a month
   after the album was released.

   The group played a set at The Princess Diana Tribute Concert on June
   27, 1998 by special request of her family.

   Duran Duran parted ways with Capitol/EMI in 1999, and the label has
   since used Duran's back catalogue to release their own compilations of
   remixes and rare vinyl-only b-sides.

   The band then signed a short-lived deal with Disney's Hollywood Records
   – it was to be a three-album contract, but lasted only through the
   poorly received 2000 album Pop Trash. The album itself was considered
   by some to be a strange one in the band's catalogue, slow-paced and
   heavy-sounding. It took its title from the track "Pop Trash Movie",
   which was originally written by Rhodes and Cuccurullo for a Blondie
   reunion album. Though the album included the standout cuts "Playing
   with Uranium" and "Last Day on Earth," Rhodes' intricate production and
   Cuccurullo's songwriting and experimentation with guitar sounds and
   time signatures were not enough to hook the public, and the album did
   not do well on the charts. The dreamy single "Someone Else, Not Me"
   lasted barely two weeks on the radio. This single was noted for having
   the first video produced entirely with Macromedia Flash animation.

   While supporting Medazzaland and Pop Trash, Duran Duran toured with
   late bassist Wes Wehmiller, who died of thyroid cancer in 2004, and
   drummer Joe Travers. These last Cuccurullo-era albums have a notably
   darker tone than the rest of the Duran Duran catalogue.

2001–2005: A highly anticipated reunion

   In 2000, John Taylor approached Le Bon and Rhodes with the notion of
   reforming the classic line-up. They agreed, and after completing the
   Pop Trash tour informed Cuccurullo by letter that he was fired. In May
   2001, Cuccurullo announced on his website that he was leaving Duran
   Duran to work again with his 1980s band Missing Persons. This
   announcement was confirmed the next day by the Duran Duran's website,
   followed a day later by the news that John, Roger, and Andy Taylor had
   rejoined. To fulfill obligations, Cuccurullo played three Duran Duran
   concerts in Japan in August 2001, ending his tenure in the band.

   Throughout 2001, 2002 and 2003, the band worked on writing new
   material. They initially rented a house in St. Tropez where sound
   engineer Mark Tinley built a recording studio for them to work on their
   first serious writing session. They then returned to London to do some
   self-financed work with various producers (including old friend Nile
   Rodgers), while searching for a new record deal. A record label willing
   to gamble on the band's comeback originally proved difficult to find,
   so Duran Duran took to the road to prove the drawing power of the
   reunited band. The response of the fans and the media was more than
   anyone expected.

   The band played a handful of 25th-anniversary dates in July 2003.
   Tickets sold out for each show within minutes, and celebrities turned
   out en masse for reunion shows at small venues the band had played on
   their first trip to America – The Roxy Theatre in Los Angeles and The
   Ritz (now Webster Hall) in New York City. Then in August, the band were
   billed to appear as presenters at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards, but
   were instead surprised with a Lifetime Achievement Award. They were
   also given a Lifetime Achievement award by Q Magazine in October, and
   the equivalent Outstanding Contribution award at the Brit Awards in
   February 2004.

   The pace picked up as a sold-out 25-city American tour was followed by
   several stadium dates in Australia and New Zealand with Robbie
   Williams. The band also played a full concert at a private Tailgate
   Party at Super Bowl XXXVIII; their performance of "The Wild Boys" was
   broadcast to millions during the pregame show. A remix of the new track
   " (Reach Up For The) Sunrise" was released on the Queer Eye for the
   Straight Guy TV show soundtrack in February, while the Queer Eye guys
   (the modern "Fab Five") hailed Duran Duran as "the first metrosexuals".

   Duran Duran then celebrated their homecoming to the UK with fourteen
   stadium dates in April 2004, including five sold-out nights at Wembley
   Arena. The British press, traditionally hostile to the band, gave the
   shows some very warm reviews. Duran Duran brought along up and coming
   acts like Scissor Sisters and Goldfrapp as opening acts for this tour.
   The last two shows were filmed, and the DVD Duran Duran: Live From
   London was released in November; it was the first real concert film for
   the band (Arena was more of a concept video and As The Lights Go Down
   was a promo video only).

   Finally, with more than thirty-five songs completed, the band signed a
   four-album contract with Epic Records in June, and completed the new
   album, now entitled Astronaut, with producer Don Gilmore, recorded at
   Sphere Studios in London. The album was released in October 2004 and
   entered the UK charts at Number 3 and the U.S. charts at Number 17; the
   first single was "(Reach Up For The) Sunrise". In November, " Sunrise"
   reached Number 1 on the Billboard U.S Dance Chart, and also peaked at
   number 5 on the UK singles chart; it was Duran Duran's highest charting
   UK single since "A View To a Kill" was released in 1985. A second
   single, "What Happens Tomorrow", debuted at #11 in February.

   After a world tour covering the beginning of the year, on 2 July 2005,
   Duran Duran headlined the massive Live 8 concert, Rome, in the Circus
   Maximus. They were one of the bands at Live 8 who had also played at
   Bob Geldof's Live Aid concert twenty years before.

2006 and beyond: A new album

   In early 2006, Duran Duran covered John Lennon's song "Instant Karma"
   for the Make Some Noise campaign sponsored by Amnesty International to
   commemorate the 25th anniversary of Lennon's death. The band played the
   song live on a few tour dates. Their version featured a heavier rhythm
   section than Lennon's version, especially the bass. Early 2006 saw the
   band performing at two high profile events - the Nobel Prize Awards and
   the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin, Italy. They also appeared at the
   Sporting Summer Festival in Monte Carlo.

   The band has been working on their next album, as yet untitled, with
   producer Michael Patterson in London. Roger Taylor said the new record
   will be a homage to the band's roots – more direct and returning to
   their "new wave" origins. The new album and its first single are
   tentatively expected to be released early in 2007.

   In Spring of 2006, John Taylor and Nick Rhodes released a compilation
   album titled Only After Dark, which featured their favourite tracks
   from those that they listened to and played as deejays at the Rum
   Runner in the late 1970s and early 1980s.

   In August of 2006, the band announced that it would be making virtual
   appearances and performing a virtual concert within the multi-player
   shared world Second Life.

   In September, the band began meeting in New York City with Justin
   Timberlake and producer Timbaland on a potential collaboration. They
   were soon reported to have completed three songs with the producer, one
   of which is a duet with Timberlake. Most recently, the band has also
   been rumored to be working with Timberlake's ex, Britney Spears to help
   her launch her long awaited comeback. Spears is said to be a longtime
   fan of the band, as they are of her.

   On October 25th, 2006, Andy Taylor again parted ways with Duran Duran,
   leaving the band for the second time. In an official announcement on
   their website, Duran Duran pledged to continue with four members,
   stating that an "unworkable gulf" had developed between them and Andy
   and that "we can no longer effectively function together". For the
   remaining 2006 tour dates, Dominic Brown would stand in as guitarist.
   Dominic Brown had previously stood in as Duran Duran's guitarist during
   Andy's absence in November and December 2004 and again for three weeks
   on their American arena tour during March 2005.

Influence

   Although they began their career as "a group of art school,
   experimental, post punk rockers", the band's quick rise to stardom,
   polished good looks, and embrace of the teen press almost guaranteed
   disfavor from music critics. The British music press was particularly
   venomous. During the 1980s, Duran Duran were considered the
   quintessential manufactured, throw-away pop group – not too different
   from other boy bands created by behind-the-scenes managers ( Menudo,
   New Kids On The Block, *NSYNC). Unlike those bands, Duran Duran wrote
   and played their own music long before there were managers or record
   companies involved, and were driven by their own ambition. As Moby said
   of the band in his website diary in 2003: "... they were cursed by what
   we can call the ' bee gees' curse. which is: 'write amazing songs, sell
   tons of records, and consequently incur the wrath or disinterest of the
   rock obsessed critical establishment'."

   Over the years, the band's contemporaries ( The Bangles, Elton John,
   Kylie Minogue, Paul Young, Smashing Pumpkins) have lauded their efforts
   towards pure, uplifting pop which rebelled against the cynicism of punk
   and the doom and gloom of Margaret Thatcher-era Britain. Le Bon himself
   described the group as "the band to dance to when the bomb drops".

   Successors like Barenaked Ladies, Beck, Jonathan Davis (of Korn), the
   Deftones, Garbage, Gwen Stefani and No Doubt, Gavin Rossdale and Bush,
   Wyclef Jean, Marilyn Manson, Fred Durst of Limp Bizkit, The Orb,
   OutKast, Coldplay and Pink have all cited Duran Duran as a key band in
   their formative years. Numerous bands have covered their music on
   record and in concert. Mark McGrath of Sugar Ray has called himself one
   of their biggest fans, and he said he "wanted to be John Taylor". Sugar
   Ray's videos have included affectionate parodies of Duran videos.
   Britney Spears and Justin Timberlake have also praised the band.

   The newest crop of performers to name Duran Duran as influences include
   Dido, Franz Ferdinand, Panic! at the Disco, Lostprophets (who took
   their name from the title of a Duran Duran bootleg tape), Goldfrapp,
   The Killers ("Nick Rhodes is an absolute hero of mine - their records
   still sound fresh, which is no mean feat as far as synths are
   concerned." -- Brandon Flowers), the Scissor Sisters ("the reason we
   got into music") and The Strokes.

   The band's music has also been used by several hip hop artists, most
   notably Notorious B.I.G., who appropriately sampled Duran Duran's 1986
   single "Notorious".

   Nick Rhodes has directly lent his production techniques to the bands
   Kajagoogoo (White Feathers) and The Dandy Warhols ( Welcome to the
   Monkey House).

Video pioneers

   Their songs were cheerful, hook-laden pop that fared well on the radio,
   but what many remember best about Duran Duran are their iconic music
   videos. Though many of the videos were tongue-in-cheek, the band never
   quite escaped the glamorous and decadent jet set image their early
   videos projected.

   The MTV cable channel and the band were launched at about the same
   time, and each had a hand in propelling the other to greater heights.
   MTV needed showcase videos with charismatic performers. Les Garland,
   senior executive vice president at MTV, said "I remember our director
   of talent and artist relations came running in and said, “You have got
   to see this video that’s come in.” Duran Duran were getting zero radio
   airplay at the time, and MTV wanted to try to break new music. “Hungry
   Like the Wolf” was the greatest video I’d ever seen.". The band's video
   work was influential – even revolutionary – to the medium in several
   ways. First, Duran Duran filmed in exotic locales like Sri Lanka and
   Antigua, creating memorable images that were radically different from
   the then-common low budget "band-playing-on-a-stage" videos. Second,
   rather than simply playing their instruments, the band participated in
   mini-storylines (often taking inspiration from contemporary movies –
   "Hungry Like The Wolf" riffs on Raiders of the Lost Ark, "The Wild
   Boys" on The Road Warrior, etc.). Videos were obviously headed in this
   direction in any case, but Duran Duran did it with a style that drew
   attention from commentators and spawned a wealth of imitators. The
   quick editing style, graphic design (e.g. wipes, diagonal
   split-screens), and surreal-to-nonsensical image inserts were also to
   become video staples. Finally, Duran Duran was among the first bands to
   have their videos shot with a professional movie camera on 35 mm film,
   rather than on videotape with cheaper video cameras. Thus the group's
   work compared very favourably to many of the quickly- and
   inexpensively-shot videos which had been MTV staples until then. Duran
   Duran changed the views of record companies on what a video could
   accomplish, and the views of other bands on how much effort should be
   invested in them.

   In a legal context, the band's videos were trailblazers as well. They
   were the first band in the UK music business to claim the production
   costs as write-offs against earnings of their record sales, which the
   IRS initially disallowed. The IRS decision was contested by the band
   and its management up to a precedential High Court case, which Duran
   Duran won. This opened up a whole industry of music video production,
   and the synergy of mass marketing and pop music, which most likely
   would not have happened.

   In return, MTV gave Duran Duran critical access to American radio
   markets that were unfriendly to British music, New Wave music, or
   "anything with synthesizers". Because MTV was not available everywhere
   in the United States at first, it was easy to see a pattern: where MTV
   went, listener demand for Duran Duran, Tears For Fears, Def Leppard and
   other European bands with interesting videos went through the roof.

   Duran Duran's sun-drenched videos "Rio", "Hungry Like The Wolf" and
   "Save A Prayer", and the surreal "Is There Something I Should Know?"
   were filmed by future movie director Russell Mulcahy, who made a total
   of eleven videos for the band. Duran Duran has always sought out
   innovative directors and techniques, even in their later years when MTV
   gave them little airplay. In addition to Mulcahy, they have had videos
   filmed by influential photographers Dean Chamberlain and Ellen von
   Unwerth, Chinese director Chen Kaige, Julien Temple, and the Polish
   Brothers, among others.

   Not everyone admired their videos, however. Morrissey, lead singer of
   The Smiths and a fan of Duran Duran's music, quipped in a 1984 issue of
   Smash Hits that "a drunken goat could direct a Duran Duran video."

   In 1984, Duran Duran brought video technology into their live stadium
   shows: they were the first major act to provide video screens
   (pioneered at the US Festival) above the stage to bring the action
   closer to the audience in the rear. They have also recorded concerts
   using IMAX and 360 degree panoramic "immersive video" cameras, with
   10.2 channel audio. In 2000, they experimented with augmented reality
   technology, which allowed three-dimensional computer-generated images
   to appear on stage with the band.

   Duran Duran appeared on several century-end video countdowns: The MTV
   "100 Greatest Videos Ever Made" featured "Hungry Like The Wolf" at #11
   and "Girls On Film" at #68, and the "VH1: 100 Greatest Videos" listed
   "Hungry" at #31 and "Rio" at #60. MTV also named "Hungry" the fifteenth
   of their most-played videos of all time.

   The band has released several video compilations, starting with the
   self-titled "video album" Duran Duran, for which they won a Grammy
   award, up to the 2004 two-disc DVD release Greatest, which included
   alternate versions of several popular videos as Easter eggs. In
   addition to Greatest, the documentary Sing Blue Silver, and the concert
   film Arena (both from 1984) were released on DVD in 2004. Live in
   London, a concert video from one of their sold-out 2004 reunion shows
   at Wembley Stadium, was released in the fall of 2005.

   Other video collections, concert films, and documentaries are still
   available only on videotape, and Duran Duran has not yet released a
   comprehensive collection which includes every music video the band has
   made. Duran Duran has also said that a huge amount of unreleased
   concert and documentary footage has been filmed over the years, and
   they hope it can be edited and released in some form over the next few
   years.

   Some of today's hottest pop stars are most definately taking cues from
   Duran Duran's blueprint for music video making. Just look at Snoop
   Dogg's video for "Signs" with Justin Timberlake. Though that particular
   video was shot on the Las Vegas Strip and not on an exotic beach, the
   formula that Duran Duran had used is most definately present; beautiful
   women, sharp dressed men and pleanty of bling. Gwen Stefani's videos
   for "What You Waiting For?", "Rich Girl" and "Cool" all have a sort of
   whimsical feel to them, much like Duran Duran's did in the '80s. Duran
   Duran's influence can probably be best seen in videos by sexy singer
   and one of Duran's biggest fans, Britney Spears. Maybe not so much in
   her earlier videos, but most definately in later videos, which feature
   tons of special effects and alot of sexuality, mostly courtesy of
   Britney herself. Many note "Toxic" for having the heaviest Duran Duran
   influence, both musically and visually. Britney playing a sexy and
   seductive airline stewardess was most definately borrowed from Duran
   Duran's method for video making. Even singer, Simon LeBon, has called
   "Toxic" one of "Duran Duran's favorite music videos.

Discography

     * Duran Duran ( 15 June 1981) #3 UK, #10 U.S.
     * Rio ( 10 May 1982) #2 UK, #6 U.S.
     * Seven and the Ragged Tiger ( 21 November 1983) #1 UK, #8 U.S.
     * Arena (1984, live) #6 UK, #4 U.S.
     * Notorious ( 18 November 1986) #16 UK, #12 U.S.
     * Big Thing ( 18 October 1988) #15 UK, #24 U.S.
     * Liberty ( 20 August 1990) #8 UK, #46 U.S.
     * Duran Duran AKA The Wedding Album ( 23 February 1993) #4 UK, #7
       U.S.
     * Thank You ( 27 March 1995, covers) #12 UK, #19 U.S.
     * Medazzaland ( 14 October 1997) #58 U.S.
     * Pop Trash ( 19 June 2000) #53 UK, #135 U.S.
     * Astronaut ( 11 October 2004) #3 UK, #17 U.S.

   This is a short list of original albums only; for a more detailed list,
   see the Duran Duran discography.

Line Ups

   Period Personnel Recordings (Label)
   1981-1985
     * Simon Le Bon - Vocals
     * Nick Rhodes - Keyboards
     * Andy Taylor - Guitar
     * John Taylor - Bass Guitar
     * Roger Taylor - Drums

     * Duran Duran (EMI/Capitol)
     * Rio (EMI/Capitol Records)
     * Seven and the Ragged Tiger (EMI/Capitol)
     * Arena (EMI/Capitol)

   1986-1988
     * Simon Le Bon - Vocals
     * Nick Rhodes - Keyboards
     * John Taylor - Bass Guitar

     * Notorious (EMI/Capitol)
     * Big Thing (EMI/Capitol)

   1989-1991
     * Simon Le Bon - Vocals
     * Nick Rhodes - Keyboards
     * John Taylor - Bass Guitar
     * Warren Cuccurullo - Guitar
     * Sterling Campbell - Drums

     * Liberty (EMI/Capitol)

   1991-1997
     * Simon Le Bon - Vocals
     * Nick Rhodes - Keyboards
     * John Taylor - Bass Guitar
     * Warren Cuccurullo - Guitar

     * Duran Duran (EMI/Capitol)
     * Thank You (EMI/Capitol)

   1997-2001
     * Simon Le Bon - Vocals
     * Nick Rhodes - Keyboards
     * Warren Cuccurullo - Guitar

     * Medazzaland (EMI/Capitol)
     * Pop Trash (Disney/Hollywood)

   2001- 25 October 2006
     * Simon Le Bon - Vocals
     * Nick Rhodes - Keyboards
     * Andy Taylor - Guitar
     * John Taylor - Bass Guitar
     * Roger Taylor - Drums

     * Astronaut (Sony/Epic)

   26 October 2006 - Present
     * Simon Le Bon - Vocals
     * Nick Rhodes - Keyboards
     * John Taylor - Bass Guitar
     * Roger Taylor - Drums

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duran_Duran"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
