   #copyright

Eagle Scout (Boy Scouts of America)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Community organisations

                         Eagle Scout
         Medal            Badge
                    (youth)                Square knot
                                     (adult)
   Eagle Scout medal
                    Eagle Scout badge
                                     Eagle Scout square knot
                         Eagle Palms
        Bronze            Gold               Silver

   An Eagle Scout is a Scout with the highest rank attainable in the Boy
   Scouts of America (BSA). Since its introduction in 1911, the Eagle
   Scout rank has been earned by over one and a half million or about five
   percent of all Boy Scouts.

   Requirements include earning a number of merit badges and demonstration
   of Scout Spirit, service and leadership. This includes an extensive
   service project that the Scout plans, organizes, leads, and manages.
   Eagle Scouts are presented with a medal and badge that visibly
   recognizes the accomplishments of the Scout. Additional recognition can
   be earned through Eagle Palms, awarded for completing additional
   tenure, leadership and merit badge requirements.

History

   The BSA's highest award was originally conceived of as the Wolf Scout,
   as shown in the June 1911 Official Handbook for Boys. The August 1911
   handbook subsequently changed this to Eagle Scout. The medal
   illustrated in the handbook was a profile of an eagle in flight, but
   was changed to the current design before any were issued. In their
   original conceptions, Life Scout, Star Scout (Life preceded Star until
   1924) and Eagle Scout were not ranks, but part of the merit badge
   system that recognized Scouts who had earned a number of merit badges.
   Eagle Scout was awarded to any First Class Scout who had earned
   twenty-one merit badges. Consequently, eight of the first nine Eagle
   Scouts did not earn the ranks of Life or Star.

   The first Eagle Scout medal was awarded in 1912 to Arthur Rose Eldred,
   a seventeen-year-old member of Troop 1 in Rockville Centre, Long
   Island, New York. Eldred was notified that he was to be awarded the
   rank of Eagle Scout in a letter from Chief Scout Executive James West,
   dated August 21, 1912. The design of the Eagle Scout medal had not been
   finalized by the National Council, so the medal was not awarded until
   Labor Day, September 2, 1912. Eldred was the first of three generations
   of Eagle Scouts; his son and grandson hold the rank as well. Since
   then, more than one and a half million Scouts have earned the rank. In
   1982, thirteen-year-old Alexander Holsinger, of Normal, Illinois, was
   recognized as the one millionth Eagle Scout. In 2002, 49,328 Scouts
   attained the Eagle Scout rank, more than in any other year. A total of
   1,835,410 Scouts have earned Eagle Scout as of the end of 2005.

Requirements

   Eagle Scout is earned by serving as a Life Scout for at least six
   months, earning a minimum of twenty-one merit badges, demonstrating
   Scout Spirit and serving as a leader in the troop, team, crew or ship.
   He must plan, develop and give leadership to a service project— the
   Eagle Project —that demonstrates both leadership and a commitment to
   duty. He must then take part in a Scoutmaster conference before his
   eighteenth birthday. After all of the requirements are met, he must
   complete an Eagle Scout Board of Review. Venturers and Sea Scouts who
   attained First Class as a Boy Scout or Varsity Scout in a troop or team
   may continue working toward the Star, Life and Eagle Scout ranks, as
   well as Eagle Palms, while registered as a Venturer or Sea Scout up to
   their eighteenth birthday. Scouts with a permanent mental or physical
   disability may use alternate requirements based on the Scout's
   abilities, if approved by the council. Eagle Scout may be awarded
   posthumously, if and only if all requirements are completed before
   death. A board of review may be held and the award presented to the
   Scout's family.

Eagle Scout service project

   The completion of the Eagle Scout service project requires significant
   effort on the part of the Eagle Scout candidate. The project must
   benefit an organization other than the BSA. It cannot be performed for
   an individual or a business, cannot solely be a fund-raising project
   and cannot be commercial in nature. A written plan using the Eagle
   Scout Leadership Service Project Workbook must be submitted and
   pre-approved by the benefiting organization, the unit leader, the unit
   committee and a district representative, before the work of the project
   can begin. When the project is complete, the Scout will update the
   workbook and determine the methods in which he gave leadership, ways in
   which the plan may have had to change, and the benefits of the project.
   Examples of Eagle Scout service projects include: constructing park
   benches, running a Vial of Life drive, constructing a playground,
   building bat houses for a local park, refurbishing a room at a church
   or school, resetting stones at a cemetery, planting grass for erosion
   control, or organizing a dinner and collecting necessities for the
   homeless.

Development

   Eagle Scout requirements have evolved since the awards' original
   conception. A requirement to earn 11 specific merit badges was added in
   1914, which underwent minor changes in 1915. The Life–Star order was
   reversed in 1924, apparently because the five-pointed star of the Star
   Scout insignia could be associated with the five merit badges required
   to earn the rank immediately following First Class Scout. In 1927,
   Eagle Scout began the transition from being a super merit badge to a
   rank. As a result, the first requirements for tenure were created,
   Scouts were now required to be an active First Class Scout for one year
   and the initial requirements for what became the service project
   appeared with a requirement to show satisfactory service. The number of
   required merit badges increased to 12. In 1936, the ranks of Star and
   Life became mandatory, and the number of required merit badges jumped
   to 13. It was at this time Eagle Scout became a full-fledged rank. In
   1952, age limits were set so that adults could no longer earn Eagle
   Scout and the service project requirement was slightly expanded to "do
   your best to help in your home, school, church or synagogue, and
   community". In 1958 the number of required merit badges increased again
   to 16 of the 21 total merit badges needed to obtain Eagle, along with
   the first requirements for service and leadership. In 1965, the
   requirements for the service project and specific troop leadership were
   defined, and the number of required merit badges returned to 11. The
   Eagle Scout candidate was now required to plan, develop, and carry out
   a leadership service project. Minor changes were made to the required
   merit badge list in 1970. In 1972, the Improved Scouting Program
   increased the number of merit badges needed to obtain Eagle to 24,
   while reducing the list of required merit badges to ten, eliminating
   badges that required swimming and outdoor skills and adding the
   requirement to show leadership during the service project. Until 1972,
   Explorers who were also registered as assistant Scoutmasters in a troop
   could work on Eagle until age 21. In 1978, the total number of merit
   badges needed for Eagle was dropped back to the original 21; required
   merit badges now numbered 11 and would eventually change to the current
   12 in 1999.

Palms

   While Palms are not themselves ranks, they represent recognition for a
   young man who has stayed active in his unit. A Palm is awarded when the
   Scout has demonstrated Scout Spirit, demonstrated leadership ability,
   earned five additional merit badges beyond those required for Eagle or
   last Palm and has taken part in a Scoutmaster conference. Sucessive
   palms may be earned by repeating these requirements.

   The insignia is a small metallic palm frond pin that is worn on the
   ribbon of the Eagle Scout medal or the Eagle Scout square knot. The
   Palms are awarded in three colors: bronze, representing five merit
   badges; gold, representing ten merit badges and silver for fifteen
   merit badges. For awards beyond fifteen merit badges, Palms are awarded
   in combinations. The order of bronze, gold and silver follows heraldic
   traditions borrowed from the US military.

Insignia and apparel

   The Eagle Scout badge is worn on the left shirt pocket by youth. Adult
   leaders who earned the rank of Eagle Scout as a youth may wear the
   square knot on their uniform above the left shirt pocket. The Eagle
   Scout medal is worn on the left shirt pocket flap of the uniform. It is
   usually only worn on ceremonial occasions, and can be worn by both
   youth and adults while wearing the badge or square knot.

   The Eagle Presentation Kit currently includes the Eagle Scout medal,
   the Eagle Scout badge, a mother's pin, a father's pin and an Eagle
   Mentor pin. A variety of caps, belt buckles, pins, tie tacs,
   neckerchiefs and slides, bolo ties, rings, jackets, t-shirts and other
   items are also available for purchase. Official Eagle Scout insignia is
   controlled by BSA Supply and requires verification by presentation of
   the Eagle Scout card or other means before it can be purchased.

History of the medal

   Eagle Scout medals
   1912-1915
   Foley 1916-1920
   Dieges&Clust 1920-1978
   Robbins 1968-1999
   Stange 1999-present
   CFJ
   Eagle Scout medal, T.H. Foley (long knot)
   Eagle Scout medal, Dieges & Clust
   Eagle Scout medal, Robbins Type 5
   Eagle Scout medal, Stange Type 5
   Eagle Scout medal, Custom Fine Jewelry Type 3

   Since its introduction in 1912, the Eagle Scout medal has undergone
   several design changes. Changes to the scroll and to the eagle pendant
   were not always introduced at the same time, therefore types may be
   somewhat mixed. Scouting historians classify these medals by the five
   different manufacturers and then by 17 sub-types, with several minor
   variations. Many variations were caused by quality control issues,
   mainly due to wear of the dies. During the 1920s and 1930s, some
   military schools allowed wear of the Eagle Scout medal on the uniform.
   In order to conform to the medal system, the scroll was removed and the
   ribbon affixed to a standard ribbon bar.

   T. H. Foley made the first medals from 1912 until they went out of
   business in 1915. The eagle pendant and scroll were of die struck
   bronze washed with silver. Early versions were made with a short double
   knot and later ones with a long double knot. Only 338 of these medals
   were issued, making them the rarest version. Some Foleys were issued
   with a drop ribbon – the ribbon was extended, folded through the bar
   mount on the scroll, then dropped behind the eagle pendant and cut in a
   swallowtail. The first drop ribbon style medal was issued to the fourth
   Eagle Scout – Sidney Clapp, a 31-year-old scoutmaster from West Shokan,
   NY.

   Dieges & Clust took over production from 1916 to 1920, basing the
   design on the Foley. These medals also have the distinguishing
   extra-long double knot hanging from the scroll. There were 1,640 of
   this variety awarded, all made of sterling silver.
              Eagle medal
   w/o BSA
               1955-1969
   Eagle Scout medal, Robbins Type 4

   In 1920, the Robbins Company took over production. They produced six
   distinct variants, all in sterling silver. The first 1920 version was
   similar to the Dieges & Clust design, but with smaller scroll lettering
   and the standard single knot. The second 1920 version has more
   distinctive feathering on the back side of the pendant. The engraving
   on the 1930 version is especially fine. In 1933, BSA was removed from
   all of the Eagle Scout insignia, including the medal. In 1955 the
   obverse of the eagle pendant was made flat so it could be engraved. BSA
   was added back to the front and the obverse was returned to a full
   feathered design in 1969.

   Medal manufacturer Stange was authorized to begin producing Eagle Scout
   medals in 1968, at the same time as Robbins – they created six distinct
   models. The 1968 version is very similar to the Robbins version, but
   the bend in the scroll is much flatter, more like a sideways V as
   compared to the S on the Robbins scroll. The BSA was added back to the
   front, and the obverse was returned to a full feathered design in 1970.
   A major re-design of the eagle pendant was made in 1974 to match the
   new NESA logo. In 1978, Robbins ceased manufacturing Eagle Scout medals
   and Stange switched to the last design used by Robbins. Minor
   differences are in the white edged ribbon and the sterling silver
   markings. In 1980 the price of silver rose dramatically and the medal
   was changed to silver plated, die struck copper. Very early versions
   were silver plated and oxidized, thus the scroll and pendant are black.
   Later versions were oxidized, buffed and lacquered to maintain the
   silver shine. Sterling silver medals were produced from the same dies
   and from this time were only available on special order. 1993 saw a
   number of changes. The clasp on the scroll was changed from the pin on
   type to a double clutch back. The pendant was changed to pewter and
   enlarged due to the lighter rigidity of the material.

   Custom Fine Jewelry (CFJ) took over the contract in 1999 and has
   currently created three types. The initial versions were based on the
   last Stange version but with the ribbon attached through the clutch
   pins instead of a bar (this led to damage of the ribbon). A small
   number of sterling silver versions were made, marked with 925. In later
   1999, the dies were laser engraved, giving a much sharper look and the
   ribbon mount was improved to eliminate wear. The knot went from wire to
   a molded version in 2001.

   In the fall of 2006, the national supply division of the National Eagle
   Scout Association began to issue replica Eagle Scout medals for
   specific wear on U.S. military dress uniforms. These medals are
   designed to be proportionate to other military medals: they contain the
   same pendant, but no scroll, and a ribbon that has been made thinner
   and more rectangular in shape.

History of the badge

   Eagle Scout Patches
   1924-1932 1933-1955 1956-1972 1972-1974
   Eagle Scout Badge, Type 1
   Eagle Scout Badge, Type 2
   Eagle Scout Badge, Type 3
   Eagle Scout Badge, Type 4
   1975-1985 1985-1986 1986-1989 1989-present
   Eagle Scout Badge, Type 5
   Eagle Scout Badge, Type 6
   Eagle Scout Badge, Type 7
   Eagle Scout Badge, Type 8

   Since its introduction, the Eagle Scout badge has undergone several
   design changes. Scouting historians have classified these badges into
   eight different designs, with several minor variations within each
   type.

   The cloth badge was introduced for Eagle Scouts attending the 1924
   World Scout Jamboree in Denmark with a design based on the hat pin. The
   Eagle Scout merit badge was sewn onto the top of the merit badge sash
   that was also created for the jamboree. The design is quite similar to
   the current badge. As with other patches of the time, the rank badges
   were embroidered onto rolls of fabric and then cut. The edges were
   folded under before sewing the badge onto the sash. Initially produced
   on tan cloth, it was later switched to olive for the Boy Scout uniform
   and white and blue to match the various Sea Scout uniforms. In 1933,
   BSA was removed from all of the Eagle Scout insignia, including the
   badge. The text Eagle Scout and Boy Scouts of America was added to the
   border, and Be Prepared was added to the scroll. These badges were
   embroidered with silk thread, switching to cotton in 1940.

   The production of badges and emblems changed in 1956 to the rolled edge
   now in current use, thus eliminating the various colored backgrounds.
   The outside oval was then changed to red. With the introduction of the
   Improved Scouting Program in 1972 came an overhaul of many badges and
   emblems. The new stylized Eagle Scout badge with no text was a major
   change that proved to be unpopular. It appears that some Scouters
   commissioned reproductions of the 1956 badge for issue in place of the
   1972 version. In 1975 the badge design partially reverted to the 1956
   version. 1985 saw a reversion to the 1956 issue with some minor
   differences. The border and the eagle were done in silver Mylar and the
   Be Prepared text was in blue. In 1986 the Mylar eagle changed back to
   silver thread due to problems with wearing and the scroll and text were
   enlarged. The Mylar border was changed to silver thread in 1989. Later
   variants increased the thread count of the white stripe to eliminate
   the visible background.

Other insignia

   Eagle Scout hat pins were produced from 1921 through 1958 with several
   variations. Eagle Scouts who earned additional merit badges were
   recognized using Eagle Palms, introduced in 1927. Adults who had earned
   Eagle Scout began to be recognized in 1934 with a red, white and blue
   ribbon bar. In 1940, a small eagle pin was added to the bar. Ribbon
   bars were replaced by embroidered square knot patches in 1947. Over the
   years, the knot was produced with various background colors to match
   the different uniforms. Although the Venturing and Sea Scout programs
   use different uniform shirts, the current knot is available only with a
   tan background that matches the Boy Scout uniform. When the
   Distinguished Eagle Scout Award (DESA) was created in 1969, a gold
   eagle device was introduced for wear on the Eagle Scout square knot.
   The Law Enforcement Explorer program introduced a ribbon bar for Eagle
   Scouts in 1995. The Eagle Scout Mentor pin was introduced in early 2004
   in a gold-plated version, and was changed in early 2006 to pewter to
   match the mother and father pins.

Certificates

   From 1912 to 1943 the BSA issued an index sized card with information
   about the Eagle Scout. Wallet sized cards were introduced in 1944 and
   switched to a plastic credit card style in 1991. Certificates suitable
   for framing were first issued in 1944. As the honorary president of the
   BSA, the signature of the President of the United States appeared on
   all certificates except from late 1999 to 2002. Replacement of a card
   or certificate can be made by application through the National Eagle
   Scout Association (NESA).

After becoming an Eagle Scout

   About five percent of Scouts attain the Eagle Scout rank, and some have
   become notable for accomplishments later in their lives and careers.
   Eagle Scouts are expected to set an example for other Scouts and to
   become the leaders in life that they have demonstrated themselves to be
   in Scouting. As such, they are disproportionately represented in the
   military, service academy graduates, major professions, business and
   politics. Eagle Scouts who enlist in the U.S. military may receive
   advanced rank in recognition of their achievements.

   Eagle Scout is the only Boy Scout rank that is recognized on an adult
   Scouter's uniform, worn as an adult recognition of the youth award as a
   red, white, and blue square knot. The title of "Eagle Scout" is held
   for life, thus giving rise to the phrase "Once an Eagle, always an
   Eagle". Eagle Scouts can join the National Eagle Scout Association
   (NESA), which serves as a fellowship and communications board for all
   Eagle Scouts.

   NESA directly administers several Eagle Scout scholarships. The
   American Legion, the National Jewish Committee on Scouting and the Sons
   of the American Revolution offer scholarships directed toward Eagle
   Scouts. Many colleges and universities, local businesses, churches and
   other organizations may offer similar scholarships.

   The Distinguished Eagle Scout Award (DESA) is a special award, given
   only to Eagle Scouts, for distinguished service in their profession and
   the community for a period of at least 25 years after earning the Eagle
   Scout rank. Only about 1 in 1000 of all Eagle Scouts have been honored
   with this prestigious award.

Similar awards

   Eagle Scout is the highest award in the BSA program. The highest awards
   in other BSA programs are: the Cub Scout Arrow of Light, the Varsity
   Scout Denali Award, the Venturing Silver Award and the Sea Scouts
   Quartermaster Award. However, the BSA considers the Eagle rank to be
   the highest achievement in Boy Scouting.

   The Eagle Scout award can also be compared to the Gold Award of the
   Girl Scouts of the USA. Since the Boy Scouts of the Philippines is an
   outgrowth of the BSA, Eagle Scout is also their highest award.

   In the Scouting associations of many other English-speaking countries,
   the equivalent is the Queen's Scout or King's Scout Award. Other
   worldwide Scouting groups have the Baden-Powell Award ( Baden-Powell
   Scouts), Chief Scout's Award ( Scouts Canada), Chief Scout's Award (
   Scouting Ireland), Crown Scout ( Guidisme et Scoutisme en Belgique),
   King Scout ( The National Scout Organization of Thailand), Pramuka
   Garuda ( Indonesian Scouting), President's Scout ( The Singapore Scout
   Association), Springbok Scout Award ( South African Scout Association),
   Fuji Scout ( Scout Association of Japan), Tiger Scout ( Korea Scout
   Association) and Rashtrapathi Scout (Bharat Scouts and Guides, India).
   Other youth organizations have similar awards, such as the Gold Medal
   of Achievement ( Royal Rangers).

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eagle_Scout_%28Boy_Scouts_of_America%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
