   #copyright

Eagle

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

        How to read a taxoboxEagle
   White-tailed Eagle in flight
   White-tailed Eagle in flight
         Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Aves
   Order:   Falconiformes
   Family:  Accipitridae

                                   Genera

   Several, see below.

   Eagles are large birds of prey which inhabit mainly the Old World, with
   only two species (the Bald Eagle and Golden Eagle) found in North
   America north of Mexico, a few in Middle and South America, two (the
   White-bellied Sea Eagle and Wedge-tailed Eagle) in Australia, and the
   Philippine Eagle in the Philippines. They are members of the bird order
   Falconiformes (or Accipitriformes, according to alternative
   classification schemes), family Accipitridae, and belong to several
   genera which are not necessarily closely related to each other in any
   sort of way.

   Eagles are differentiated from other broad-winged birds of prey mainly
   by their larger size, more powerful build, and heavier head and bill.
   Even the smallest eagles, like the Booted Eagle (which is comparable in
   size to a Common Buzzard or Red-tailed Hawk), have relatively longer
   and more evenly broad wings, and more direct, faster flight. Most
   eagles are larger than any other raptors apart from the vultures.

   Like all birds of prey, eagles have very large powerful hooked beaks
   for tearing flesh from their prey, strong legs, and powerful talons.
   They also have extremely keen eyesight to enable them to spot potential
   prey from a very long distance. This keen eyesight is primarily
   contributed by their extremely large pupils which cause minimal
   diffraction (scattering) of the incoming light.

   In Britain before 1678, Eagle referred specifically to the Golden
   Eagle, the other native species, the White-tailed Eagle, being known as
   the Erne. The modern name "Golden Eagle" for Aquila chrysaetos was
   introduced by the naturalist John Ray.

   Eagles build their nests, which are sometimes called eyries (mostly in
   Australia) in tall trees or on high cliffs. Many species lay two eggs,
   but the older, larger chick frequently kills its younger sibling once
   it has hatched.

   Eagles are sometimes used in falconry. They appear prominently in myth
   and literature. In the Old World, such references are commonly to the
   Golden Eagle (or possibly closely related species found in warm
   climates).
   Thermographic image of an eagle, thermoregulating using its wings
   Thermographic image of an eagle, thermoregulating using its wings

   '

Taxonomy

   Major new research into eagle taxonomy suggests that the important
   genera Aquila and Hieraaetus are not composed of nearest relatives, and
   it is likely that a reclassification of these genera will soon take
   place, with some species being moved to Lophaetus or Ictinaetus.
     * Bonelli's Eagle, the Booted Eagle and the Little Eagle have been
       moved from Hieraaetus to Aquila.
     * Either the Greater Spotted Eagle and Lesser Spotted Eagle should
       move from Aquila to join the Long-crested Eagle in Lophaetus, or,
       perhaps better, all three of these species should move to
       Ictinaetus with the Black Eagle.
     * The Steppe Eagle and Tawny Eagle, once thought to be conspecific,
       are not even each other's nearest relatives.

Species

   FAMILY ACCIPITRIDAE
     * Subfamily Buteoninae - hawks (buzzards), true eagles and sea-eagles
          + Genus Geranoaetus
               o Black-chested Buzzard-eagle, Geranoaetus melanoleucus
          + Genus Harpyhaliaetus
               o Crowned Solitary Eagle, Harpyhaliaetus coronatus
               o Solitary Eagle, H. solitarius
          + Genus Morphnus
               o Crested Eagle, Morphnus guianensis

   The powerful Harpy Eagle can easily grab a monkey weighing 5 kg and fly
   away with it.
   The powerful Harpy Eagle can easily grab a monkey weighing 5 kg and fly
   away with it.
     *
          + Genus Harpia
               o Harpy Eagle, Harpia harpyja
          + Genus Pithecophaga
               o Philippine Eagle, Pithecophaga jefferyi
          + Genus Harpyopsis
               o New Guinea Eagle, Harpyopsis novaeguineae
          + Genus Oroaetus
               o Black-and-chestnut Eagle, Oroaetus isidori
          + Genus Spizastur
               o Black-and-white Hawk-eagle, Spizastur melanoleucus
          + Genus Spizaetus
               o Cassin's Hawk-eagle, Spizaetus africanus
               o Changeable Hawk-eagle, S. cirrhatus
               o Mountain Hawk-eagle, S. nipalensis
               o Blyth's Hawk-eagle, S. alboniger
               o Javan Hawk-eagle, S. bartelsi
               o Sulawesi Hawk-eagle, S. lanceolatus
               o Philippine Hawk-eagle, S. philippensis
               o Wallace's Hawk-eagle, S. nanus
               o Black Hawk-eagle, S. tyrannus
               o Ornate Hawk-eagle, S. ornatus
          + Genus Lophaetus
               o Long-crested Eagle, Lophaetus occipitalis - possibly
                 belongs in Ictinaetus
          + Genus Stephanoaetus
               o Crowned Hawk-eagle, Stephanoaetus coronatus
          + Genus Polemaetus
               o Martial Eagle, Polemaetus bellicosus
          + Genus Hieraaetus
               o Ayres' Hawk-eagle, Hieraaetus ayresii
               o Rufous-bellied Eagle, H. kienerii
               o African Hawk Eagle, H. spilogaster

   A Steppe Eagle in Lahore Zoo.
   A Steppe Eagle in Lahore Zoo.
     *
          + Genus Harpagornis (extinct)
               o Haast's Eagle, Harpagornis moorei - possibly belongs in
                 either Hieraaetus or Aquila
          + Genus Aquila
               o Bonelli's Eagle, Aquila fasciata - formerly Hieraaetus
                 fasciatus
               o Booted Eagle, A. pennata - formerly Hieraaetus pennatus
               o Little Eagle, A. morphnoides
               o Golden Eagle, A. chrysaetos
               o Eastern Imperial Eagle, A. heliaca
               o Spanish Imperial Eagle A. adalberti
               o Steppe Eagle, A. nipalensis
               o Tawny Eagle, A. rapax
               o Greater Spotted Eagle, A. clanga - to be moved to
                 Lophaetus or Ictinaetus
               o Lesser Spotted Eagle, A. pomarina - to be moved to
                 Lophaetus or Ictinaetus
               o Indian Spotted Eagle, A. hastata - to be moved to
                 Lophaetus or Ictinaetus
               o Verreaux's Eagle, A. verreauxii
               o Gurney's Eagle, A. gurneyi
               o Wahlberg's Eagle, A. wahlbergi
               o Wedge-tailed Eagle, A. audax
          + Genus Ictinaetus
               o Black Eagle, Ictinaetus malayensis
          + Genus Haliaeetus
               o White-tailed Eagle, Haliaeetus albicilla
               o Bald Eagle, H. leucocephalus
               o Steller's Sea-eagle, H. pelagicus
               o African Fish-eagle, H. vocifer
               o White-bellied Sea-eagle, H. leucogaster
               o Sanford's Fish-eagle, H. sanfordi
               o Madagascar Fish-eagle, H. vociferoides
               o Pallas' Sea-eagle, H. leucoryphus
          + Genus Ichthyophaga
               o Lesser Fish-eagle, Ichthyophaga humilis
               o Grey-headed Fish-eagle, I. ichthyaetus

   A dark individual of the Short-toed Eagle.
   A dark individual of the Short-toed Eagle.
     * Subfamily Circaetinae: snake-eagles
          + Genus Terathopius
               o Bateleur, Terathopius ecaudatus
          + Genus Circaetus
               o Short-toed Eagle, Circaetus gallicus
               o Black-chested Snake-eagle, C. pectoralis
               o Brown Snake-eagle, C. cinereus
               o Fasciated Snake-eagle, C. fasciolatus
               o Banded Snake-eagle, C. cinerascens
          + Genus Spilornis
               o Crested Serpent-eagle, Spilornis cheela
               o Nicobar Serpent-eagle, S. minimus
               o Mountain Serpent-eagle,S. kinabaluensis
               o Sulawesi Serpent-eagle, S. rufipectus
               o Philippine Serpent-eagle, S. holospilus
               o Andaman Serpent-eagle, S. elgini
          + Genus Eutriorchis
               o Madagascar Serpent-eagle, Eutriorchis astur

Eagles in culture

The word

   The modern English name of the bird is derived from the Latin term
   aquila by way of the French Aigle. The Latin aquila may derive from the
   word aquilus, meaning dark-colored, swarthy, or blackish, as a
   description of the eagle's plumage; or from Aquilo, the Latin version
   of Greek Boreas, or north wind.

   Old English used the term Earn, related to Scandinavia's Ørn. The
   etymology of this word is related to Greek ornos, literally meaning
   "bird". In this sense, the Eagle is the Bird with a capital B.

Eagles as national symbols

   Coat of arms of the town of Berg en Terblijt in the Netherlands, an
   example of the prolific use of the eagle in European heraldry.
   Coat of arms of the town of Berg en Terblijt in the Netherlands, an
   example of the prolific use of the eagle in European heraldry.
   Napoleonic eagle
   Napoleonic eagle

   The eagle has been used by many nations as a national symbol, depicting
   power, beauty and independence.
     * Arabic world. Many Arabic states and organisations use eagles as
       symbols, e.g. the PLO.
     * Czech Republic. The Czech Republic integrates three historical
       parts: Bohemia (with a double-tailed lion in the emblem), Moravia
       and Silesia (both with female eagles in their emblems -
       red-and-white chequered and black).
     * Hellenistic Egypt. The Ptolemaic rulers of Egypt used it as their
       seal.
     * First French Empire. Napoleon Bonaparte used the Roman Golden Eagle
       as the symbol of his new French empire.
     * Ghana. Two eagles are part of the coat of arms of Ghana.
     * Mexico. The bird on the Mexican coat of arms and flag is a Golden
       Eagle.
     * Moldova. An eagle is part of the coat of arms and flag of Moldova.
     * Nigeria, The eagle is part of the Coat of Arms of Nigeria and the
       Seal of the President of Nigeria.
     * The Philippines. The endangered Philippine Eagle is the national
       bird of the Philippines.
     * Poland. A white eagle on a red field is the coat of arms of Poland.
     * Romania. The eagle is also part of the coat of arms of Romania
     * Rome. The Romans used it on the standards of their armies. From
       this derives:
          + The late Byzantine Empire) chose a two-headed golden eagle as
            its symbol. It is popularly that one head symbolised ancient
            Rome, and the other head symbolised "new Rome" at
            Constantinople. From this derives:
               o Albania. The two-headed eagle is the emblem of
                 "Shqipëria" or Land of the Eagles, which is known in
                 English as Albania (see The Tale of the Eagle for the
                 legendary origin of the name)
               o Russian Empire. After the fall of Constantinople, the
                 Russian Empire took the two-headed eagle as its own
                 symbol.
          + Charlemagne and Holy Roman Empire. After his crowning as the
            new Roman Emperor, Charlemagne adopted the ancient Roman eagle
            as his own symbol. The Holy Roman Empire born of his kingdom
            took the eagle, but the Habsburgs replaced the golden eagle by
            an imperial eagle. From this derives:
               o Austria. The Austrian Empire had a two-headed eagle as
                 its symbol. After the abolition of Austria-Hungary,
                 Austria took as its symbol a one-headed eagle in the
                 modern coat of arms of Austria.
               o Germany and Prussia. Prussia, and later Germany have used
                 a black eagle as their national symbol.
               o Spain. The "Catholic Kings", Isabella and Ferdinand, used
                 the Golden Eagle as a part of the royal shield. The eagle
                 was on the Spanish shield until 1978.
     * Serbia/Montenegro. The Two-headed eagle is the emblem of Serbia,
       Montenegro, and Serbia and Montenegro.
     * The Seljuk Turks and Ottoman Turks used a double-headed eagle as
       coats-of-arms.
     * USA. The United States has adopted the North American Bald Eagle as
       its national emblem. Although the Golden Eagle is found in North
       America, U.S. references to an unspecified "eagle" are often to the
       Bald Eagle, especially in an emblematic context. However, a few
       U.S. coins have shown the Golden Eagle (recognizable because the
       feathering on its legs extends to the base of the toes); this error
       is the cause of the expression "illegal eagle".

Eagles as religious objects

   In Jewish tradition the eagle is a symbol of greatness, and leaders
   such as the medieval sage Maimonides and the Lubavitcher Rebbe, Rabbi
   Menachem M. Schneerson, have been referred to by their peers and
   students as "The Great Eagle". The Torah compares God Himself to an
   eagle in Deuteronomy, 32.11-12. "As an eagle awakens its nest, hovering
   over its fledglings, it spreads its wings, taking them and carrying
   them on its pinions. [So] the Lord guided them [the Israelites] alone,
   and there was no alien deity with Him."

   Eagle lecterns are very common in Christian churches and cathedrals.
   The eagle is the symbol used to depict John the Apostle, whose writing
   most clearly witnesses the light and divinity of Christ. In art, John,
   as the presumed author of the Gospel, is often depicted with an eagle,
   which symbolizes the height he rose in the first chapter of his gospel.
   See Names of John.

   The eagle is a sacred bird in some cultures and the feathers of the
   eagle are central to many religious and spiritual customs, especially
   amongst Native Americans in the United States and First Nations in
   Canada, as well as among many of the peoples of Meso-America. Some
   Native American peoples revere eagles as sacred religious objects and
   the feathers and parts of Bald and Golden Eagles are often compared to
   the Bible and crucifix. Eagle feathers are often used in various
   ceremonies and are used to honour noteworthy achievements and qualities
   such as exceptional leadership and bravery. In the cultures of the
   Northwest Coast, Eagle is also a supernatural being and also the
   ancestor and reatures in the heraldic crests of important clans known
   as totem poles.

   Despite modern and historic Native American practices of giving eagle
   feathers to non-indigenous people and also members of other tribes who
   have been deemed worthy, current United States eagle feather law
   stipulates that only individuals of certifiable Native American
   ancestry enrolled in a federally recognized tribe are legally
   authorized to obtain eagle feathers for religious or spiritual use. In
   Canada, poaching of eagle feathers for the booming U.S. market has
   sometimes resulted in the arrests of First Nations person for the
   crime.

Eagles as organizational symbols

     * Australia. The Royal Australian Air Force uses the Wedge-tailed
       Eagle on its coat of arms. There is also an Australian Rules
       Football club called the West Coast Eagles, and an NRL Football
       club called the Manly Sea Eagles.
     * Greece. The double-headed eagle is the emblem of the Greek sport
       clubs AEK (black eagle with open wings on yellow background) and
       PAOK (black eagle with closed wings on white background, as a
       symbol of mourning). It is a symbol of the clubs' origins, since
       both clubs were founded by Greeks who fled to Greece from
       Constantinople in 1922-23.
     * Italy. The Roman eagle is the symbol of the Roman sports club S.S.
       Lazio.
     * Nigeria. The Nigeria Football Association, the nation's football
       (soccer) governing body, has a green eagle perched on a football as
       its organisational symbol and logo. The Nigerian national football
       team is known as the 'Super Eagles', the under-20 youth team as the
       'Flying Eagles', and the under-17 national side as the 'Golden
       Eaglets'. They all have an eagle as their symbol.
     * Portugal. Eagle is the symbol of the Portuguese football team Sport
       Lisboa e Benfica.
     * Turkey. Black Eagles is used for the Turkish sports club Beşiktaş
       J.K..
     * USA. Eagles are a common motif for American companies and
       organizations seeking association with a national identity. A few
       examples are the United States Postal Service, the Constitution
       Party, and the name of the highest rank in the Boy Scouts of
       America. Among the sports teams whose mascot is an eagle, the only
       one in a major league of a major sport (by U.S. standards) is the
       Philadelphia Eagles (American football).
     * China. Flying eagle is the logo of Shatin Pui Ying College in Hong
       Kong. In this school, an award is called Flying Eagle Award with
       the eagle badges as prizes.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eagle"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
