   #copyright

East Timor

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Asian Countries;
Countries

                Repúblika Demokrátika Timor Lorosa'e
   República Democrática de Timor-Leste
   Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste

   Flag of East Timor Coat of arms of East Timor
   Flag               Coat of arms
   Motto: Honra, Pátria e Povo
   (Portuguese: "Honour, Homeland and People")
   Anthem: Pátria
   Location of East Timor
   Capital
   (and largest city)    Dili
                         8°34′S 125°34′E
    Official languages   Tetum and Portuguese^1
   Government            Republic
    - President          Xanana Gusmão
    - Prime Minister     José Ramos Horta
       Independence      from Portugal^2
    - Declared           November 28, 1975
    - Recognized         May 20, 2002
                                 Area
    - Total              14,609 km² ( 158th)
                         5,743 sq mi
    - Water (%)          negligible
                              Population
    - July 2005 estimate 947,000 ( 155th)
    - Density            64/km² ( 132nd)
                         166/sq mi
        GDP ( PPP)       2005 estimate
    - Total              $370 million ( not ranked)
    - Per capita         $400 ( not ranked)
        HDI  (2003)      0.513 (medium) ( 140th)
         Currency        U.S. Dollar^3 ( USD)
         Time zone       ( UTC+9)
       Internet TLD      .tl ( .tp is being phased out)
       Calling code      +670
   ^1 English and Indonesian are recognised by the Constitution as "
   working languages".
   ^2 Indonesia invaded East Timor on December 7, 1975 and left in 1999.
   ^3 Additionally, centavo coins are also used.

   East Timor, officially the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, is a
   country in Southeast Asia comprising the eastern half of the island of
   Timor, the nearby islands of Atauro and Jaco, and Oecussi-Ambeno, an
   exclave on the northwestern side of the island, within Indonesian West
   Timor. The small country of 5,376 square miles (14,609 square
   kilometres) is located about 400 miles (640 km) northwest of Darwin,
   Australia.

   The name Timor derives from timor or timur, the word for 'east' in
   Malay as well as Indonesian, which became Timor in Portuguese. The
   Portuguese name Timor-Leste ( pron. IPA: [ti'moɾ 'lɛʃtɨ]) and the Tetum
   name Timor Lorosa'e are sometimes used in English. Lorosa'e (the word
   for 'east' in Tetum) literally means 'rising sun'.

   East Timor has the lowest per capita GDP (Purchasing Power Parity
   adjusted) in the world, of only $400 (which corresponds to the 192nd
   position). However, on its Human Development Index, or HDI, it is in
   142nd place among the world's nations, which corresponds to medium
   human development.

   Colonized by Portugal in the 16th century, East Timor was known as
   Portuguese Timor for centuries. It was invaded by Indonesia in 1975,
   which occupied it until 1999. Following the UN-sponsored act of
   self-determination that year, Indonesia relinquished control of the
   territory, which achieved full independence on May 20, 2002, becoming
   the first new country of the 21st century. With the Philippines, East
   Timor is one of only two predominantly Roman Catholic countries in
   Asia, and the only Portuguese-speaking sovereign state in Asia.

History

Early history

   Timor was originally populated as part of the human migrations that
   have shaped Australasia more generally. It is believed that survivors
   from at least three waves of migration still live in the country. The
   first were related to the principal indigenous groups of New Guinea and
   Australia, and arrived before 40,000 years ago. Around 3000 BC, a
   second migration brought Austronesians, who later continued eastward
   and colonized Island Oceania, and are possibly associated with the
   development of agriculture on Timor. Finally, proto- Malays arrived
   from south China and north Indochina. The mountainous nature of the
   country meant that these groups could remain separate, and explains why
   there is so much linguistic diversity in East Timor today.

   Timor was incorporated into Chinese and Indian trading networks of the
   14th Century as an exporter of aromatic sandalwood, slaves, honey and
   wax. Early European explorers report that the island had a number of
   small chiefdoms or princedoms in the early 16th century. One of the
   most significant is the Wehale kingdom in central Timor, with its
   capital at Laran, West Timor, to which the Tetum, Bunaq and Kemak
   ethnic groups were aligned.

The Portuguese

   The Portuguese were the first Europeans to colonise South-East Asia
   when they arrived in the 16th century. They established outposts in
   Timor as well as in several of the surrounding islands. However, during
   the House of Habsburg's rule over Portugal, all the surrounding
   outposts were lost and eventually came under Dutch control by the mid
   17th century. The area became a colony in 1702 with the arrival of the
   first governor from Lisbon. In the 18th century, the Netherlands gained
   a foothold on the Western half of the island, and was formally given
   West Timor in 1859 through the Treaty of Lisbon. The definitive border
   was established by the Hague Treaty of 1916, and it remains the
   international boundary between the successor states East Timor and
   Indonesia.

   In late 1941 Portuguese Timor was briefly occupied by Dutch and
   Australian troops, who aimed to thwart the Japanese invasion of the
   island. The Portuguese Governor protested the invasion, and the Dutch
   forces returned to the Dutch side of the island. When the Japanese
   landed and drove the small Australian force out of Dili, the
   mountainous interior became the scene of a guerrilla campaign, known as
   the Battle of Timor, waged by Allied forces and Timorese volunteers
   against the Japanese. The struggle resulted in the deaths of between
   40,000 and 70,000 Timorese. Following the end of the war, Portuguese
   control was reinstated.

   The process of decolonisation in Portuguese Timor began in 1974,
   following the change of government in Portugal in the wake of the
   Carnation Revolution. Owing to political instability and more pressing
   concerns with decolonisation in Angola and Mozambique, Portugal
   effectively abandoned East Timor, which unilaterally declared itself
   independent on November 28, 1975. Nine days later, it was invaded and
   occupied by Indonesian forces before the declaration could be
   internationally recognised.

The Indonesians

   Indonesia alleged that the popular East Timorese FRETILIN party, which
   received some vocal support from the People's Republic of China, was
   communist. With the American cause in South Vietnam lost and fearing a
   Communist domino effect in Southeast Asia, the U.S., along with their
   ally Australia, supported the pro-Western Indonesian government's
   actions, despite Portugal being a founding member of NATO.

   An Indonesian invasion was launched over the western border on 7
   December 1975. The day before the invasion of Dili and subsequent
   annexation, U.S. President Gerald Ford and Secretary of State Henry
   Kissinger met President Suharto in Jakarta where Ford made it clear
   that "we will not press you on the issue." U.S. arms sales to Indonesia
   continued under subsequent U.S administrations including that of Bill
   Clinton, although it did eventually discontinue U.S. support of
   Suharto's regime. The territory was declared the 27th province of
   Indonesia in July 1976 as Timor Timur. Its nominal status in the UN
   remained that of a "non-self-governing territory under Portuguese
   administration."

   The East Timorese guerrilla force, Falintil, fought a campaign against
   the Indonesian forces from 1975 to 1999. Their casualties were
   relatively light compared to those they inflicted upon the Indonesian
   military.
   Demonstration for independence from Indonesia
   Enlarge
   Demonstration for independence from Indonesia

   Indonesian rule in East Timor was often marked by extreme violence and
   brutality, such as the Dili massacre and the Liquiçá Church Massacre.
   In addition, subsistence agriculture, food, and medical supplies were
   deliberately obstructed, resulting in heavy excess mortality. From 1975
   until 1993, attacks on civilian populations were only nominally
   reported in the Western press. Death tolls reported during the
   occupation varied from 60,000 to 200,000 . A detailed statistical
   report prepared for the Commission for Reception, Truth and
   Reconciliation in East Timor cited a lower range of 102,800
   conflict-related deaths in the period 1974-1999, namely, approximately
   18,600 killings and 84,200 'excess' deaths from hunger and illness.
   Since each data source used under-reports actual deaths, this is
   considered a minimum. Amnesty International estimated deaths at 200,000
   .

Independence

   Following a UN-sponsored agreement between Indonesia, Portugal and the
   US; as well as a surprise decision by the Indonesian President B. J.
   Habibie, on August 30, 1999, a United Nations-supervised popular
   referendum was held. The East Timorese voted for full independence from
   Indonesia, but violent clashes, instigated primarily by the Indonesian
   military (see Scorched Earth Operation) and aided by Timorese
   pro-Indonesia militias, led by Eurico Guiterres, broke out soon
   afterwards. A peacekeeping force ( INTERFET, led by Australia)
   intervened to restore order. Militias fled across the border into
   Indonesia, from which they attempted sporadic armed raids, particularly
   along the New Zealand Army-held southern half of the main border. As
   these raids were repelled and international moral opinion forced
   Indonesia to withdraw tacit support, the militias dispersed. INTERFET
   was replaced by a UN force of International Police, the mission became
   known as UNTAET, and the UNTAET Crime Scene Detachment was formed to
   investigate alleged atrocities. The result of these actions caused
   Osama Bin Laden to place a fatwa on Australia and Australian interests.

   Independence was recognised by Portugal after a visit of Xanana Gusmão
   to Lisbon to choose the date. They decided May 20, 2002, and East Timor
   joined the UN on September 27 of that year.

2006 crisis

   Unrest started in the country in April 2006 following the riots in
   Dili. A rally in support of 591 East Timorese soldiers, who were
   dismissed for deserting their barracks, turned into rioting where five
   people were killed and over 20,000 fled their homes. Fierce fighting
   between pro-government troops and disaffected Falintil troops broke out
   in May 2006 . While unclear, the motives behind the fighting appeared
   to be the distribution of oil funds and the poor organization of the
   Timorese army and police, including former Indonesian police and former
   Timorese rebels. Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri called the violence a
   "coup" and welcomed offers of foreign military assistance from several
   nations . By May 25, 2006, Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand, and
   Portugal sent troops to Timor, attempting to quell the violence .

   On June 21, 2006, President Xanana Gusmão formally requested Prime
   Minister Mari Alkatiri to step down. A majority of Fretlin party
   members had demanded the prime minister's resignation, accusing him of
   lying about distributing weapons to civilians . On June 26, 2006 Prime
   Minister Mari Alkatiri resigned stating, "I declare I am ready to
   resign my position as prime minister of the government... so as to
   avoid the resignation of His Excellency the President of the Republic"
   . José Ramos Horta was appointed as his successor on July 8, 2006.

Politics

   Government Palace in Dili
   Enlarge
   Government Palace in Dili

   The Head of state of the East Timorese republic is the president, who
   is elected by popular vote for a five-year term. Although the role is
   largely symbolic, the president does have veto power over certain types
   of legislation. Following elections, the president appoints the leader
   of the majority party or majority coalition as the prime minister. As
   head of government, the prime minister presides over the Council of
   State or cabinet.

   The unicameral Timorese parliament is the National Parliament or
   Parlamento Nacional, whose members are elected by popular vote to a
   five-year term. The number of seats can vary from a minimum of 52 to a
   maximum of 65, though it exceptionally has 88 members at present, due
   to this being its first term of office. The East Timorese constitution
   was modelled on that of Portugal. The country is still in the process
   of building its administration and governmental institutions.

Districts

   Map of the districts of East Timor, geographic order
   Enlarge
   Map of the districts of East Timor, geographic order

   East Timor is divided into 13 administrative districts:
    1. Lautém
    2. Baucau
    3. Viqueque
    4. Manatuto
    5. Dili
    6. Aileu
    7. Manufahi
    8. Liquiçá
    9. Ermera
   10. Ainaro
   11. Bobonaro
   12. Cova-Lima
   13. Oecussi-Ambeno

Geography

   Map of East Timor with cities
   Enlarge
   Map of East Timor with cities

   The island of Timor is part of the Malay archipelago and the largest
   and easternmost of the Lesser Sunda Islands. To the north of the
   mountainous island are the Ombai Strait and Wetar Strait, to the south
   the Timor Sea separates the island from Australia, while to the west
   lies the Indonesian Province of East Nusa Tenggara. The highest point
   of East Timor is Mount Ramelau (also known as Mount Tatamailau) at
   2,963 meters (9,721  ft).

   The local climate is tropical and generally hot and humid,
   characterised by distinct rainy and dry seasons. The capital, largest
   city and main port is Dili, and the second-largest city is the eastern
   town of Baucau. Dili has the only functioning international airport,
   though there are airstrips in Baucau and Oecusse used for domestic
   flights. Dili's airport runway is unable to accommodate large aircraft
   (upto a 737 or a C-130).

Economy

   Prior to and during colonisation, Timor was best known for its
   sandalwood. In late 1999, about 70% of the economic infrastructure of
   East Timor was laid waste by Indonesian troops and anti-independence
   militias, and 260,000 people fled westward. Over the next three years a
   massive international program led by the UN, manned by civilian
   advisers, 5,000 peacekeepers (8,000 at peak) and 1,300 police officers,
   led to substantial reconstruction in both urban and rural areas. By
   mid-2002, all but about 50,000 of the refugees had returned. This
   successful UN effort was headed by Special Representative of the
   Secretary-General, Sérgio Vieira de Mello, later to become High
   Commissioner for Human Rights, who was killed in Baghdad in August
   2003.

   The country faces great challenges in continuing to rebuild the
   infrastructure and strengthen the infant civil administration. One
   promising long-term project is the joint development with Australia of
   petroleum and natural gas resources in the waters southeast of Timor.

   The Portuguese colonial administration granted a concession to Oceanic
   Exploration Corporation, [NASDAQ: OCEX.OB] of Denver, Colorado, to
   develop the petroleum deposits of the Timor Sea. Before the concession
   could begin to be developed, the Indonesian invasion made it
   impossible.

   Timor Sea petroleum resources were divided between Indonesia and
   Australia by the Timor Gap Treaty in 1989 which established guidelines
   for joint exploitation of seabed resources in the area of the "gap"
   left by then-Portuguese Timor in the maritime boundary agreed between
   the two countries in 1972. Revenues from the "joint" area were to be
   divided 50%-50%. Woodside Petroleum and ConocoPhillips began
   development of some resources in the Timor Gap on behalf of the two
   governments in 1992.

   OCEX currently has a $30B lawsuit against ConocoPhillips pending in US
   District Court in New York. This lawsuit is the company's sole
   significant asset; to fund the suit, it relies on the deep pockets of
   its majority owner, James Neal Blue, who also owns General Atomics
   (maker of the RQ-1 Predator drone aircraft).

   East Timor inherited no permanent maritime boundaries when it attained
   independence, repudiating the Timor Gap Treaty as illegal. A
   provisional agreement (the Timor Sea Treaty, signed when East Timor
   became independent on 20 May 2002) defined a Joint Petroleum
   Development Area (JPDA), and awarded 90% of revenues from existing
   projects in that area to East Timor and 10% to Australia. The first
   significant new development in the JPDA since Timorese independence is
   the largest petroleum resource in the Timor Sea, the Greater Sunrise
   gas field. Its exploitation was the subject of separate agreements in
   2003 and 2005. Only 20% of the field lies within the JPDA and the rest
   in waters not subject to the treaty (though claimed by both countries).
   The initial, temporary agreement gave 82% of revenues to Australia and
   only 18% to East Timor.

   The Government of East Timor has sought to negotiate a definite
   boundary with Australia at the halfway line between the countries, in
   accordance with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
   The Government of Australia preferred to establish the boundary at the
   end of the wide Australian continental shelf, as agreed with Indonesia
   in 1972 and 1991. Normally a dispute such as this could be referred to
   the International Court of Justice or the International Tribunal for
   the Law of the Sea for an impartial decision, but the Australian
   government had withdrawn itself from these international jurisdictions
   (solely on matters relating to maritime boundaries) shortly before
   Timorese independence. Nevertheless, under public and diplomatic
   pressure the Australian government offered instead a last-minute
   concession on Greater Sunrise gas field royalties alone. On July 7,
   2005, an agreement was signed under which both countries would set
   aside the dispute over the maritime boundary, and East Timor would
   receive 50% of the revenues (estimated at A$26 billion or about US$20
   billion over the lifetime of the project ) from the Greater Sunrise
   development. Other developments within waters claimed by East Timor but
   outside the JPDA (Laminaria-Corallina and Buffalo) continue to be
   exploited unilaterally by Australia, however.

   East Timor also has a large and potentially lucrative coffee industry,
   which sells organic coffee to numerous Fair Trade retailers and on the
   open market.

   Currently three foreign banks have a branch in Dili: Australia's ANZ,
   Portugal's Banco Nacional Ultramarino, and Indonesia's Bank Mandiri.

   East Timor has the lowest per capita income in the world (USD 400 per
   annum) according to the CIA World Factbook, 2005.

Demographics

   The population of East Timor is about one million. It has grown
   considerably recently, because of a high birth rate, but also because
   of the return of refugees. The population is especially concentrated in
   the area around Dili.

   The Timorese are called Maubere collectively by some of their political
   organizations, an originally derogatory name turned into a name of
   pride by Fretilin. They consist of a number of distinct ethnic groups,
   most of whom are of mixed Malayo-Polynesian and Melanesian/ Papuan
   descent. The largest Malayo-Polynesian ethnic groups are the Tetun (or
   Tetum) (100,000), primarily in the north coast and around Dili; the
   Mambae (80,000), in the central mountains; the Tukudede (63,170), in
   the area around Maubara and Liquiçá; the Galoli (50,000), between the
   tribes of Mambae and Makasae; the Kemak (50,000) in north-central Timor
   island; and the Baikeno (20,000), in the area around Pante Macassar.
   The main tribes of predominantly Papuan origin include the Bunak
   (50,000), in the central interior of Timor island; the Fataluku
   (30,000), at the eastern tip of the island near Lospalos; and the
   Makasae, toward the eastern end of the island. In addition, like other
   former Portuguese colonies where interracial marriage was common, there
   is a smaller population of people of mixed Timorese and Portuguese
   origin, known in Portuguese as mestiços. The East Timorese mestiços
   best-known internationally are Xanana Gusmão, the resistance fighter
   and national hero, and now President of East Timor; and José Ramos
   Horta, the spokesman for the resistance movement in exile, and now
   Prime Minister of East Timor. Mário Viegas Carrascalão, Indonesia's
   appointed governor between 1987 and 1992, is also a mestiço. East Timor
   has also tiny Chinese and pure-blooded Portuguese minorities (most of
   them left the area after the Indonesian invasion).

Religion

   Upon independence, East Timor became one of only two predominantly
   Roman Catholic Christian countries in Asia (along with the
   Philippines). The population predominantly identifies as Roman Catholic
   (90%), though local animist traditions have a persistent and strong
   influence on the culture. Religious minorities include Muslims (5 per
   cent), including former Prime Minister of East Timor Mari Alkatiri, and
   Protestants (3 per cent). Smaller Hindu, Buddhist and traditional
   animist minorities make up the remainder. Church membership grew
   considerably under Indonesian rule, as Indonesia's state ideology
   Pancasila does not recognize traditional beliefs and requires all
   citizens to believe in God. Although the struggle was not about
   religion, as a deep-rooted local institution, the Church not only
   symbolized East Timor's distinction from predominantly Muslim
   Indonesia, but also played a significant role in the resistance
   movement, as personified by Bishop Carlos Filipe Ximenes Belo, the 1996
   Nobel Peace Prize laureate. (See also the Liquiçá Church Massacre). The
   constitution acknowledges the Church's role among the East Timorese
   people although it also stipulates a secular state that guarantees
   freedom of religion to everyone.

Languages

   East Timor's two official languages are Portuguese and Tetum, a local
   Austronesian language. The predominant form of Tetum, known as
   Tetun-Dili, grew out of the dialect favored by the colonizers at Dili,
   and thus has considerable Portuguese influence, but other dialects of
   Tetum are also widely used in the country, among which Tetun-Terik
   along the southwestern coast. Indonesian and English are defined as
   working languages under the Constitution in the Final and Transitional
   Provisions, without setting a final date. Although the country has only
   about 1 million inhabitants, another fifteen indigenous languages are
   spoken: Bekais, Bunak, Dawan, Fataluku, Galoli, Habun, Idalaka,
   Kawaimina, Kemak, Lovaia, Makalero, Makasai, Mambai, Tokodede and
   Wetarese.

   Under Indonesian rule, the use of Portuguese was banned, but it was
   used by the clandestine resistance, especially in communicating with
   the outside world. The language, along with Tetum, gained importance as
   a symbol of resistance and freedom and was adopted as one of the two
   official languages for this reason, and as a link to nations in other
   parts of the world. It is now being taught and promoted widely with the
   help of Brazil, Portugal and the Latin Union, although its prominence
   in official and public spheres has been met with some hostility from
   younger Indonesian-educated Timorese.

   According to the 2006 UN Development Report (using data from official
   census), under 5% of the Timorese population is literate in Portuguese.
   However, the validity of this report has been questioned by members of
   the Timorese National Institute of Linguistics , which maintains that
   Portuguese is spoken by up to 25% of Timorese, with the number of
   speakers more than doubling in the last five years. Along with other
   local languages, Tetum remains the most common means of communication
   between ordinary Timorese, while Indonesian is still widely used in the
   media. A large proportion of words in Tetum are derived from
   Portuguese, but it also shares many Malay-derived words with
   Indonesian. Many Indonesian words are still in common use in Tetum and
   other Timorese languages, particularly numbers.

   East Timor is a member of the Community of Portuguese Language
   Countries ( CPLP), also known as the Lusophone Commonwealth, and a
   member of the Latin Union. It is the only independent state in Asia
   with Portuguese as an official language, although this is also one of
   the official languages of China's Special Administrative Region of
   Macau.

Culture

   The culture of East Timor reflects numerous influences, including
   Portuguese, Roman Catholic, and Malay, on the indigenous Austronesian
   and Melanesian cultures of Timor. Legend has it that a giant crocodile
   was transformed into the island of Timor, or Crocodile Island, as it is
   often called. East Timorese culture is heavily influenced by
   Austronesian legends, although the Catholic influence is also strong.

   Illiteracy is still widespread, but there is a strong tradition of
   poetry. President Xanana Gusmão, for example, is a distinguished poet.
   As for architecture, some Portuguese-style buildings can be found,
   along with the traditional totem houses of the eastern region. These
   are known as uma lulik (sacred houses) in Tetum, and lee teinu (houses
   with legs) in Fataluku. Craftsmanship is also widespread, as is the
   weaving of traditional scarves or tais.

Sports

International Sports Associations

   East Timor has joined many international sport associations, including
   the International Olympic Committee (IOC). The IOC board has granted
   full recognition to the East Timorese Olympic Committee (COTL). The IOC
   had allowed a mainly symbolic four-member team to take part in the 2000
   Sydney Games under the Olympic flag as "Independent Olympic Athletes."
   The Federação de Timor-Leste de Atletismo has joined the International
   Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF). The Federação de Badminton
   de Timor-Leste joined the International Badminton Federation (IBF) in
   April 2003. The East Timor Cycling Federation has joined the Union
   Cycliste Internationale. The Confederação do Desporto de Timor Leste
   has joined the International Weightlifting Federation. East Timor is
   also a full member of the International Table-Tennis Federation (ITTF).
   In September 2005, East Timor's national football team joined FIFA.

Participation in international events

   East Timor has taken part in several sporting events. In the 22nd SEA
   Games, held in Vietnam in 2003, although the athletes came back with no
   medals, the athletes were happy to have the opportunity to perform and
   compete with the best athletes coming from Southeast Asian countries.
   The equipment of the athletes were lent to them by nations of Southeast
   Asia, such as Malaysia. In the 2003 ASEAN Paralympics Games, also held
   in Vietnam, a bronze medal was won by East Timor. In the Athens 2004
   Olympic Games, six athletes participated in three sports (athletics,
   weightlifting and boxing).

   On East Timor's performance in the 22nd SEA Games in 2003, karate coach
   Austo Aparício remarked, "This was an opportunity for our athletes to
   gain experience. East Timor is still young, so it has lots of financial
   problems." He also commented on his team's karate performance, "We are
   fairly good at karate and we can make sure that we win a medal in the
   Philippines, in 2005."

Public holidays

   East Timor now has public holidays that commemorate historic events in
   the liberation struggle, as well as those associated with Catholic
   Christianity.
       Date             Name                         Observations
   1 January    New Year's Day
   March/April  Good Friday
   March/April  Easter Sunday
   May 20       Independence Day      2002
   August 15    Assumption
   August 30    Consultation Day      Anniversary of the Popular Consultation in
                                      1999
   September 20 Liberation Day        by INTERFET in 1999
   November 1   All Saints' Day
   November 12  Santa Cruz Day        Anniversary of the Santa Cruz massacre in
                                      1991
   December 8   Immaculate Conception
   December 25  Christmas Day
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/East_Timor"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
