   #copyright

Edinburgh

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

                                 Edinburgh
   Gaelic:              Dùn Èideann
   Scots:               Embra, Embro or Edinburrie; poetic, Edina, Dunedin
                                  Location
   OS grid reference:   NT275735
                                 Statistics
   Population:          448,624 (2001 census)
                               Administration
   Council area:        City of Edinburgh
   Constituent country: Scotland
   Sovereign state:     United Kingdom
                                   Other
   Police force:        Lothian and Borders Police
   Lieutenancy area:    Edinburgh
   Former county:       City of Edinburgh
                         Post office and telephone
   Post town:           EDINBURGH
   Postal district:     EH1-EH13; EH14 (part); EH15-EH17
   Dialling code:       0131
                                  Politics
   UK Parliament:       Edinburgh South
                        Edinburgh West
                        Edinburgh South West
                        Edinburgh North and Leith
                        Edinburgh East
   Scottish Parliament: Edinburgh North and Leith
                        Edinburgh Central
                        Edinburgh East and Musselburgh
                        Edinburgh Pentlands
                        Edinburgh South
                        Edinburgh West
                        Lothians
   European Parliament: Scotland
                                 Scotland

   Edinburgh ( pronounced [ˈɛdɪnb(ə)rə]; Scottish Gaelic: Dùn Èideann) is
   the capital of Scotland and its second-largest city. It is situated on
   the east coast of the central lowlands, on the south shore of the Firth
   of Forth, on the North sea. It forms the City of Edinburgh council
   area; the city council area includes urban Edinburgh and a small rural
   area.

   It has been the capital of Scotland since 1437 and is the seat of the
   country's parliament. The city was one of the major centres of the
   enlightenment (see Scottish Enlightenment), led by the University of
   Edinburgh. The Old Town and New Town districts of Edinburgh were listed
   as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1995. In the census of 2001,
   Edinburgh had a total resident population of 448,624, making it the 7th
   largest city in the United Kingdom..

   Edinburgh is well-known for the annual Edinburgh Festival, actually a
   collection of independent festivals held annually over about four weeks
   from early August, when the population of the city doubles. The most
   famous of these events are the Edinburgh Fringe (the largest performing
   arts festival in the world), the Edinburgh International Festival, the
   Edinburgh Military Tattoo, and the Edinburgh International Film
   Festival. Other famous events are the Hogmanay street party and the
   Beltane celebrations.

   The city is one of Europe's major tourist destinations, attracting
   roughly 13 million visitors a year, and is the second most visited
   tourist destination in the United Kingdom, after London.

Etymology

   Panoramic view over Edinburgh from the Nelson monument
   Enlarge
   Panoramic view over Edinburgh from the Nelson monument

   The origin of the city's name is understood to come from the Brythonic
   Din Eidyn (Fort of Eidyn) from the time when it was a Gododdin
   hillfort.

   In the 1st century the Romans recorded the Votadini as a Brythonic
   tribe in the area, and about 600 the poem Y Gododdin, using the
   Brythonic form of that name, describes warriors feasting "in Eidin's
   great hall".

   After it was besieged by the Bernician Angles the name changed to
   Edin-burh, which some have argued derives from the Anglo-Saxon for
   "Edwin's fort", possibly derived from the 7th century king Edwin of
   Northumbria. However, since the name apparently predates King Edwin,
   this is highly unlikely. The burgh element means "fortress" or "group
   of buildings", i.e. a town or city and is akin to the German burg,
   Latin parcus, Greek pyrgos etc.

   The first evidence of the existence of the town as a separate entity
   from the fort lies in an early 12th century royal charter, generally
   thought to date from 1124, by King David I granting land to the Church
   of the Holy Rood of Edinburgh. This suggests that the town came into
   official existence between 1018 (when King Malcolm II secured the
   Lothians from the Northumbrians) and 1124.

   The charter refers to the recipients (in Latin) as "Ecclisie Sancte
   Crucis Edwinesburgensi". This could mean that those who drafted the
   charter believed Edwin to be the original source of the name and
   decided to derive the Latinisation from what they believed to be the
   ancient name. It could also mean that at some point in the preceding
   600 years the name had altered to include a w. If the latter scenario
   was the case then it was soon to change; by the 1170s King William the
   Lion was using the name "Edenesburch" in a charter (again in Latin)
   confirming the 1124 grant of David I.

   Documents from the 14th century show the name to have settled into its
   current form; although other spellings ("Edynburgh" and "Edynburghe")
   appear, these are simply spelling variants of the current name.

Other names

   Edinburgh is clearly labelled on this T and O map of the British isles
   from ca. 1300.
   Enlarge
   Edinburgh is clearly labelled on this T and O map of the British isles
   from ca. 1300.

   The city is affectionately nicknamed Auld Reekie, Scots for Old Smoky.
   This is because when the only fuels available were coal and wood, all
   the chimneys would spew lots of smoke into the air. Auld Reekie also
   referred to the less than sanitary living conditions that would lead to
   a strong odour covering the city. "Reek" means "smell" in lowland
   Scots.

   Some have called Edinburgh the Athens of the North for a variety of
   reasons. The earliest comparison between the two cities showed that
   they had a similar topography, with the Old Town of Edinburgh
   performing a similar role to the Athenian Acropolis. Both of them had
   flatter, fertile agricultural land sloping down to a port several miles
   away (respectively Leith and Piraeus). Although this arrangement is
   common in Southern Europe, it is rare in Northern Europe. The 18th
   century intellectual life, referred to as the Scottish Enlightenment,
   was a key influence in gaining the name. Such beacons as David Hume and
   Adam Smith shone during this period. Having lost most of its political
   importance after the Union, some hoped that Edinburgh could gain a
   similar civilising influence on London as Athens had on Rome. Also a
   contributing factor was the later neoclassical architecture,
   particularly that of William Henry Playfair, and the National Monument.
   Tom Stoppard's character Archie, of Jumpers, has said, facetiously,
   that the " Reykjavík of the South" would be more appropriate!

   Edinburgh has also been known as Dunedin, deriving from the Scottish
   Gaelic, Dùn Èideann. Dunedin, New Zealand, was originally called "New
   Edinburgh" and is still nicknamed the "Edinburgh of the South".

   The Scots poets Robert Burns and Robert Fergusson sometimes used the
   city's Latin name, Edina, in their work. Ben Johnson described it as
   Britaine's other eye, and Sir Walter Scott referred to the city as yon
   Empress of the North.

   Some Scots-speakers refer to the city informally as Edinburrie or
   Embra.

Geography

   Edinburgh Castle viewed from Princes StreetAlternate view
   Enlarge
   Edinburgh Castle viewed from Princes Street
   Alternate view
   Same castle viewed from the Royal Mile
   Enlarge
   Same castle viewed from the Royal Mile

   Some 320 million years ago, the cores of several volcanic vents in the
   area cooled and solidified to form tough basalt volcanic plugs, then,
   during the last ice age, glaciers eroded the area, exposing the plug as
   a rocky crag to the west, and leaving a tail of material swept to the
   east. At the same time, the glacier gouged out ground to each side,
   leaving the ravine of the Grassmarket and Cowgate to the south, and the
   swampy valley of the Nor Loch to the north. The resulting crag and tail
   landform now forms the Castle Rock, and the narrow steep sided ridge
   which the Royal Mile follows. The ridge declines in height over a mile,
   meeting general ground level at Holyrood.

   This formed a natural fortress, and recent excavations at the castle
   found material dating back to the Late Bronze Age, as long ago as 850
   BCE.

   The map co-ordinates of the centre of Edinburgh are approximately
   55°57′N 3°11′W.

Parts of the city

Areas of the centre

   Looking east across part of Princes Street Gardens
   Enlarge
   Looking east across part of Princes Street Gardens

   The historic centre of Edinburgh is divided into two by the broad green
   swath of Princes Street Gardens. To the south the view is dominated by
   Edinburgh Castle, perched atop the extinct volcanic crag, and the long
   sweep of the Old Town trailing after it along the ridge. To the north
   lies Princes Street and the New Town. The gardens were begun in 1816 on
   bogland which had once been the Nor Loch.

   To the immediate west of the castle lies the financial district,
   housing insurance and banking buildings. Probably the most noticeable
   building here is the circular sandstone building that is the Edinburgh
   International Conference Centre.

Old Town

   The Old Town has preserved its medieval plan and many Reformation-era
   buildings. One end is closed by the castle and the main artery, the
   Royal Mile, leads away from it; minor streets (called closes or wynds)
   lead downhill on either side of the main spine in a herringbone
   pattern. Large squares mark the location of markets or surround major
   public buildings such as St Giles Cathedral and the Law Courts. Other
   notable places of interest nearby include the Royal Museum of Scotland,
   Surgeons' Hall, the University of Edinburgh, and numerous underground
   streets and vaults, relics of previous phases of construction. The
   street layout, typical of the old quarters of many northern European
   cities, is made especially picturesque in Edinburgh, where the castle
   perches on top of a rocky crag, the remnants of a dormant volcano, and
   the main street runs down the crest of a ridge from it.
   The Royal Mile in the Old Town during the Edinburgh Festival.
   Enlarge
   The Royal Mile in the Old Town during the Edinburgh Festival.

   Due to the space restrictions imposed by the narrowness of the "tail"
   the Old Town became home to some of the earliest "high rise"
   residential buildings. Multi-storey dwellings were the norm from the
   1500s onwards.

New Town

   The New Town was an 18th century solution to the problem of an
   increasingly crowded Old Town. The city had remained incredibly
   compact, confined to the ridge running down from the castle. In 1766 a
   competition to design the New Town was won by James Craig, a
   22-year-old architect. The plan that was built created a rigid, ordered
   grid, which fitted well with enlightenment ideas of rationality. The
   principal street was to be George Street, which follows the natural
   ridge to the north of the Old Town. Either side of it are the other
   main streets of Princes Street and Queen Street. Princes Street has
   since become the main shopping street in Edinburgh, and few Georgian
   buildings survive on it. Linking these streets were a series of
   perpendicular streets. At the east and west ends are St. Andrew's
   Square and Charlotte Square respectively. The latter was designed by
   Robert Adam and is often considered one of the finest Georgian squares
   in the world. Bute House, the official residence of the First Minister
   of Scotland, is on the north side of Charlotte Square.

   Sitting in the glen between the Old and New Towns was the Nor' Loch,
   which had been both the city's water supply and place for dumping
   sewage. By the 1820s it was drained. Some plans show that a canal was
   intended, but the Princes Street Gardens were created instead. Excess
   soil from the construction of the buildings was dumped into the loch,
   creating what is now The Mound. In the mid-19th century the National
   Gallery of Scotland and Royal Scottish Academy Building were built on
   The Mound, and tunnels to Waverley Station driven through it.

   The New Town was so successful that it was extended greatly. The grid
   pattern was not maintained, but rather a more picturesque layout was
   created. Today the New Town is considered by many to be one of the
   finest examples of Georgian architecture and planning in the world.

Leith

   Leith is the port of Edinburgh. It still retains a separate identity
   from Edinburgh, and it was a matter of great resentment when, in 1920,
   the burgh of Leith was merged into the county of Edinburgh. Even today
   the parliamentary seat is known as 'Edinburgh North and Leith'. With
   the redevelopment of Leith, Edinburgh has gained the business of a
   number of cruise liner companies who now provide cruises to Norway,
   Sweden, Denmark, Germany and the Netherlands. Leith also boasts the
   Royal Yacht Britannia, berthed behind the Ocean Terminal shopping
   centre.

   See also: Granton, Newhaven

Viewpoints

   View of Edinburgh from the Scott Monument on Princes Street, showing
   Waverley Station in the foreground and Arthur's Seat beyond.
   Enlarge
   View of Edinburgh from the Scott Monument on Princes Street, showing
   Waverley Station in the foreground and Arthur's Seat beyond.

   The varied terrain of the city includes several summits which command
   sweeping views over Edinburgh.

   To the southeast of central Edinburgh stands the eminence known as
   Arthur's Seat, overlooking Holyroodhouse and the Old Town beside it.
   The crag is a collection of side vents of the main volcano on which
   Edinburgh is built. The volcano slipped and tipped sideways, leaving
   these vents as the highest points for miles around. Arthur's Seat is
   now part of Holyrood Park, originally owned by the monarch and part of
   the grounds of the Palace of Holyroodhouse. It contains the United
   Kingdom's largest concentration of geological SSSIs, as well as
   providing the people of Edinburgh with spectacular views of and from
   Arthur's Seat and somewhere to relax after a long day in the city.

   To the northeast, overlooking the New Town, is Calton Hill. It is
   topped by an assortment of buildings and monuments: two observatories,
   Nelson's Monument (a tower dedicated to Admiral Horatio Nelson), the
   old Royal High School (once almost the home of a devolved Scottish
   Assembly), and the unfinished National Monument, which is modelled on
   the Parthenon from the Athenian Acropolis and is nicknamed "Edinburgh's
   Disgrace". The nickname of the city, "Athens of the North", also hails
   partly from this monument. Calton Hill plays host to the Beltane Fire
   Festival on May 1.

   The Royal Observatory rests on Blackford Hill, the third and
   Southernmost viewpoint of the city.

Climate

   Panoramic view of Edinburgh from the top of Arthur's Seat.
   Enlarge
   Panoramic view of Edinburgh from the top of Arthur's Seat.

   Like much of the rest of Scotland, Edinburgh has a temperate maritime
   climate, which is relatively mild despite its northerly latitude.
   Winters are especially mild given that Moscow and Labrador in
   Newfoundland lie on the same latitude, with daytime temperatures rarely
   falling below freezing, or 0C (32F). Summer temperatures are
   comparatively cool, with daily upper maxima rarely exceeding 23C (73F).
   The proximity of the city to the sea mitigates any large variations in
   temperature or extremes of climate. Given Edinburgh's position between
   the coast and hills it is renowned as a windy city, with the prevailing
   wind direction coming from the south-west which is associated with
   warm, unstable air from the Gulf Stream that gives rise to rainfall.
   Winds from an easterly direction are usually drier but colder. Rainfall
   is distributed fairly evenly throughout the year. Vigorous Atlantic
   depressions - sometimes called European windstorms can affect the city
   between October and March.

   CAPTION: Climate Table

   Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Year
   Mean daily maximum temperature ( °C) 6.2 6.5 8.7 11.1 14.2 17.3 18.8
   18.5 16.2 13.2 8.1 6.9 12.1
   Mean daily maximum temperature ( °F) 43.2 43.7 47.7 52.0 57.6 63.1 65.8
   65.3 61.2 55.8 46.6 44.4 53.8
   Mean daily minimum temperature ( °C) 0.3 0.0 1.5 3.1 5.7 8.7 10.3 10.2
   8.4 5.9 2.1 0.9 4.8
   Mean daily minimum temperature ( °F) 32.5 32.0 34.7 37.6 42.3 47.7 50.5
   50.4 47.1 42.6 35.8 33.6 40.6
   Mean total rainfall ( mm) 57 42 51 41 51 51 57 65 67 65 63 58 668
   Mean total rainfall ( in) 22.4 16.5 20.1 16.1 20.1 20.1 22.4 25.6 26.4
   25.6 24.8 22.8 263
   Mean number of rain days 17.2 13.6 16.2 14.0 14.4 13.3 13.1 15.2 16.5
   16.7 16.3 16.3 182.8
   Source: World Meterological Organization

Culture

Festivals

   View up George IV Bridge
   Enlarge
   View up George IV Bridge

   Culturally, Edinburgh is best known for the Edinburgh Festival,
   although this is in fact a series of separate events, which run from
   the end of July until early September each year. The longest
   established festival is the Edinburgh International Festival, which
   first ran in 1947. The International Festival centres on a programme of
   high-profile theatre productions and classical music performances,
   featuring international directors, conductors, theatre companies and
   orchestras.

   The International Festival has since been taken over in both size and
   popularity by the Edinburgh Fringe. What began as a programme of
   marginal acts has become the largest arts festival in the world, with
   1867 different shows being staged in 2006, in 261 venues. Comedy is now
   one of the mainstays of the Fringe, with numerous notable comedians
   getting their 'break' here, often through receipt of the Perrier Award.

   Alongside these major festivals, there is also the Edinburgh
   International Film Festival, the Edinburgh Jazz Festival, and the
   Edinburgh International Book Festival. T on the Fringe, a popular music
   offshoot of the Fringe, began in 2000, replacing the smaller Flux and
   Planet Pop series of shows. Tigerfest is an independent music festival
   which ran concurrently with the Fringe in 2004 and 2005 before moving
   to a May slot in 2006.

   Running concurrently with the festivals, the Edinburgh Military Tattoo
   occupies the Castle Esplanade every night, with massed pipers and
   fireworks.

Celebrations

   A Viking longship being burnt during Edinburgh's annual Hogmanay
   celebrations.
   Enlarge
   A Viking longship being burnt during Edinburgh's annual Hogmanay
   celebrations.

   Equally famous is the annual Hogmanay celebration. Originally simply a
   street party held on Princes Street and the Royal Mile, the Hogmanay
   event has been officially organised since 1993. In 1996, over 300,000
   people attended, leading to ticketing of the main street party in later
   years, with a limit of 100,000 tickets. Hogmanay now covers four days
   of processions, concerts and fireworks, and the event regularly
   attracts thousands of people. On the night of 30 April, the Beltane
   Fire Festival takes place on Edinburgh's Calton Hill. The festival
   involves a procession followed by the re-enactment of scenes inspired
   by pagan spring fertility celebrations.

Music, theatre and film

   Outside festival season, Edinburgh continues to support a number of
   theatres and production companies. The Royal Lyceum Theatre has its own
   company, while the King's Theatre, Edinburgh Festival Theatre, and
   Edinburgh Playhouse stage large touring shows. The Traverse Theatre
   presents a more contemporary programme of plays. Amateur theatre
   companies productions are staged at the Bedlam Theatre, Church Hill
   Theatre, and the King's Theatre amongst others.

   The Usher Hall is Edinburgh's premier venue for classical music, as
   well as the occasional prestige popular music gig. Other halls staging
   music and theatre include The Hub, the Assembly Rooms and the Queen's
   Hall. The Scottish Chamber Orchestra is based in Edinburgh.

   Edinburgh has two repertory cinemas, the Edinburgh Filmhouse, and the
   Cameo, as well as the usual range of multiplexes.

   Edinburgh has a healthy popular music scene, despite the recent closure
   of The Venue and the attempted closure of Studio 24. Occasional large
   gigs are staged at Murrayfield, the Liquid Rooms, Meadowbank, as well
   as the relatively new Edinburgh Corn Exchange.

Visual arts

   The National Gallery of Scotland.
   Enlarge
   The National Gallery of Scotland.

   Edinburgh is home to Scotland's five National Galleries. The national
   collection is housed in the Scottish National Gallery, located on the
   Mound, and now linked to the Royal Scottish Academy, which holds
   regular major exhibitions of painting. The contemporary collections are
   shown in the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, and the nearby
   Dean Gallery. The Scottish National Portrait Gallery focuses on
   portraits and photography.

   The city council-owned City Arts Centre shows regular art exhibitions.
   Across the road, the Fruitmarket Gallery offers touring exhibitions of
   contemporary art.

Letters

   Edinburgh has a long literary tradition, going back to the Scottish
   Enlightenment. Writers such as James Boswell, Robert Louis Stevenson
   and Walter Scott all lived and worked in Edinburgh. More recently,
   Edinburgh has become associated with the crime novels of Ian Rankin and
   the work of Leith native Irvine Welsh, whose novels are mostly set in
   the city and are often written in colloquial Scots. Edinburgh has been
   declared the first UNESCO City of Literature.

   Edinburgh's Enlightenment also produced philosopher David Hume and the
   pioneer of economics, Adam Smith. Further scientific and philosophical
   enquiry was discussed at The Poker Club in the city.

Nightlife

   A panorama of Edinburgh published by the Illustrated London News in
   1868.
   Enlarge
   A panorama of Edinburgh published by the Illustrated London News in
   1868.

   Edinburgh has a large number of pubs, clubs and restaurants. The
   traditional areas were the Grassmarket, Lothian Road and surrounding
   streets, Rose Street and its surrounds and the Bridges. In recent years
   George Street in the New Town has grown in prominence, with a large
   number of new, upmarket public houses and nightclubs opening, along
   with a number on the parallel Queen Street. Stockbridge and the
   waterfront at Leith are also increasingly fashionable areas, with a
   number of pubs, clubs and restaurants.

   A fortnightly publication, The List, is dedicated to life in Edinburgh
   and Glasgow, and contains listings of all Nightclubs, as well as music,
   theatrical and other events. The List also regularly produces
   specialist guides such as its Food and Drink guide and its guide to the
   Edinburgh Festivals.

Sports

   Edinburgh has two professional football clubs: Hibernian and Heart of
   Midlothian. They are known locally as Hibs (or the Hibees) and Hearts
   (or the Jambos). Both teams play in the Scottish Premier League:
   Hibernian at Easter Road Stadium near Leith and Hearts at Tynecastle
   Stadium in Gorgie. Non-league sides include Spartans and Edinburgh
   City. Edinburgh was also formerly home to Meadowbank Thistle, until
   they moved to Livingston in 1995, shedding their old name and becoming
   Livingston F.C.. The Scottish national team usually plays at Hampden
   Park, in Glasgow.

   The Scotland national rugby union team plays at Murrayfield Stadium,
   which is owned by the Scottish Rugby Union and is also used as a venue
   for other events, including music concerts. Edinburgh's professional
   rugby team, Edinburgh, play in the Celtic League at Murrayfield.

   The Scottish cricket team represent Scotland at cricket internationally
   and in the C&G Trophy and play their home matches at The Grange in
   Stockbridge.

   The Edinburgh Capitals are the latest of a succession of ice hockey
   clubs to represent the Scottish capital. Previously Edinburgh was
   represented by the Murrayfield Racers and the Edinburgh Racers. The
   club play their home games at the Murrayfield Ice Rink and are
   currently the sole Scottish representative in the Elite Ice Hockey
   League.

   Edinburgh has also hosted various national and international sports
   events including the World Student Games, the 1970 British Commonwealth
   Games, the 1986 Commonwealth Games and the inaugural 2000 Commonwealth
   Youth Games. For the Games in 1970 the city built major Olympic
   standard venues and facilities including the Royal Commonwealth Pool
   and the Meadowbank Stadium.

   The Scottish Claymores played American football from 1995 - 2004, with
   some matches taking place at Murrayfield, others in Glasgow at Hampden.

   The Edinburgh Marathon has been held in the city since 2003 with over
   13,000 taking part annually.

Demographics

                      CAPTION: Population of Edinburgh

           1755 1791 1811 1821 1831 1841 1851 1861 1871 1881 1891
    57,195 81,865 82,624 112,235 136,054 138,182 160,511 168,121 196,979
                               228,357 261,225

 1901    1911    1921    1931    1951    1961    1971    1981    1991  2001 2005
316,837 320,318 420,264 439,010 466,761 468,361 453,575 425,575 418,914
448,624 457,830
Population of Leith included. Sources: City of Edinburgh Council and
                                   Edinphoto

   As of 2005, the General Register Office for Scotland estimated that the
   City of Edinburgh council area had a resident population of 457,830.
   The 2001 UK census reported the population to be 448,624, making the
   city the seventh largest in the United Kingdom. The General Register
   Office also reported that this resident population was split between
   220,094 males and 237,736 females.

   Whilst Edinburgh's population is ageing a very large and transient
   population of young students studying at the universities in the city
   offset this demographic problem somewhat. The population of Edinburgh
   is expected to grow over the next 20 years, with the number of
   residents expected to have reached 500,000 by 2024. There are estimated
   to be around 100,000 students studying at the various Higher Education
   institutions in the city.

Economy

   Edinburgh viewed from Arthur's Seat. See also this picture for a
   panoramic view from Holyrood Park towards Ocean Terminal.
   Enlarge
   Edinburgh viewed from Arthur's Seat. See also this picture for a
   panoramic view from Holyrood Park towards Ocean Terminal.

   The economy of Edinburgh is largely based around the services sector
   centred around banking, financial services and tourism. Unemployment in
   Edinburgh is low at 2.2%, which has been consistently below the
   Scottish average. The city is one of the most prosperous parts of the
   country and has the strongest economy of any city in the UK except
   London.

   Banking has been a part of the economic life of Edinburgh for over 300
   years with the invention of capitalism in the city, with the
   establishment of the Bank of Scotland by an act of the original
   Parliament of Scotland in 1695. Today, together with the burgeoning
   financial services industry, with particular strengths in insurance and
   investment underpinned by the presence Edinburgh based firms such as
   Scottish Widows and Standard Life, Edinburgh has emerged as Europe’s
   sixth largest financial centre. The Royal Bank of Scotland, which is
   the fifth largest in the world by market capitalisation, opened their
   new global headquarters at Gogarburn in the west of the city in October
   2005.

   Manufacturing has never had as strong a presence in Edinburgh compared
   to Glasgow; however brewing, publishing, and nowadays electronics have
   maintained a foothold in the city. Whilst brewing has been in decline
   in recent years, with the closure of the McEwan's Brewery in 2005,
   Caledonian Brewery remains as the largest, with Scottish and Newcastle
   retaining their headquarters in the city.

   Tourism is an important economic mainstay in the city. As a World
   Heritage Site tourists come to visit such historical sites as Edinburgh
   Castle, the Palace of Holyroodhouse and the Georgian New Town. This is
   augmented in August of each year with the presence of the Edinburgh
   Festivals, which bring in large numbers of visitors, generating in
   excess of £100m for the Edinburgh economy.

   As the centre of Scotland’s devolved government, as well as its legal
   system, the public sector plays a central role in the economy of
   Edinburgh with many departments of the Scottish Executive located in
   the city. Other major employers include NHS Scotland and local
   government administration.

Government and politics

   Coat of arms of Edinburgh
   Enlarge
   Coat of arms of Edinburgh

   As capital of Scotland, Edinburgh is host to the national unicameral
   legislature, the Scottish Parliament. The Scottish Parliament Building,
   in the Holyrood area of Edinburgh, opened in September 2004.

   The Scottish Executive, the devolved government of Scotland, has
   offices at St Andrew's House on Calton Hill in the city centre, and
   Victoria Quay in Leith. Bute House on Charlotte Square is the official
   residence of the First Minister of Scotland.

   The city has hosted a number of international events, such as
   Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting and the Council of Europe.

   Apart from elections to the Scottish Parliament, politics in Edinburgh
   are evident in elections to the City of Edinburgh Council and the House
   of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. For elections to
   the European Parliament, Edinburgh is within the Scotland constituency.

Local government

   Edinburgh constitutes one of the 32 council areas of Scotland and, as
   such, is represented by the Edinburgh City Council, a local authority
   composed of 58 elected councillors, each representing an electoral ward
   in the city. The council is led by the Lord Provost.

   Of the 58 council seats, 30 are held by the Labour Party, with that
   party therefore in control of the administration, as it has been for a
   number years now. The current Lord Provost of Edinburgh, Lesley Hinds
   (who replaced Eric Milligan on May 8, 2003), and the current Majority
   Leader of the Council, Donald Anderson, are both Labour Party members.
   There are also 14 Liberal Democrat councillors, 13 Scottish
   Conservative and Unionist Party councillors and one Scottish National
   Party councillor.

   General elections to the council are held on a four year cycle, the
   next being due in 2007, with polling on Thursday 5 May. At present,
   councillors are elected from single-member wards by the first past the
   post system of election. For the 2007 election, however, as a result of
   the Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004, multi-member wards will
   introduced, each electing three or four councillors by the single
   transferable vote system, to produce a form of proportional
   representation.

Scottish Parliament

   The Scottish Parliament, with Calton Hill in the background.
   Enlarge
   The Scottish Parliament, with Calton Hill in the background.

   In elections to the Scottish Parliament ( Holyrood), the city area is
   divided between six of the nine constituencies in the Lothians
   electoral region. Each constituency elects one Member of the Scottish
   Parliament (MSP) by the first past the post system of election, and the
   region elects seven additional MSPs, to produce a form of proportional
   representation.

   Five of the six Edinburgh constituencies, Edinburgh North and Leith,
   Edinburgh Central, Edinburgh Pentlands, Edinburgh South and Edinburgh
   West, are entirely within the city area. Musselburgh, in East Lothian,
   is included in the sixth, Edinburgh East and Musselburgh.

   Boundaries date from 1999, and the creation of the Scottish Parliament
   itself.

Parliament of the United Kingdom

   In elections to the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United
   Kingdom ( Westminster), the city area is divided between five first
   past the post constituencies, all entirely within the city area, and
   each electing one Member of Parliament (MP): Edinburgh South, Edinburgh
   West, Edinburgh South West, Edinburgh North and Leith, and Edinburgh
   East.

   Boundaries date from 2005.

Transport

   Edinburgh Waverley railway station - the principal mainline station in
   Edinburgh viewed from Edinburgh Castle.
   Enlarge
   Edinburgh Waverley railway station - the principal mainline station in
   Edinburgh viewed from Edinburgh Castle.

   Edinburgh is a major transport hub in east central Scotland, with
   arterial road and rail routes that connect the city to the rest of
   Scotland and with England.

   Most passenger transport trips in Edinburgh are taken by bus, with
   Lothian Buses and First Bus operating an extensive system connecting
   most parts of the city, suburbs and surrounding city region. In early
   2007, construction will begin on the Edinburgh Tram Network, a light
   rapid transit system of trams that will connect the airport and western
   suburbs with the city centre. Another loop will connect the city centre
   and the northern waterfront areas of Leith and Granton — areas which
   are currently undergoing major regeneration and redevelopment.

   Edinburgh Waverley is the main railway station for the city. It is on
   the East Coast Main Line and is a through station as well as a terminus
   for many services to and from London Kings Cross operated by GNER and
   to London Euston operated by Virgin Trains and First Scotrail, as well
   as services from within Scotland operated by First Scotrail. Haymarket
   Station is a smaller station located to the west of the city centre.

   Edinburgh is served by Edinburgh Airport (EDI), located approximately 8
   miles to the west of the city, with connections to many cities in
   Europe and an expanding international long-haul route network.
   Construction of a rail link to the airport is due to commence in 2007
   and be operational by 2009. The airport will also be served by the
   Edinburgh Tram Network.

   Traffic congestion, especially at peak times, is viewed as a problem.
   The rise in car use in the city caused commuting trips to grow by 72%
   in Edinburgh between 1981 and 2001. Various initiatives have been put
   in place to combat this, with park and ride facilities provided at
   Ingliston and Riccarton on the western outskirts of the city, as well
   as in Fife. "Greenways", dedicated bus lanes on primary routes into the
   city centre with strict traffic regulations, have been initiated in
   recent years. Improvements to the bus network have included guided
   busways in the west of the city and major improvements to bus services,
   such as clearer ticketing arrangements and better provision of bus
   stops.

Education

Universities and colleges

   The University of Edinburgh was founded by Royal Charter in 1583, and
   is the fourth oldest university in Scotland, after St Andrews, Glasgow
   and Aberdeen. The Old College on South Bridge opened in the 1820s. As
   the institution continued to expand, new buildings were constructed
   around George Square, where the heart of the university remains, and
   the King's Buildings campus in southern Edinburgh. Development of the
   college's buildings continues in the 21st century. The Royal College of
   Surgeons of Edinburgh and the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh
   were also established by Royal Charter, in 1506 and 1681 respectively.
   The Trustees Drawing Academy of Edinburgh was established in 1760, an
   institution that became, in 1907, Edinburgh College of Art.

   In the 1960s Heriot-Watt University and Napier Technical College were
   established. Heriot-Watt traces its origins to 1821, when a school for
   technical education of the working classes was opened. Heriot-Watt
   continues to have a strong reputation in engineering, and is based at
   Riccarton, in the west of the city.

   Napier College was renamed Napier Polytechnic in the 1980s, and gained
   university status in its own right in 1992; the mass conversion of
   other polytechnic higher education establishments only began several
   months later in the same year. Napier University now has several
   campuses in the south and west of the city, including the former
   Craiglockhart Hydropathic (of Siegfried Sassoon and Wilfred Owen fame)
   and Merchiston Tower (the family home of John Napier). The University
   contains a number of highly specialised research centres (in timber
   engineering and teledemocracy, for example) and has one of the largest
   business schools of any university north of the border. The School of
   Computing at Napier University is also the largest computing department
   in Scotland.

   Queen Margaret University College was founded in 1875 as a women's
   college, and today specialises in healthcare, media, hospitality and
   business.

   Other colleges offering further education in Edinburgh include Telford
   College, opened in 1968, and Stevenson College, opened in 1970. Basil
   Paterson offers courses in languages and teaching. The Scottish
   Agricultural College also has a campus in south Edinburgh.

Schools

   Notable schools in Edinburgh include the Royal High School, (a state
   run school) considered to be the oldest in Scotland, and Donaldson's
   College, for deaf students. Private schools include Edinburgh Academy,
   St George’s School for Girls, Fettes College, George Heriot's School,
   George Watson's College, the Mary Erskine School, Merchiston Castle
   School and Stewart's Melville College.

Health

Hospitals

   Notable hospitals in Edinburgh include the Royal Infirmary of
   Edinburgh, which includes Edinburgh University Medical School, and the
   Western General Hospital, which includes a large cancer treatment
   centre. There is one private hospital, BUPA's Murrayfield Hospital.

Places of worship

Churches

   Edinburgh has a large number of churches of many different
   denominations. As well as their religious significance, many of the
   city's church buildings are of considerable architectural and historic
   interest.

   The national Church of Scotland is numerically the largest denomination
   in Edinburgh; notable historic church buildings in the city centre
   include St Giles' Cathedral, Greyfriars Kirk, Canongate Kirk and St
   Andrew's and St George's Church. On the city's south east can be found
   the 12th century Duddingston Kirk. The Church of Scotland Offices are
   located in Edinburgh, as is the Church's Assembly Hall (used as the
   home of the Scottish Parliament 1999-2004) and New College on The
   Mound.

   The second-largest church in Edinburgh (in terms of membership) is the
   Catholic Church. Notable buildings include St Mary's Cathedral at the
   top of Leith Walk.

   The Scottish Episcopal Church is part of the Anglican Communion. Its
   largest Edinburgh church is St Mary's Cathedral in Palmerston Place.

   An increasing number of lively evangelical churches are situated
   throughout the city. These churches have a high percentage of students
   and include Charlotte Baptist Chapel, Carrubbers Christian Centre and
   Bellevue Chapel.

Mosque

   Edinburgh's main mosque and Islamic Centre is located on Potterow on
   the city's southside, near Bristo Square. It was opened in the late
   1990s. Construction was partly financed by a gift from King Fahd of
   Saudi Arabia.

Synagogue

   The first recorded presence of a Jewish community in Edinburgh dates
   back to the late 17th century. Edinburgh's Orthodox synagogue is
   located in Salisbury Road. The present building was opened in 1932 and
   can accommodate 2000 people. A Liberal congregation also meets in the
   City.

Notable residents

   Many famous people in the past and present have been born in Edinburgh,
   resident in the city or connected to it in some way, these include:
     * Alexander Graham Bell, telephone pioneer, was born in Edinburgh.
     * Tony Blair, UK Prime Minister, was born in the city and attended
       its exclusive Fettes College high school
     * James Clerk Maxwell, Scottish physicist
     * Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, the creator of Sherlock Holmes, was born in
       the city's New Town
     * Sir Sean Connery, actor
     * Cushny, Arthur Robertson, physiologist
     * Wattie Buchan, lead singer and founding member of punk band The
       Exploited, was born in, and still lives in Edinburgh to this day
     * Isabella Glyn, (1823-1889) Victorian era actress
     * David Hume, philosopher and historian
     * James Hutton, geologist, regarded as the "Father of Geology"
     * Shirley Manson, lead singer for the band Garbage
     * John Napier, mathematician, mainly remembered for the invention of
       logarithms
     * Max Born, Physicist and Nobel Laureate
     * Ian Rankin, author of the Inspector Rebus series of crime
       thrillers, attended the University of Edinburgh
     * J. K. Rowling, Harry Potter author, wrote her first book in
       Edinburgh coffee-shop, Nicolson's.
     * James Boyle (broadcasting), arts supremo, formerly head of BBC
       Radio Four and BBC Radio Scotland, and former chairman of the
       Scottish Arts Council and the Scottish Cultural Commission, lives
       in Edinburgh
     * Sir Walter Scott, (1771-1832), novelist, was born in Edinburgh.
     * Adam Smith, economist, author of The Wealth of Nations
     * Muriel Spark, novelist, author of The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie
     * Robert Louis Stevenson, novelist
     * John Witherspoon, only clergyman to sign the American Declaration
       of Independence, president of Princeton University, educated in
       Edinburgh
     * Professor Ian Wilmut, involved in the creation of Dolly the Sheep –
       the first cloned mammal
     * James Young Simpson, an obstetrician who conducted the first
       experimental use of chloroform for anaesthesia
     * Robin Harper, a Scottish politician
     * James Connolly, an Irish-Scots socialist leader.
     * Irvine Welsh, playwright and novelist, author of Trainspotting.
     * Dylan Moran, Irish Comedian.
     * The Proclaimers Brothers, singers from Edinburgh

Twinned cities worldwide

   Edinburgh is twinned with several cities across Europe and throughout
   the rest of the world. These include:
     * Germany Munich, Germany
     * Italy Florence, Italy
     * France Nice, France
     * Canada Vancouver, Canada
     * Ukraine Kiev, Ukraine

     * Denmark Aalborg, Denmark
     * United States San Diego, U.S.
     * New Zealand Dunedin, New Zealand
     * Poland Kraków, Poland
     * People's Republic of China Xi'an, the People's Republic of China

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edinburgh"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
