   #copyright

Edward Gibbon

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Historians, chroniclers
and history books

   Edward Gibbon (1737–1794).
   Enlarge
   Edward Gibbon (1737–1794).

   Edward Gibbon ( April 27, 1737 – January 16, 1794) was an English
   historian and Member of Parliament. His most important work, The
   History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire was published in
   six volumes between 1776 and 1788. The History is known principally for
   the quality and irony of its prose, its use of primary sources, and its
   open denigration of organized religion.

Life

Childhood

   Edward Gibbon was born in 1737 of Edward and Judith Gibbon in the town
   of Putney, near London, England. He had six siblings: five brothers and
   one sister, all of whom died in infancy. His grandfather, also named
   Edward, had lost all in the notorious South Sea Bubble scandal, but
   eventually regained nearly all of it, so that Gibbon's father was able
   to inherit a substantial estate.

   As a youth, his health was constantly threatened; he described himself
   as "a weakly child." At age nine, Gibbon was sent to Dr. Woddeson's
   school at Kingston-on-Thames, shortly after which his mother passed
   away. He then took up residence in the Westminster School boarding
   house, owned by his adored "Aunt Kitty" Porten. Sometime after she died
   in 1786, he membered her imparting an avid "taste for books which is
   still the pleasure and glory of my life." In 1751, Gibbon's reading was
   already indicating his future pursuits: Laurence Echard's Roman History
   (1713), William Howel(l)'s An Institution of General History (1680–85),
   and several of the 65 volumes of the acclaimed Universal History from
   the Earliest Account of Time (1747–1768).

Oxford, Lausanne, and a Religious Journey

   Following a stay at Bath to improve his health, Gibbon in 1752 at the
   age of 15, was sent by his father to Magdalen College, Oxford, where he
   was enrolled as a gentleman-commoner. He was ill-suited, however, to
   the college atmosphere and later rued his 14 months there as the "most
   idle and unprofitable" of his life. But his penchant for "theological
   controversy," (his aunt's influence), fully bloomed when he came under
   the spell of rationalist theologian Conyers Middleton (1683–1750) and
   his Free Inquiry into the Miraculous Powers (1749). In that tract,
   Middleton denied the validity of such powers; Gibbon promptly objected.
   The product of that disagreement, with some assistance from the work of
   French Catholic Bishop Jacques-Bénigne Bousset (1627–1704), and that of
   the Jesuit priest Robert Parsons (1546–1610), yielded the most
   memorable event of his time at Oxford: his conversion to Roman
   Catholicism on June 8, 1753. He was further "corrupted" by the 'free
   thinking' deism of the playwright/poet couple David and Lucy Mallet;
   and finally Gibbon's father, already "in despair," had had enough.

   Within weeks of his conversion, the youngster was removed from Oxford
   and sent to live under the care and tutelage of David Pavillard,
   Calvinist pastor of Lausanne, Switzerland. It was here that he made one
   his life's two great friendships, that of Jacques Georges Deyverdun;
   the other being John Baker Holroyd (later Lord Sheffield). Just a year
   and a half later, on Christmas Day 1754, he reconverted to
   Protestantism. 'The articles of the Romish creed,' he wrote,
   'disappeared like a dream.' He remained in Lausanne for five
   intellectually productive years, a period that greatly enriched
   Gibbon's already immense aptitude for scholarship and erudition: he
   read Latin literature; traveled throughout Switzerland studying its
   cantons' constitutions; and aggressively mined the works of Hugo
   Grotius, Samuel Puffendorf, John Locke, Pierre Bayle, and Blaise
   Pascal.

Thwarted Romance

   He also met the one romance in his life: the pastor of Crassy's
   daughter, a young woman named Suzanne Curchod, who would later become
   the wife of Jacques Necker, the French finance minister. Gibbon and
   Curchod developed something of a mutual affinity, but marriage was out
   of the question, blocked both by his father's staunch disapproval, and
   Curchod's equally staunch reluctance to leave Switzerland. Gibbon
   returned to England in August 1758 to face his father's steely scowl.
   There could be no refusal of the elder's wishes. Gibbon put it this
   way: "I sighed like a lover, I obeyed like a son." He proceeded to cut
   off all contact with Mlle. Curchod, even as she vowed to wait for him.

Fame Arrives

   Upon his return to England, Gibbon published his first book, Essai sur
   l'Etude de la Littérature in 1761. From 1759 to 1763, Gibbon spent four
   years in active service with the Hampshire militia and another seven in
   reserve, his deactivation coinciding with the end of the Seven Years'
   War. In 1763, he embarked on the Grand Tour (of continental Europe),
   which included a visit to Rome. It was here, in 1764, that Gibbon first
   conceived the idea of composing a history of the Roman Empire:

     It was on the fifteenth of October, in the gloom of evening, as I
     sat musing on the Capitol, while the barefooted fryars were chanting
     their litanies in the temple of Jupiter, that I conceived the first
     thought of my history.

   His father died in 1770, and after tending to the estate, which was by
   no means in good condition, there remained quite enough for Gibbon to
   settle in London, independent of financial concerns. Two years later he
   began writing in earnest, but not without the occasional self-imposed
   distraction. He took to London society quite easily, joined the better
   social clubs, including Dr. Johnson's Literary Club, and looked in from
   time to time on his friend Holroyd in Sussex. He succeeded Oliver
   Goldsmith at the Royal Academy as 'professor in ancient history'
   (honorary but prestigious). And perhaps least productively, he was
   returned to the House of Commons for Liskeard, Cornwall in 1774. He
   became the archetypal back-bencher, "mute" and "indifferent," his
   support of the ministry routinely automatic. Gibbon's indolence in that
   position, perhaps fully intentional, subtracted little from the
   progress of his writing.

   After several rewrites, and Gibbon "often tempted to throw away the
   labours of seven years," the first volume of what would become his
   life's major achievement, The History of the Decline and Fall of the
   Roman Empire, appeared in 1776. The reading public eagerly consumed
   three editions for which Gibbon was rewarded handsomely: two-thirds of
   the profits on the first edition alone, amounting to £490. Biographer
   Sir Leslie Stephen wrote that thereafter, "His fame was as rapid as it
   has been lasting." And as regards this first volume, "Some warm praise
   from [David] Hume overpaid the labour of ten years."

   Volumes II and III appeared in 1781, eventually rising "to a level with
   the previous volume in general esteem." The final three volumes were
   finished during a retreat to Lausanne where Gibbon reunited with his
   friend Deyverdun in leisurely comfort. By early 1787, he was "straining
   for the goal;" and with great relief the project was finished in June
   of that year. Volumes IV, V, and VI finally reached the press in 1788.
   Mounting the bandwagon of praise for the later volumes were such
   contemporary luminaries as Adam Smith, William Robertson, Adam
   Ferguson, Lord Camden, and Horace Walpole. Smith remarked that Gibbon's
   triumph had positioned him "at the very head of [Europe's] literary
   tribe."

Aftermath and the end

   The years following Gibbon's completion of The History were filled
   largely with sorrow and increasing physical discomfort. He returned to
   London to oversee the publication process alongside Lord Sheffield;
   publication having been delayed to coincide with a party celebrating
   Gibbon's 51st birthday. Then in 1789, it was back to Lausanne only to
   learn of and be "deeply affected" by the death of Deyverdun, who had
   willed Gibbon his home. He resided there with little commotion, took in
   the local society, received a visit from Sheffield in 1791, and "shared
   the common abhorrence" of the French Revolution. In 1793, word came of
   Lady Sheffield's death; Gibbon immediately deserted Lausanne and set
   sail to comfort a grieving but composed Sheffield, the last of his
   close friends. His health began to fail critically in December, and at
   the turn of the new year, he was on his last legs.

   Gibbon is believed to have suffered from hydrocele testis, a condition
   which causes the testicles to swell with fluid. In an age when
   close-fitting clothes were fashionable, his condition lead to a chronic
   and disfiguring inflammation which left Gibbon a lonely figure. As his
   condition worsened, he underwent numerous procedures to alleviate the
   condition, but with no enduring success. In early January, the last of
   a series of three operations caused an unremitting peritonitis to set
   in and spread. The "English giant of the Enlightenment" finally
   succumbed at 12:45 pm, January 16, 1794 at age 56, to be buried in the
   Sheffield family graveyard at the parish church in Fletching, Sussex.

Assessment

   It is generally accepted that Gibbon's treatment of Byzantium has had
   detrimental effects on the study of the Middle Ages. There remains an
   issue as to whether his poor analysis is primarily due to a lack of
   primary sources in this field or to the prejudices of the time.

   Gibbon's work has also been criticized for its aggressively scathing
   view of Christianity as laid down in chapters XV and XVI. Those
   chapters were strongly criticised and resulted in the banning of the
   book in several countries. Gibbon's alleged crime was disrespecting,
   and none too lightly, the character of sacred Christian doctrine in
   "treat[ing] the Christian church as a phenomenon of general history,
   not a special case admitting supernatural explanations and disallowing
   criticism of its adherents" as the Roman church was likely expecting.
   More specifically, Gibbon's blasphemous chapters excoriated the church
   for two deeply wounding transgressions: displacing the glory and
   grandeur of ancient Rome ("supplanting in an unnecessarily destructive
   way the great culture that preceded it"); and reexposing the church's
   dirty laundry ("for the outrage of [practicing] religious intolerance
   and warfare").

   Gibbon, in letters to Holroyd and others, expected some type of
   church-inspired backlash, but the utter harshness of the ensuing
   torrents far exceded anything he or his friends could possibly have
   anticipated. Contemporary detractors such as Joseph Priestley and
   Richard Watson stoked the nascent fire, but the most severe of these
   attacks was an intolerably "acrimonious" piece from the pen of a young
   cleric, Henry Edwards Davis. Concerned for his honour and anxious that
   the public read both sides of the dispute, Gibbon subsequently
   published his Vindication of some Passages in the Fifteenth and
   Sixteenth Chapters of The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire in 1779.
   Therein, he categorically denied Davis' "criminal accusations,"
   branding him a purveyor of "servile plagiarism."

   Gibbon's antagonism to Christian doctrine spilled over into the Jewish
   faith, inevitably leading to charges of anti-Semitism. For example, he
   wrote:

     Humanity is shocked at the recital of the horrid cruelties which
     [the Jews] committed in the cities of Egypt, of Cyprus, and of
     Cyrene, where they dwelt in treacherous friendship with the
     unsuspecting natives;¹ and we are tempted to applaud the severe
     retaliation which was exercised by the arms of legions against a
     race of fanatics, whose dire and credulous superstition seemed to
     render them the implacable enemies not only of the Roman government,
     but also of humankind.²

Burke, Churchill and 'the fountainhead'

   Gibbon is considered to be a son of the Enlightenment and this is
   reflected in his famous verdict on the history of the Middle Ages: "I
   have described the triumph of barbarism and religion." However,
   politically, he aligned himself with both Burke's rejection of the
   democratic movements of the time as well as Burke's dismissal of the
   "rights of man."

   Gibbon's work has been praised for its style, his piquant epigrams and
   its brilliant irony. Winston Churchill memorably noted, "I set out upon
   Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire [and] was immediately
   dominated by both the story and the style. I devoured Gibbon. I rode
   triumphantly through it from end to end." Churchill modeled much of his
   own style upon Gibbon's, though with less use of irony.

   Unusually for the 18th century, Gibbon was never content with
   secondhand accounts when the primary sources were accessible. "I have
   always endeavoured," he says, "to draw from the fountainhead; my
   curiosity, as well as a sense of duty, has always urged me to study the
   originals; and if they have sometimes eluded my search, I have
   carefully marked the secondary evidence on whose faith a passage or a
   fact were reduced to depend." In this insistence upon the importance of
   primary sources, Gibbon is considered by many to be one of the first
   modern historians:

     In accuracy, thoroughness, lucidity, and comprehensive grasp of a
     vast subject, the 'History' is unsurpassable. It is the one English
     history which may be regarded as definitive. ...Whatever its
     shortcomings the book is artistically imposing as well as
     historically unimpeachable as a vast panorama of a great period.

Influence on other writers

   The subject of Gibbon's writing as well as his ideas and style have
   influenced other writers. Besides his influence on Churchill, Gibbon
   was also a model for Isaac Asimov in his writing of The Foundation
   Trilogy.

   The writings of Shoghi Effendi, which constitute the majority of
   authoritative primary-source written works in the Bahá'í Faith, are
   written in a style quite similar to Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the
   Roman Empire. This is often attributed to the influence of his avowed
   appreciation of Gibbon and Carlyle.

Works by Gibbon

     * Essai sur l’étude de la littérature ( 1761).
     * Mémoires littéraires de la Grand Bretagne ( 1768).
     * Critical Observations on the Sixth Book of Vergil's Aeneid ( 1770).
     * The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (vol. I,
       1776; vols. II,III, 1781; vols. IV,V,VI, 1788).
     * A vindication of some passages in the fifteenth and sixteenth
       chapters of the History of the decline and fall of the Roman Empire
       ( 1779).
     * Mémoire justificatif pour servir de réponse à l’exposé, &c de la
       cour de France ( 1779).
     * Memoirs of My Life ( 1796). found at the beginning of the
       posthumous Miscellaneous Works of Edward Gibbon, Esq. published two
       years after the author's death by his friend and literary executor
       Lord Sheffield; cf. Bonnard in References.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Gibbon"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
