   #copyright

Effect of Hurricane Katrina on New Orleans

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Natural Disasters

            Hurricane Katrina

   2005 Atlantic hurricane season

   General
     * Timeline
     * Meteorological history
     * Preparations
          + New Orleans preparedness

   Impact
     * Economic effects
     * Political effects
     * Criticism of gov't response
     * Social effects
     * Effects by region
          + Effects on Mississippi
          + Effects on New Orleans
               o Levee failures
               o Infrastructure repairs
               o Reconstruction

   Relief
     * Disaster relief
     * International response

   Analysis
     * Alternative theories
     * Historical context
     * Media involvement

   Other wikis
     * Commons: Katrina images
     * Wikinews: Katrina stories
     * Wikisource: Katrina sources

   The effect of Hurricane Katrina on New Orleans was catastrophic and
   long-lasting. The storm, which was the costliest hurricane as well as
   one of the deadliest natural disasters in U.S. history, made its second
   and third landfalls in the Gulf Coast region on August 29, 2005 as a
   powerful Category 3 hurricane (with a storm surge of a Category 5
   hurricane). By August 31, 2005, eighty percent (80%) of the city was
   flooded, with some parts under 20 feet (6.1 meters) of water. Four of
   the city's protective levees were breached, including the 17th Street
   Canal levee, the Industrial Canal levee, and the London Avenue Canal
   floodwall.

   Although more than 80% of residents evacuated, the rest remained. The
   Louisiana Superdome, used as a designated "refuge of last resort" for
   those who remained in the city, also sustained significant damage,
   including two sections of the roof that were compromised, and the
   dome's waterproof membrane had essentially been peeled off. As the city
   flooded, many who remained in their homes had to swim for their lives,
   wade through deep water, or remain trapped in their attics or on their
   rooftops.

   The disaster had major implications for a large segment of the
   population, economy and politics of the entire United States, which
   lasted for several months, well into 2006.

Background

   New Orleans sits between (and below) the Mississippi River and Lake
   Pontchartrain.
   Enlarge
   New Orleans sits between (and below) the Mississippi River and Lake
   Pontchartrain.

   Flooding due to rain and storms has long been an issue since the New
   Orleans' early settlement due to the city's location on a delta marsh,
   much of which sits below sea level. The city is surrounded by the
   Mississippi River to the south, Lake Pontchartrain to the north, and
   Lake Borgne to the east. The first settlements by the French during
   colonial times in the area were above sea level, a trend that continued
   until the 19th century. Construction of the levees along the River
   began soon after the city was founded, and more extensive river levees
   were built as the city grew. The levees were originally designed to
   prevent damage caused by seasonal flooding. Today, the modern 17th
   Street and London Avenue Canals are used for drainage, while the wide,
   navigable Industrial Canal is used for shipping. The heavy flooding
   caused by Hurricane Betsy in 1965 brought concerns regarding flooding
   from hurricanes to the forefront.

   There were many predictions of hurricane risk in New Orleans before
   Hurricane Katrina in August, 2005. In 2001, the Houston Chronicle
   published a story which predicted that a severe hurricane striking New
   Orleans, "would strand 250,000 people or more, and probably kill one of
   10 left behind as the city drowned under 20 feet of water. Thousands of
   refugees could land in Houston." Many concerns also focused around the
   fact that the city's levee system was only designed for hurricanes of
   no greater intensity than category 3. As it turned out, Katrina was
   Category 3 when it made landfall and most of New Orleans experienced
   Category 1 or 2 strength winds. However, due to the slow moving nature
   of the storm in its pass over New Orleans, several floodwalls lining
   the shipping and drainage canals in New Orleans collapsed and the
   resulting flood water from Lake Ponchartrain inundated the city within
   the two days following the storm, causing costly damage to buildings
   and resulting in many deaths.

   Furthermore, the region's natural defenses, the surrounding marshland
   and the barrier islands, have been dwindling in recent years. Much of
   the land was undeveloped swamp on the lake side, and only small levees
   were constructed in the 19th century. A much larger project to build up
   levees along the lake and extend the shoreline out by dredging began in
   1927. As the city grew, there was increased pressure to urbanize lower
   areas, and, as a result, a large system of canals and pumps was
   constructed to drain the city. Drainage of the formerly swampy ground
   allowed more room for the city to expand, but also resulted in
   subsidence of the local soil.

   Outside of the city, the Mississippi River's natural deposition of
   suspended sediment built up the river's delta marshlands during
   periodic flooding episodes. However, the lower Mississippi was later
   restricted to channels for the benefit of shipping, which interrupted
   the process that continued to build the Mississippi Delta and prevented
   its erosion. As the swampy lands of Southern Louisiana shrank, the land
   began to sink. Entire barrier islands disappeared during periodic
   storms as the land of the vast delta slowly settled without river silt
   to replenish the wetlands. Approximately one-third of the land
   subsidence has been attributed to the large number of canals through
   the delta. Barge traffic and tides erode the earth around the edge of
   the canals, and salty Gulf water seeps in along them, slowly salinating
   the ground and killing the vegetation that the land previously depended
   on to anchor it.

Pre-Katrina Preparations

   The eye of Hurricane Katrina was forecast to pass to the east of New
   Orleans. In that event, the wind would come back from the north as the
   storm passed, forcing large volumes of water from Lake Pontchartrain
   against the levees and possibly into the city. It was also forecast
   that the storm surge in Lake Pontchartrain would reach 14 to 18 feet (4
   - 5 meters), with waves reaching seven feet (2 meters) above the storm
   surge.

   On August 28, at 10:00 AM CDT, the National Weather Service (NWS) field
   office in New Orleans issued a bulletin predicting catastrophic damage
   to New Orleans. Anticipated effects included, at the very least, the
   partial destruction of half of the well-constructed houses in the city,
   severe damage to most industrial buildings, rendering them inoperable,
   the "total destruction" of all wood-framed low-rise apartment
   buildings, all windows blowing out in high-rise office buildings, and
   the creation of a huge debris field of trees, telephone poles, cars,
   and collapsed buildings. Lack of clean water was predicted to "make
   human suffering incredible by modern standards".

   It was also predicted that the standing water caused by the storm surge
   would render most of the city uninhabitable for weeks and that the
   destruction of oil and petrochemical refineries in the surrounding area
   would spill waste into the flooding. The resulting mess would coat
   every surface, converting the city into a toxic marsh until water could
   be drained. Some experts said that it could take six months or longer
   to pump all the water out of the city.

Evacuation order

   In anticipation of widespread destruction caused by Hurricane Katrina,
   Max Mayfield, the director of the National Hurricane Centre, telephoned
   New Orleans Mayor Ray Nagin on the night of August 27 to express his
   extreme concern, and on the following day, made a video call to U.S.
   President George W. Bush at his farm in Crawford, Texas about the
   severity of the storm.

   With the hurricane threatening the Gulf Coast, many New Orleans
   residents started taking precautions to secure their homes and prepare
   for possible evacuation on Friday the 26th and Saturday the 27th. By
   mid morning on the 27th, many local gas stations which were not yet out
   of gas had long lines. Nagin first called for a voluntary evacuation of
   the city at 5:00 PM on August 27 and subsequently ordered a citywide
   mandatory evacuation at 9:30 AM on August 28, the first such order in
   the city's history. In a live news conference, Mayor Nagin predicted
   that, "the storm surge most likely will topple our levee system," and
   warned that oil production in the Gulf of Mexico would be shut down.
   President Bush made a televised appeal for residents to heed the
   evacuation orders, warning, "We cannot stress enough the danger this
   hurricane poses to Gulf Coast communities." Many neighboring areas and
   parishes also called for evacuations. By mid-afternoon, officials in
   Plaquemines, St. Bernard, St. Charles, Lafourche, Terrebonne,
   Jefferson, St. Tammany, and Washington parishes had called for
   voluntary or mandatory evacuations."

   Although Mayor Ray Nagin ordered a mandatory evacuation of the city,
   many remained voluntarily, which a CNN writer described as "gambling
   with their own lives." Reasons were numerous, including feeling their
   homes or the buildings they planned to stay in offered sufficient
   protection, lack of financial resources or access to transportation, a
   feeling of obligation to protect their property, or fearing that the
   tribulations of evacuation (which many went through the previous year
   with Ivan) were more of a hazard than the hurricane risk. A "refuge of
   last resort" was designated at the Louisiana Superdome. Beginning at
   noon on August 28 and running for several hours, city buses were
   redeployed to shuttle local residents from 12 pickup points throughout
   the city to the "shelters of last resort." Several hundred school buses
   were also available, yet they were not deployed, apparently because not
   enough drivers could be found.

   By the time Hurricane Katrina came ashore early the next morning,
   approximately one million people had fled the city and its surrounding
   suburbs by the evening of August 28, while about 20,000 to 25,000
   people remained in the city, taking shelter at the Louisiana Superdome,
   along with 550 National Guard troops. While supplies of MREs and
   bottled water were available at the Superdome, Nagin told survivors to
   bring blankets and enough food for several days, warning that it would
   be a very uncomfortable place. As the elevation of the Superdome is
   about three feet (1 m) above sea level, the forecasted storm surge was
   predicted to cause flooding on that site. Survivors were told to keep
   out of the lower levels of the structure, for fear it would be flooded.

   The Superdome had been used as a shelter in the past, such as during
   1998's Hurricane Georges, because it was estimated to be able to
   withstand winds of up to 200 mph (320 km/h) and water levels of 35 feet
   (10 m).

   The entire southeastern Louisiana region was declared a disaster area
   by the Federal Government before Hurricane Katrina made landfall, and
   FEMA prepositioned 18 disaster medical teams, medical supplies and
   equipment, urban search and rescue teams along with millions of MREs,
   liters of water, tarpaulins, and truckloads of ice.

Effects

   Checkpoint in the Ninth Ward at the Industrial Canal. Only residents
   were allowed in to examine and salvage from their property during
   daylight. October 25, 2005.
   Enlarge
   Checkpoint in the Ninth Ward at the Industrial Canal. Only residents
   were allowed in to examine and salvage from their property during
   daylight. October 25, 2005.

   Hurricane Katrina made its second and third landfalls in the Gulf Coast
   region on August 29, 2005 as a Category 3 hurricane.

   On Monday August 29 area affiliates of local television station WDSU
   reported New Orleans was experiencing widespread flooding due to
   several levee breaches, was without power, and that there were several
   instances of catastrophic damage in residential and business areas.
   Entire neighborhoods on the south shore of Lake Pontchartrain were
   flooded.

   The extensive flooding stranded many residents, who remained long after
   Hurricane Katrina had passed. Stranded survivors dotted the tops of
   houses citywide. In the Ninth Ward, as many as 116 residents were seen
   on rooftops seeking aid. Some were trapped inside attics, unable to
   escape.

   Some people reportedly chopped their way onto their roofs with hatchets
   and sledge hammers, which residents had been urged to keep in their
   attics in case of such events since Hurricane Betsy. Clean water was
   unavailable, and power outages were expected to last for weeks.

   By 11:00 PM on August 29, Mayor Nagin described the loss of life as
   "significant" with reports of bodies floating on the water throughout
   the city, though primarily in the eastern portions. He also said many
   houses have been picked up and moved. There was no clean water or
   electricity in the city, and some hotels and hospitals reported diesel
   fuel shortages. The National Guard began setting up temporary morgues
   in select locations.

Communications failures

   Coordination of rescue efforts August 29 and August 30 were made
   difficult by disruption of the communications infrastructure. Many
   telephones, Internet access, including most cell phones, were not
   working due to line breaks, destruction of base stations, or power
   failures, even though some base stations had their own back-up
   generators. In a number of cases, reporters were asked to brief public
   officials on the conditions in areas where information was not reaching
   them any other way.

   All local television stations were disrupted. Local television
   stations, and newspapers, moved quickly to sister locations in nearby
   cities. Broadcasting and publishing on the Internet became an important
   means of distributing information to evacuees and the rest of the
   world.

   Amateur radio provided tactical and emergency communications and
   handled health-and-welfare enquiries.

   By September 4, a temporary communications hub was set up at the Hyatt
   Hotel in downtown New Orleans.

Damage to buildings and roads

   An aerial view of the flooding in part of the Central Business
   District. The Superdome is at center.
   Enlarge
   An aerial view of the flooding in part of the Central Business
   District. The Superdome is at centre.

   Most of the major roads traveling into and out of the city were
   damaged. The only route out of the city was west on the Crescent City
   Connection as the I-10 Twin Span Bridge traveling east towards Slidell,
   Louisiana had collapsed. The 24 mile long Lake Pontchartrain Causeway
   escaped unscathed but was only carrying emergency traffic. Louis
   Armstrong New Orleans International Airport was closed before the storm
   but thankfully reported no flooding in airplane movement areas or
   inside of the building itself. By August 30, it was reopened to
   humanitarian and rescue operations. Commercial cargo flights resumed on
   September 10, and commercial passenger service resumed on September 13.

   On August 29, at 7:40 AM CDT, it was reported that most of the windows
   on the north side of the Hyatt Regency New Orleans had been blown out,
   and many other high rise buildings had extensive window damage. The
   Hyatt was the most severely damaged hotel in the city, with beds
   reported to be flying out of the windows. Insulation tubes were exposed
   as the hotel's glass exterior was completely sheared off.

   The Superdome sustained significant damage, including two sections of
   the roof that were compromised, and the dome's waterproof membrane had
   essentially been peeled off. On August 30, Louisiana governor Kathleen
   Blanco ordered the complete evacuation of the remaining people that
   sought shelter in the Superdome. They were then transported to the
   Astrodome in Houston, Texas.

Levee failures

   Flooded I-10 interchage and surrounding area of northwest New Orleans
   and Metairie, Louisiana
   Enlarge
   Flooded I-10 interchage and surrounding area of northwest New Orleans
   and Metairie, Louisiana

   As of mid-day Monday, August 29, the eye of Hurricane Katrina had swept
   northeast. It subjected the city to hurricane conditions for hours, but
   spared New Orleans the worst brunt of the storm. Most buildings in
   Louisiana though flooded were spared direct impact of the powerful
   waves that communities along the beaches in Mississippi were subjected
   to. The City seemed to have escaped most of the catastrophic wind
   damage and heavy rain that had been predicted as a possibility. Damage,
   however was still very extensive, with windows and other debris blown
   out by heavy winds, and reports of widespread flooding and wind damage
   in the east of the city. But most buildings came through well
   structurally.

   Unfortunately, the heavy winds and storm surges had severely weakened
   the city's levee system, and there were reports of extensive failures
   of the levees and flood walls protecting New Orleans, Louisiana and
   surrounding communities. The Mississippi River Gulf Outlet ("MR-GO")
   breached its levees in approximately 20 places, flooding much of New
   Orleans East, most of Saint Bernard Parish and the East Bank of
   Plaquemines Parish. The major levee breaches in the city included
   breaches at the 17th Street Canal levee, the London Avenue Canal, and
   the wide, navigable Industrial Canal, which left approximately 80% of
   the city flooded. There were three major breaches at the Industrial
   Canal; one on the upper side near the junction with MR-GO, and two on
   the lower side along the Lower Ninth Ward, between Florida Avenue and
   Claiborne Avenue. The 17th Street Canal levee was breached on the lower
   (New Orleans West End) side inland from the Old Hammond Highway Bridge,
   and the London Avenue Canal breached in two places, on the upper side
   just back from Robert E. Lee Boulevard, and on the lower side a block
   in from the Mirabeau Avenue Bridge. Flooding from the breaches put the
   majority of the city under water for days, in many places for weeks.

   In the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, engineers investigated the
   possibility that a failure in the design, construction, or maintenance
   caused much of the flooding. Originally, it was speculated that the
   levees had been overtopped by the storm surge, however this was later
   found not to be the case. Some investigations pointed to the
   possibility of a weakening of the soil beneath the foundations of the
   flood walls due to storm water caused the ground to shift, which would
   indicate that a major design flaw made during the construction of the
   levees had been a major cause of the failures due to the storm.

Loss of life

   A U.S. Coast Guardsman searches for survivors in New Orleans in the
   aftermath of Katrina.
   Enlarge
   A U.S. Coast Guardsman searches for survivors in New Orleans in the
   aftermath of Katrina.

   As of May 19, 2006, the official number of deceased victims from
   Louisiana was 1,577. The first deaths were reported shortly before
   midnight on August 28, as three nursing home patients died during an
   evacuation to Baton Rouge, most likely due to dehydration.

   On September 4, Mayor Nagin speculated that the death toll could rise
   as high as ten thousand after the clean-up was completed. Some
   survivors and evacuees reported seeing dead bodies lying in city
   streets and floating in still-flooded sections, especially in the east
   of the city. The advanced state of decomposition of many corpses, some
   of which were left in the water or sun for days before being collected,
   hindered efforts by coroners to identify many of the dead.

   There were six deaths confirmed at the Superdome. Four of these were
   from natural causes, one was the result of a drug overdose, and one was
   a suicide. At the Convention Centre, four bodies were recovered. One
   out of these four is believed to be the result of a homicide. Body
   collection throughout the city began on approximately September 9.
   Prior to that date, the locations of corpses were recorded, but most
   were not retrieved. There was a focus on living residents who refuse to
   evacuate.

Aftermath

Civil disturbances

   A fire raged in a downtown business the morning of September 2.
   Enlarge
   A fire raged in a downtown business the morning of September 2.

   In the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, looting, violence, and other
   criminal activity became serious problems. With most of the attention
   of the authorities focused on rescue efforts, the security in New
   Orleans degraded quickly. By August 30, looting had spread throughout
   the city, often in broad daylight and in the presence of police
   officers. "The looting is out of control. The French Quarter has been
   attacked," City Councilwoman Jackie Clarkson said. "We're using
   exhausted, scarce police to control looting when they should be used
   for search and rescue while we still have people on rooftops."

   Incapacitated by the breakdown of transportation and communication, as
   well as overwhelmed in terms of numbers, police officers could do
   little to stop crime, and shopkeepers who remained behind were left to
   defend their property alone. Looters included gangs of armed gunmen,
   and gunfire was heard in parts of the city. Along with violent, armed
   robbery of non-essential valuable goods, many incidents were of
   residents simply gathering food, water and other essential commodities
   from unstaffed grocery stores. There were also reports of looting by
   some police officers. There was also significant looting reported
   continually in areas of the city with few, if any permanent residents,
   such as the Lakeview, Gentilly, and the Midcity regions.

   " Sniper fire" was also reported throughout the city, targeted at
   rescue helicopters, relief workers, and police officers. One of the
   possibilities of the sniper fire was possibly resistance to relocation
   or evacuation. One report of violence involved police shooting six
   people on the Danziger Bridge, which carries the Chef Menteur Highway
   across the industrial canal, who were reportedly attacking contractors
   of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers involved in the 17th Street Canal
   repair.

   Looting and violence was also hampering efforts to evacuate the Tulane
   University medical centre, as well. Looters in boats with guns had
   attempted to break into the hospital but were repelled by hospital
   staff. "If we don't have the federal presence in New Orleans tonight at
   dark, it will no longer be safe to be there, hospital or no hospital,"
   Acadian Ambulance Services C.E.O. Richard Zuschlag told CNN. Several
   news sources reported instances of fighting, theft, rape, and even
   murder in the Superdome and other refuge centers.

   Most of the city's 750 nuns had remained in the city during the storm.
   They refused to leave, even after Governor Blanco had ordered everyone
   left after the storm evacuated, because it would have been the only
   time in over 200 years that the clergy had left the city in a time of
   suffering. Many government officials were very concerned about their
   safety.

   Additional acts of unrest occurred following the storm, particularly
   with the New Orleans Police Department. In the aftermath, a tourist
   asked a police officer for assistance, and got the response, "Go to
   hell, it's every man for himself." Also, many New Orleans police
   officers deserted the city in the days before the storm, many of them
   escaping in their department-owned patrol cars. This added to the chaos
   by stretching law enforcement thin . Additionally, there were reports
   of police officers stealing vehicles from car dealerships, further
   adding to the confusion.

Regaining control

   A National Guard humvee patrols the streets outside of the Louisiana
   Superdome.
   Enlarge
   A National Guard humvee patrols the streets outside of the Louisiana
   Superdome.

   On August 31, New Orleans's 1,500-member police force was ordered to
   abandon search and rescue missions and turn their attention toward
   controlling the widespread looting. The city also ordered a mandatory
   curfew. Mayor Nagin called for increased federal assistance in a,
   "desperate S.O.S.," following the city's inability to control looting
   and was often misquoted as declaring martial law in the city, despite
   there being no such term in Louisiana state law (a declaration of a
   state of emergency was instead made). On the same day, Governor
   Kathleen Blanco announced the arrival of a military presence, stating
   that they, "[knew] how to shoot and kill and [expected that] they
   [would]." Despite the increased law enforcement presence, crime
   continued to be problematic. Several armed attacks on relief
   helicopters, bus convoys, and police officers were reported, and fires
   erupted around the city at stores and a chemical storage facility. By
   September 1, 6,500 National Guard troops had arrived in New Orleans,
   and on September 2, Blanco requested a total of 40,000 for assistance
   in evacuation and security efforts in Louisiana.

   Some concern over the availability and readiness of the Louisiana
   National Guard to help stabilize the security situation was questioned.
   Guardsman Lieutenant Colonel Pete had commented that, "dozens of high
   water vehicles, humvees, refuelers, and generators were abroad." At the
   time of the hurricane, approximately 3,000 members of the Guard were
   serving a tour of duty in Iraq. With total personnel strength of
   11,000, this meant that 27% of the Louisiana National Guard was away.
   However, both the White House and the Pentagon argued that the
   depletion of personnel and equipment did not impact the ability of the
   Guard to perform its mission — rather, impassable roads and flooded
   areas were the major factors impeding the Guardsmen from securing the
   situation in New Orleans.

   Before Hurricane Katrina, the murder rate in New Orleans was ten times
   higher than the U.S. average. After the situation in New Orleans was
   brought under control, criminal activity in New Orleans dropped
   significantly.

The Superdome

   Displaced people bringing their belongings and lining up to get into
   the Superdome.
   Enlarge
   Displaced people bringing their belongings and lining up to get into
   the Superdome.
   Damage to the Superdome as a result of Katrina.
   Enlarge
   Damage to the Superdome as a result of Katrina.

   As one of the largest structures in the city, evacuees were brought to
   the Superdome to wait out the storm or to await further evacuation.
   Many others made their way to the Superdome on their own, hoping to
   find food, water, shelter, or transport out of town. On August 29,
   Katrina passed over New Orleans with such force that it ripped two
   holes in the Superdome roof. On the evening of August 30, Maj. Gen.
   Bennett C. Landreneau, of the Louisiana National Guard, said that the
   number of people taking shelter in the Superdome had risen to around
   15,000 to 20,000 as search and rescue teams brought more people to the
   Superdome from areas hard-hit by the flooding. As conditions worsened
   and flood waters continued to rise, on August 31, Governor Blanco
   ordered that all of New Orleans, including the Superdome, be evacuated.
   The area outside the Superdome was flooded to a depth of three feet (1
   m), with a possibility of seven feet (2.3 m) if the area equalized with
   Lake Pontchartrain. Governor Blanco had the state send in 68 school
   buses on Monday to begin evacuating people.

   Despite increasingly squalid conditions, the population inside
   continued to grow. The situation inside the building was described as
   chaotic; reports of fights, rape, and filthy living conditions were
   widespread. As many as 100 were reported to have died in the Superdome,
   with most deaths resulting from heat exhaustion, but other reported
   incidents included an accused rapist who was beaten to death by a crowd
   and an apparent suicide. Despite these reports, though, the final
   official death toll was significantly less: six people inside (4 of
   natural causes, one overdose, and an apparent suicide) and a few more
   in the general area outside the stadium.

   FEMA had announced that, in conjunction with Greyhound, the National
   Guard, and Houston Metro, the 25,000 people at the Superdome would be
   relocated across state lines to the Houston Astrodome. Roughly 475
   buses were promised by FEMA to ferry evacuees with the entire
   evacuation expected to take two days. By September 4, the Superdome had
   been completely evacuated.

   Although the Superdome suffered damage by water and wind to the overall
   interior and exterior structures, as well as interior damage from human
   waste and trash, the facility was repaired at a cost of $140 Million
   and ready for games by the fall of 2006. The Saints' first game in the
   Superdome after Hurricane Katrina was played on September 25, 2006 (the
   third Monday night of the regular season), resulting in a 23-3 Saints
   victory over the Atlanta Falcons.

New Orleans Convention Centre

   Because of Hurricane Katrina, the Ernest N. Morial Convention Centre
   suffered a loss of water pressure and electricity, and one of its
   convention halls had a large hole in its ceiling. The centre was
   otherwise only lightly damaged..

   On August 29, as people were being turned away at the Superdome and
   rescues continued, rescuers began dropping people on the dry road in
   front of the Convention Centre. Captain MA Pfeiffer of the NOPD was
   quoted as saying, "It was supposed to be a bus stop where they dropped
   people off for transportation. The problem was, the transportation
   never came." By the afternoon of the 29th, the crowd had grown to about
   1,000 people. The convention center's president (who was there with a
   small group of convention center employees at this time) addressed the
   crowd near dark, informing them that there was no food, water, medical
   care, or other services. By late on the evening of the 29th, the
   convention center had been broken into, and evacuees began occupying
   the inside of the convention centre.

   A contingent of 250 National Guard engineering units occupied one part
   of the convention centre beginning August 30 and remained there until
   September 1, at times barricaded in their location. The units were
   never given orders to control the crowd, and were not expected to be
   prepared for such a task, as engineering units. The number of people at
   the convention center continued to grow over the next three days to by
   some estimates as many as 20,000 people. Reasons for arriving included
   being sent to the convention center from the overwhelmed Superdome,
   being dropped off there by rescuers, or hearing about the convention
   center as a shelter via word of mouth. No checking for weapons was done
   among the crowd as was done at the Superdome, and a large store of
   alcohol kept at the Convention Centre was broken into. Reports of
   robberies, murder, and rape began to surface, though were later
   questioned. In general, those who died, regardless of cause of death,
   did not have their bodies moved or removed.

   By September 1, the facility, like the Superdome, was completely
   overwhelmed and declared unsafe and unsanitary. However, even though
   there were thousands of evacuees at the centre, along with network
   newscasters, pleading desperately for help on CNN, FOX, and other
   broadcast outlets, FEMA head Michael Brown and Homeland Security
   Secretary Michael Chertoff both claimed to have no knowledge of the use
   of the Convention Centre as a shelter until the afternoon of September
   1.

   A sizable contingent of National Guard arrived on September 2 to
   establish order and provide essential provisions, and on September 3,
   buses began arriving at the convention centre to pick up the refugees
   there. The Convention Centre was completely evacuated by September 4.

Evacuation efforts

   Hurricane evacuees in Jefferson Parish, Louisiana (in the Metairie
   community) being helped by the Air National Guard.
   Enlarge
   Hurricane evacuees in Jefferson Parish, Louisiana (in the Metairie
   community) being helped by the Air National Guard.

   On August 31, a public health emergency was declared for the entire
   Gulf Coast, and Louisiana Governor Kathleen Blanco ordered a mandatory
   evacuation of all those remaining in New Orleans. Relief organizations
   scrambled to locate suitable areas for relocating evacuees on a large
   scale. Many of the survivors in the Superdome were bussed to the
   Reliant Astrodome in Houston, Texas. Houston agreed to shelter an
   additional 25,000 evacuees beyond those admitted to the Astrodome,
   including one "renegade bus" that was commandeered by private citizen
   Jabbar Gibson. By September 1, the Astrodome was declared full and
   could not accept any more evacuees. The George R. Brown Convention
   Centre nearby was opened to house additional evacuees. San Antonio,
   Texas also agreed to house 25,000 "refugees", beginning relocation
   efforts in vacant office buldings on the grounds of KellyUSA, a former
   air force base, and the Reunion Arena in Dallas, Texas was mobilized to
   house incoming evacuees, and smaller shelters were established in towns
   across Texas and Oklahoma. Arkansas also opened various shelters and
   state parks throughout the state for evacuees.

   Expected to last only two days, the evacuation of remaining evacuees
   proved more difficult than rescue organizations anticipated as
   transportation convoys struggled with damaged infrastructure and a
   growing number of evacuees. By the morning of September 1, Governor
   Blanco reported that the number of evacuees in the Superdome was down
   to 2,500. However, by evening, eleven hours after evacuation efforts
   began, the Superdome held 10,000 more people than it did at dawn.
   Evacuees from across the city swelled the crowd to about 30,000,
   believing the arena was the best place to get a ride out of town.

   Evacuation efforts were hastened on September 2 by the wider dispersal
   of evacuees among newly-opened shelters. Louis Armstrong International
   Airport was reopened to allow flights related to relief efforts, and
   began to load evacuees onto planes as well.

   On September 3, some 42,000 evacuees were evacuated from New Orleans,
   including those remaining in the Superdome and Convention Centre.
   Efforts turned to the hundreds of people still trapped in area hotels,
   hospitals, schools and private homes.

   On September 6, Mayor Ray Nagin ordered a forced evacuation of everyone
   from the city who as not involved in clean up work, citing safety and
   health concerns. The order was given not only as an attempt to restore
   law and order, but also out of concern about the hazardous living
   conditions in the city. Eviction efforts escalated three days later,
   when door-to-door searches were conducted to advise remaining residents
   to leave the city. Despite this, a number of residents defied the
   eviction order. While initially lax in enforcing evictions, National
   Guard troops eventually began to remove residents by force.

Health effects

   Sick and injured people being evacuated aboard a C-17 Globemaster III
   Enlarge
   Sick and injured people being evacuated aboard a C-17 Globemaster III

   There was a concern that the prolonged flooding would lead to an
   outbreak of health problems for those who remained in the city. In
   addition to dehydration and food poisoning, there was also potential
   for the spread of hepatitis A, cholera, tuberculosis, and typhoid
   fever, all related to the growing contamination of food and drinking
   water supplies in the city compounded by the city's characteristic heat
   and stifling humidity. Survivors could also face long-term health risks
   due to prolonged exposure to the petrochemical tainted flood waters and
   mosquito-borne diseases such as yellow fever, malaria and West Nile
   Virus.

   On September 2, an emergency triage centre was set up at the airport. A
   steady stream of helicopters and ambulances brought in the elderly,
   sick, and injured. Baggage equipment was used as gurneys to transport
   people from the flight line to the hospital, which was set up in the
   airport terminal. The scene could be described as, "organized chaos,"
   but efficient. By September 3, the situation started to stabilize. Up
   to 5,000 people had been triaged and fewer than 200 remained at the
   medical unit.

   Hospital evacuations continued from other area hospitals that were
   flooded or damaged. Reports from the Methodist Hospital indicated that
   people were dying of dehydration and exhaustion while the staff worked
   unendingly in horrendous conditions. The first floor of the hospital
   flooded and the dead were stacked in a second floor operating room.
   Patients requiring ventilators were kept alive with hand-powered
   resuscitation bags.

   On September 6, E. coli was detected in the water supply. According to
   the CDC, five people died from bacterial infections caused by the toxic
   waters. The deaths appear to have been caused by Vibrio vulnificus
   bacteria, of the Cholera family.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Effect_of_Hurricane_Katrina_on_New_Orleans
   "
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
