   #copyright

Egyptian pyramids

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Archaeology

   The Great Sphinx of Giza with Khafre's pyramid in the background.
   Enlarge
   The Great Sphinx of Giza with Khafre's pyramid in the background.
   Pyramid
   in hieroglyphs


   U23 G17
       r  O24

   The pyramids of Egypt, among the largest constructions ever built by
   man, , constitute one of the most potent and enduring symbols of
   Ancient Egyptian civilization. It is generally accepted by most
   archaeologists that they were constructed as burial monuments
   associated with royal solar and stellar cults, and most were built
   during the Old and Middle Kingdom periods.

Pyramid sites

   Map of Giza pyramid complex.
   Enlarge
   Map of Giza pyramid complex.

   The number of pyramid structures in Egypt today is reported by most
   sources as being between 80 and 110, with a majority favouring the
   higher number. In 1842 Lepsius made a list of pyramids, in which he
   counted 67, although more have been identified and discovered since his
   time the imprecise nature of the count appears related to the fact that
   as many smaller pyramids are in a poor state of preservation and appear
   as little more than mounds of rubble, they are only now being properly
   identified and studied by archaeologists. Most are grouped in a number
   of pyramid fields, the most important of which are listed
   geographically, from north to south, below.

Abu Rawash

   Abu Rawash is the site of Egypt's most northerly pyramid other than the
   ruins of Lepsius pyramid number one— the mostly ruined Pyramid of
   Djedefre, the son and successor of Khufu. Originally it was thought
   that this pyramid had never been completed, but the current
   archaeological consensus is that not only was it completed, but that it
   was originally about the same size as the Pyramid of Menkaure — the
   third largest of the Giza pyramids. On this basis Djedefre's edifice
   would have claimed the title of the fourth or fifth largest pyramid in
   Egypt.

   Unfortunately its location adjacent to a major crossroads made it an
   easy source of stone, and quarrying — which began in Roman times —
   continued until as recently as the early 20th century. Today little
   remains apart from a few courses of stone superimposed upon the natural
   hillock that formed part of the pyramid's core — although a small
   adjacent satellite pyramid is in a better state of preservation.

Giza

   The Giza pyramid field, viewed from the south-west. Dominating the
   picture from foreground to background are the Pyramids of Menkaure,
   Khafre and Khufu.
   Enlarge
   The Giza pyramid field, viewed from the south-west. Dominating the
   picture from foreground to background are the Pyramids of Menkaure,
   Khafre and Khufu.

   Giza, on the southern outskirts of Cairo is the location of the Pyramid
   of Khufu (also known as the "Great Pyramid" and the "Pyramid of
   Cheops"), the somewhat smaller Pyramid of Khafre (or Kephren), and the
   relatively modest-sized Pyramid of Menkaure (or Mykerinus), along with
   a number of smaller satellite edifices, known as leens pyramids, and
   the Great Sphinx.

   Of the three, only Khafre's pyramid retains part of its original
   polished limestone casing, towards its apex. Interestingly this pyramid
   appears larger than the adjacent Khufu pyramid by virtue of its more
   elevated location, and the steeper angle of inclination of its
   construction — it is, in fact, smaller in both height and volume.

   The Giza Necropolis has arguably been the world's most popular tourist
   destination since antiquity, and was popularised in Hellenistic times
   when the Great Pyramid was listed by Antipater of Sidon as one of the
   Seven Wonders of the World. Today it is the only one of the ancient
   Wonders still in existence.
     * Pyramids of Giza colour satellite imagery

Zawyet el-Aryan

   This site, half way between Giza and Abu Sir, is the location for two
   unfinished Old Kingdom pyramids. The northern structure's owner is
   believed to be the Pharaoh Nebka, whilst the southern structure is
   attributed to the Third Dynasty Pharaoh Khaba, also known as Hudjefa,
   successor to Sekhemkhet). Khaba's four-year tenure as pharaoh more than
   likely explains the similar premature truncation of his step pyramid.
   Today it is approximately twenty metres in height; had it been
   completed, it would probably have more than doubled in size.

Abu Sir

   There are a total of seven pyramids at this site, which served as the
   main royal necropolis during the Fifth Dynasty. The quality of
   construction of the Abu Sir pyramids is inferior to those of the Fourth
   Dynasty — perhaps signalling a decrease in royal power or a less
   vibrant economy. They are smaller than their predecessors, and are
   built of low quality local limestone.

   The three major pyramids are those of Niuserre (which is also the most
   intact), Neferirkare Kakai and Sahure. The site is also home to the
   incomplete Pyramid of Neferefre. All of the major pyramids at Abu Sir
   were built as step pyramids, although the largest of them — the Pyramid
   of Neferirkare Kakai — is believed to have originally been built as a
   step pyramid some seventy metres in height and then later transformed
   into a "true" pyramid by having its steps filled in with loose masonry.

Saqqara

   The Step Pyramid of Djozer
   Enlarge
   The Step Pyramid of Djozer

   Major pyramids here include the Step Pyramid of Djozer — Egypt's oldest
   stone monumental building — the Pyramid of Userkaf and the Pyramid of
   Teti. Also at Saqqara is the Pyramid of Unas, which retains a pyramid
   causeway that is amongst the best-preserved in Egypt. This pyramid was
   also the subject of one of antiquities' earliest restoration attempts,
   conducted under the auspices of one of the sons of Ramesses II. Saqqara
   is also the location of the incomplete step pyramid of Djozer's
   successor Sekhemkhet, known as the Buried Pyramid. Archaeologists
   believe that had this pyramid been completed it would have been larger
   than Djozer's.

Dahshur

   This area is arguably the most important pyramid field in Egypt outside
   Giza and Saqqara, although until 1996 the site was inaccessible due to
   its location within a military base, and hence was virtually unknown
   outside archaeological circles.

   The southern Pyramid of Sneferu, commonly known as the Bent Pyramid is
   believed to be the first (or by some accounts, second) attempt at
   creating a pyramid with smooth sides. In this it was only a partial —
   but nonetheless visually arresting — success; it remains the only
   Egyptian pyramid to retain a significant proportion of its original
   limestone casing, and serves as the best example of the luminous
   appearance common to all pyramids in their original state.

   The northern, or Red Pyramid built at the same location by Sneferu was
   later successfully completed as the world's first true smooth-sided
   pyramid. Despite its relative obscurity, the Red Pyramid is actually
   the third largest pyramid in Egypt — after the pyramids of Khufu and
   Khafre at Giza. Also at Dahshur is the pyramid known as the Black
   Pyramid of Amenemhet III.

Mazghuna

   Located to the south of Dahshur, this area was used in the First
   Intermediate Period by several kings who constructed their pyramids out
   of mudbrick. Today these structures are obscure and unimpressive.

Lisht

   The ruined Pyramid of Amenemhet I at Lisht
   Enlarge
   The ruined Pyramid of Amenemhet I at Lisht

   Two major pyramids are known to have been built at Lisht — those of
   Amenemhat I and his son, Senusret I. The latter is surrounded by the
   ruins of ten smaller subsidiary pyramids. The site which is in the
   vicinity of the oasis of Fayyum, midway between Dahshur and Meidum, and
   about 100 kilometres south of Cairo, is believed to be in the vicinity
   of the ancient city of Itjtawy (the precise location of which remains
   unknown), which served as the capital of Egypt during the 12th Dynasty.

Meidum

   Sneferu's Pyramid at Meidum; the central core structure remains,
   surrounded by a mountain of rubble from the collapsed outer casing
   Enlarge
   Sneferu's Pyramid at Meidum; the central core structure remains,
   surrounded by a mountain of rubble from the collapsed outer casing

   The pyramid at Meidum is one of three constructed during the reign of
   Sneferu, and is believed by some to have been commenced by that
   pharaoh's father and predecessor, Huni. However, this is not very
   likely, as his name does not appear on the site. Some archaeologists
   also suggest that the Meidum pyramid may have been the first
   unsuccessful attempt at the construction of a "true" or smooth-sided
   pyramid.

   The pyramid suffered a catastrophic collapse in antiquity, and today
   only the central parts of its stepped inner core remain standing,
   giving it an odd tower-like appearance that is unique among Egyptian
   pyramids. The hill that the pyramid sits atop is not a natural
   landscape feature — it is in fact the small mountain of debris created
   when the lower courses and outer casing of the pyramid gave way.

Hawarra

   The Pyramid of Amenemhet III at Hawarra
   Enlarge
   The Pyramid of Amenemhet III at Hawarra

   Amenemhet III was the last powerful ruler of the 12th Dynasty, and the
   pyramid he built at Hawarra, near Faiyum, is believed to post-date the
   so-called "Black Pyramid" built by the same ruler at Dahshur. It is the
   Hawarra pyramid that is believed to have been Amenemhet's final resting
   place.

el-Lahun

   The Pyramid of Senusret II. The pyramid's natural limestone core is
   clearly visible as the yellow stratum at its base.
   Enlarge
   The Pyramid of Senusret II. The pyramid's natural limestone core is
   clearly visible as the yellow stratum at its base.

   The pyramid of Senusret II at el-Lahun is the southernmost royal-tomb
   pyramid structure in Egypt. Its builders reduced the amount of work
   necessary to construct it by ingeniously using as its foundation and
   core a 12 metre high natural limestone hill.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Egyptian_pyramids"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
