   #copyright

Electronic amplifier

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Engineering


   This is a featured article. Click here for more information.

   The term amplifier as used in this article can mean either a circuit
   (or stage) using a single active device or a complete system such as a
   packaged audio hi-fi amplifier..

   An electronic amplifier is a device for increasing the power of a
   signal. It does this by taking power from a power supply and
   controlling the output to match the input signal shape but with a
   larger amplitude. An idealized amplifier can be said to be "a piece of
   wire with gain", as the output is an exact replica of the input, but
   larger.

Classification of amplifier stages and systems

   Different designs of amplifiers are used for different types of
   applications and signals. We can broadly divide amplifiers into three
   categories:
     * Small signal amplifiers,
     * Low frequency power amplifiers and
     * Radio frequency RF power amplifiers.

   Each of these calls for a slightly different design approach, mainly
   because of the physical limitations of the components used to implement
   the amplifier, and the efficiencies that can be realised.

   There are many alternative classifications that address different
   aspects of amplifier designs, and they all have some effect on the
   design parameters and objectives of the circuit. Amplifier design is
   always a compromise of numerous factors, such as cost, amount of power
   consumed, devices that have real-world imperfections, and the need to
   match the amplifier to the input signal as well as the output load.

Classification of amplifier stages by common terminal

   One set of these classifications include terms referring to “common
   terminal” connections, where the design is described by the terminal of
   the active device that is tied closest to ground. Examples include
   terms such as common emitter, common plate, or common drain, and these
   names also reflect the type of active device used to amplify the
   signal. For instance, common emitter refers to an amplifier with a
   bipolar transistor as the active device, while common plate would be
   for a vacuum tube amp, while a common drain amp would signify the use
   of MOSFET or JFET devices. Designs exist for almost any terminal of any
   active device to be held to ground in an amplifier, for different
   reasons that are reflected in each use. See also: common collector,
   common base.

Inverting or non-inverting

   Another way to classify amps is the phase relationship of the input
   signal to the output signal. An inverting amplifier produces an output
   that is 180 degrees out of phase of the input signal, or a mirror image
   of it if viewed on an oscilloscope. A non-inverting amplifier maintains
   equal phase relationship between the input and output waveforms. An
   emitter follower is a type of this amplifier, indicating that the
   signal at the emitter of a transistor is following (matching phases)
   with the input signal.

   This description can apply to a single stage or a complete system.

Function

   Other amps may be classified by their function or output
   characteristics. These functional descriptions usually apply to
   complete amplifier systems or sub-systems and rarely to individual
   stages.
     * A servo amp indicates an integrated feedback loop to actively
       control the output at some desired level. A DC servo indicates use
       at frequencies down to DC levels, where the rapid fluctuations of
       an audio or RF signal do not occur. These are often used in
       mechanical actuators, or devices such as DC motors that must
       maintain a constant speed or torque. An AC servo amp can do this
       for some ac motors.

     * A linear amp denotes that it has a precise amplification factor
       over a wide range of frequencies, and is often used to boost
       signals for relay in communications systems. A non-linear amp is
       made to amplify only a specific narrow or tuned frequency, to the
       exclusion of all other frequencies.

     * A RF amp refers to an amp designed for use in the radio frequency
       range of the electromagnetic spectrum, and is often used to
       increase the sensitivity of a receiver or the output power of a
       transmitter.

     * An audio amp is designed for use in reproducing audio frequencies,
       with special considerations made for driving speakers. These often
       have multiple amps grouped together as separate or bridgeable
       channels to accommodate different audio reproduction requirements.

     * A special type of low power amp with almost ideal characteristics
       is used in instruments and for signal processing, among many other
       varied uses. These are known as operational amplifiers, or op-amps.
       This is because this type of amplifier is used in circuits that
       perform mathematical algorithmic functions, or "operations" on
       input signals to obtain specific types of output signals.

Voltage, current and power amplification

   Amplifiers can be designed to increase signal voltage (voltage amp),
   current (buffer amp), or both (power amp), of an electronic signal.
   Electronic amplifiers can operate off either single sided supplies
   (either + or − voltage “rail”, or “bus”, and ground), or double-sided
   or balanced supplies (+ and − supply rails, and ground).

   The different methods of supplying power result in many different
   methods of bias. Bias is the method by which the active devices are set
   up to operate properly, or by which the DC component of the output
   signal is set to the midpoint between the maximum voltages available
   from the power supply. Most amplifiers use sets of devices that are
   matched in specifications except for polarity. These are called
   complementary pairs. Class A amplifiers generally use only one device,
   unless the power supplies are set to provide both positive and negative
   supplies, in which case a dual device symmetrical design may be used.
   Class C amps, by definition, use a single polarity supply.

   Amplifiers are also often designed to have multiple stages hooked in
   series to increase gain. Each stage of these designs is often a
   different type of amp to suit the needs of each stage. For instance,
   the first stage might be a Class A stage, feeding a class AB push-pull
   second stage, which then drives a class G final output stage, taking
   advantage for the strengths of each type, while minimizing the
   weaknesses.

   There also exist special “stacked” transistors, called Darlington
   pairs, which have two specially matched transistors in a single case.
   Transistors or other active devices are also often hooked in parallel,
   or “strapped”, in order to multiply the amount of current that the
   final output stage can deliver to the load.

Interstage coupling method

   Audio amplifiers are sometimes classified by the coupling method of the
   signal at the input, output, or between stages. Different types of
   these include:
     * R-C coupled amplifier
     * L-C coupled amplifier
     * Transformer coupled amplifier
     * Direct coupled amplifier

   Each method has its advantages and compromises. Also see: Multistage
   amplifiers.

In accordance with the frequency range

     * DC( direct coupled) – capable of amplifying even zero frequency
       (DC) signals
     * Audio frequency (AF) – 20 Hz to 20 kHz
     * Video amplifiers – upto few 100 MHz (<10 MHz for TV)
     * Ultra High Frequency (UHF) – upto few GHz

In accordance with the type of load

     * Untuned - (a) audio (b) video
     * Tuned (RF amps) - used for amplifying a single radio frequency or
       band of frequencies

Angle of flow or conduction angle

   The letter system of amplifier classification assigns a letter to
   different designs of electronic amplifiers. These designs are
   classified according to the relationship between the input wave form
   and the output wave form, as well as the amount of time that the active
   components used to amplify a signal are conducting electricity. This
   time is measured in degrees of duration of sine wave test signal
   applied to the input of an amplifier, with 360 degrees representing one
   full cycle.

Implementation

   Amplifiers can be implemented using transistors of various types, or
   vacuum tubes (valves). Other more exotic forms of amplifier are also
   possible using different types of devices. Such exotic amplifiers are
   often used for microwave or other extremely high frequency signals.

Amplifier classes

   Amplifier circuits are classified as A, B, AB and C for analog designs,
   and class D and E for switching designs. For the analog classes, each
   class defines what proportion of the input signal cycle (called the
   angle of flow) is used to actually switch on the amplifying device:

   Class A
          100% of the input signal is used (conduction angle a = 360° or
          2π)

   Class AB
          more than 50% but less than 100% is used. (181° to 359°, π < a <
          2π)

     * Class AB1 applies to tube or transistor amplifiers in class AB
       where the grid or base is more negatively biased than it is in
       class A.

     * Class AB2 applies to tube or transistor amplifiers in class AB
       where the grid or base is often more negatively biased than in AB1,
       and the input signal is often larger. When the drive is high enough
       to make the grid or the base more positive, the grid or base
       current will increase. It is possible depending on the level of the
       signal input for the amplifier to move from class AB1 to AB2.

   Class B
          50% of the input signal is used (a = 180° or π)

   Class C
          less than 50% is used (0° to 179°, a < π)

   This can be most easily understood using the diagrams in each section
   below. For the sake of illustration, a bipolar junction transistor is
   shown as the amplifying device, but in practice this could be a MOSFET
   or vacuum tube device. In an analog amplifier, the signal is applied to
   the input terminal of the device (base, gate or grid), and this causes
   a proportional output drive current to flow out of the output terminal.
   The output drive current is obtained from the power supply. The voltage
   signal shown is thus a larger version of the input, but has been
   changed in sign (inverted) by the amplification. Other arrangements of
   amplifying device are possible, but that given ( common emitter, common
   source or common cathode) is the easiest to understand and employ in
   practice. If the amplifying element is linear, then the output will be
   faithful copy of the input, only larger and inverted. In practice,
   transistors are not linear, and the output will only approximate the
   input. Non-linearity is the origin of distortion within an amplifier.
   Which class of amplifier (A, B, AB or C) depends on how the amplifying
   device is biased — in the diagrams the bias circuits are omitted for
   clarity.

   Any real amplifier is an imperfect realization of an ideal amplifier.
   One important limitation of a real amplifier is that the output it can
   generate is ultimately limited by the power available from the power
   supply. An amplifier can saturate and clip the output if the input
   signal becomes too large for the amplifier to reproduce.

Class A

   Class A amplifiers amplify over the whole of the input cycle such that
   the output signal is an exact scaled-up replica of the input with no
   clipping. Class A amplifiers are the usual means of implementing
   small-signal amplifiers. They are not very efficient — a theoretical
   maximum of 50% is obtainable, but for small signals, this waste of
   power is still extremely small, and can be easily tolerated. Only when
   we need to create output powers with appreciable levels of voltage and
   current does Class A become problematic. In a Class A circuit, the
   amplifying element is biased such that the device is always conducting
   to some extent, and is operated over the most linear portion of its
   characteristic curve (known as its transfer characteristic or
   transconductance curve). Because the device is always conducting, even
   if there is no input at all, power is wasted. This is the reason for
   its inefficiency.

                   image:Electronic_Amplifier_Class_A.png

   Class A Amplifier

   If high output powers are needed from a Class A circuit, the power
   wastage will become significant. For every watt delivered to the load,
   the amplifier itself will, at best, waste another watt. For large
   powers this will call for a large power supply and large heat sink to
   carry away the waste heat. Class A designs have largely been superseded
   for audio power amplifiers, though some audiophiles believe that Class
   A gives the best sound quality, due to it being operated in as linear a
   manner as possible. In addition, some aficionados prefer thermionic
   valve (or "tube") designs over transistors, for a number of reasons:
   Tubes are more commonly used in class A designs, which have an
   asymmetrical transfer function. This means that distortion of a sine
   wave creates both odd- and even-numbered harmonics. They claim that
   this sounds more "musical" than the purely odd harmonics produced by a
   symmetrical push-pull amplifier. Though good amplifier design can avoid
   inducing any harmonic patterns in a sound reproduction system, the
   differences in harmonic content are essential to the sound of
   intentional electric guitar distortion. Another is that valves use many
   more electrons at once than a transistor, and so statistical effects
   lead to a "smoother" approximation of the true waveform — see shot
   noise for more on this. Field-effect transistors have similar
   characteristics to valves, so these are found more often in high
   quality amplifiers than bipolar transistors. Historically, valve
   amplifiers often used a Class A power amplifier simply because valves
   are large and expensive; Many Class A design uses only a single device.
   Transistors are much cheaper, and so more elaborate designs that give
   greater efficiency but use more parts are still cost effective. A
   classic application for a pair of class A devices is the long-tailed
   pair, which is exceptionally linear, and forms the basis of many more
   complex circuits, including many audio amplifiers and almost all
   op-amps.

Class B and AB

   Class B amplifiers only amplify half of the input wave cycle. As such
   they create a large amount of distortion, but their efficiency is
   greatly improved and is much better than Class A. Class B has a maximum
   theoretical efficiency of 78.5%. This is because the amplifying element
   is switched off altogether half of the time, and so cannot dissipate
   power. A single Class B element is rarely found in practice, though it
   can be used in RF power amplifiers where the distortion is unimportant.
   However Class C is more commonly used for this.

                   Image:Electronic_Amplifier_Class_B.png

   Class B Amplifier

   A practical circuit using Class B elements is the complementary pair or
   "push-pull" arrangement. Here, complementary devices are used to each
   amplify the opposite halves of the input signal, which is then
   recombined at the output. This arrangement gives excellent efficiency,
   but can suffer from the drawback that there is a small glitch at the
   "joins" between the two halves of the signal. This is called crossover
   distortion. A solution to this is to bias the devices just on, rather
   than off altogether when they are not in use. This is called Class AB
   operation. Each device is operated in a non-linear region which is only
   linear over half the waveform, but still conducts a small amount on the
   other half. Such a circuit behaves as a class A amplifier in the region
   where both devices are in the linear region, however the circuit cannot
   strictly be called class A if the signal passes outside this region,
   since beyond that point only one device will remain in its linear
   region and the transients typical of class B operation will occur. The
   result is that when the two halves are combined, the crossover is
   greatly minimised or eliminated altogether.

   However, it is important to note that while the efficiency of Class AB
   is greater than Class A, it is less than Class B.

                  Image:Electronic_Amplifier_Push-pull.png

   Class B Push-Pull Amplifier

   Class B or AB push-pull circuits are the most common form of design
   found in audio power amplifiers. Class AB is widely considered a good
   compromise for audio amplifiers, since much of the time the music is
   quiet enough that the signal stays in the "class A" region, where it is
   reproduced with good fidelity, and by definition if passing out of this
   region, is large enough that the distortion products typical of class B
   are relatively small. Class B and AB amplifiers are sometimes used for
   RF linear amplifiers as well.

Negative feedback

   Feedback feeds the difference of the input and part of the output back
   to the input in a way that cancels out part of the input. The main
   effect is to reduce the overall gain of the system. However the
   unwanted signals introduced by the amplifier are also fed back. Since
   they are not part of the original input, they are added to the input in
   opposite phase, subtracting them from the input.

   Careful design of each stage of an open loop (non-feedback) amplifier
   can achieve about 1% distortion. With negative feedback, 0.001% is
   typical. Noise, even crossover distortion can be practically
   eliminated. Feedback was originally invented so that replacing a
   burnt-out vacuum tube would not change an amplifier's performance
   (manufacturing realities require that tubes and transistors with the
   same part number will have close but not identical gain). Negative
   feedback also compensates for changing temperatures, and degrading or
   non-linear components. While amplifying devices can be treated as
   linear over some portion of their characteristic curve, they are
   inherently non-linear; their physics dictates that they operate using a
   square law. The result of non-linearity is distortion.

   The application dictates how much distortion a design can tolerate. For
   hi-fi audio applications, instrumentation amplifiers and the like,
   distortion must be minimal, often better than 1%.

   While feedback seems like a universal fix for all the problems of an
   amplifier, many believe that negative feedback is a bad thing. Since it
   uses a loop, it takes a finite time to react to an input signal, and
   for this short period the amplifier is "out of control." A musical
   transient whose timing is of the same order as this period will be
   grossly distorted, even though the amplifier will show incredibly good
   distortion performance on steady-state signals. This, essentially, is
   the rationale for the existence of "transient intermodulation
   distortion" in amplifiers which was exhaustively discussed and debated
   from the late 1970s through much of the 1980s . Proponents of feedback
   refute this, saying that the feedback "delay" is of such a short order
   that it represents a frequency vastly outside the bandwidth of the
   system, and such effects are not only inaudible, but not even present,
   as the amplifier will not respond to such high frequency signals.

   The argument has caused controversy for many years, and has led to all
   sorts of interesting designs — such as feedforward amplifiers (e.g.
   digital signals on many cell-site base-station transmitters are
   precompensated for the radio amplifier's distortion). The fact remains
   that the majority of modern amplifiers use considerable amounts of
   feedback, though many of the high-end audiophile designs seek to
   minimise this.

   Whatever the merits of these arguments about its effect on waveform
   distortion, feedback also affects the output impedance of the amplifier
   and therefore its damping factor. Roughly speaking, the damping factor
   is a measure of the ability of the amplifier to control the speaker.
   All other things being equal, the greater the amount of feedback, the
   lower its output impedance and the higher its damping factor. This has
   an effect on the low frequency performance of many speaker systems
   where low damping factors lead to irregular bass response.

   The concept of feedback is used in operational amplifiers to precisely
   define gain, bandwidth and other parameters.

A practical circuit

   For the purposes of illustration, this practical amplifier circuit is
   described. It could be the basis for a moderate-power audio amplifier.
   It features a typical (though substantially simplified) design as found
   in modern amplifiers, with a class AB push-pull output stage, and uses
   some overall negative feedback. Bipolar transistors are shown, but this
   design would also be realisable with FETs or valves.

                      image:Amplifier_Circuit_Small.png

   A practical amplifier circuit

   The input signal is coupled through capacitor C1 to the base of
   transistor Q1. The capacitor allows the AC signal to pass, but blocks
   the DC bias voltage established by resistors R1 and R2 so that any
   preceding circuit is not affected by it. Q1 and Q2 form a differential
   amplifier (an amplifier that multiplies the difference between two
   inputs by some constant), in an arrangement known as a long-tailed
   pair. This arrangement is used to conveniently allow the use of
   negative feedback, which is fed from the output to Q2 via R7 and R8.
   The negative feedback into the difference amplifier allows the
   amplifier to compare the input to the actual output. The amplified
   signal from Q1 is directly fed to the second stage, Q3, which provides
   further amplification of the signal, and the DC bias for the output
   stages, Q4 and Q5. R6 provides the load for Q3 (A better design would
   probably use some form of active load here, such as a constant-current
   sink). So far, all of the amplifier is operating in Class A. The output
   pair are arranged in Class AB push-pull, also called a complementary
   pair. They provide the majority of the current amplification and
   directly drive the load, connected via DC-blocking capacitor C2. The
   diodes D1 and D2 provide a small amount of constant voltage bias for
   the output pair, just biasing them into the conducting state so that
   crossover distortion is minimised. This design is simple, but a good
   basis for a practical design because it automatically stabilises its
   operating point, since feedback internally operates from DC up through
   the audio range and beyond. Further circuit elements would probably be
   found in a real design that would roll off the frequency response above
   the needed range to prevent the possibility of unwanted oscillation.
   Also, the use of fixed diode bias as shown here can cause problems if
   the diodes are not both electrically and thermally matched to the
   output transistors — if the output transistors turn on too much, they
   can easily overheat and destroy themselves, as the full current from
   the power supply is not limited at this stage. A common solution to
   help stabilise the output devices is to include some emitter resistors,
   typically an ohm or so. Calculating the values of the circuit's
   resistors and capacitors is done based on the components employed and
   the intended use of the amp.

   For the basics of radio frequency amplifers using valves, see Valved RF
   amplifiers.

Class C

   Class C amplifiers conduct less than 50% of the input signal and the
   distortion at the output is high, but efficiencies of up to 90% can be
   reached. Some applications can tolerate the distortion, such as
   megaphones. A much more common application for Class C amplifiers is in
   RF transmitters, where the distortion can be vastly reduced by using
   tuned loads on the amplifier stage. The input signal is used to roughly
   switch the amplifying device on and off, which causes pulses of current
   to flow through a tuned circuit. The tuned circuit will only resonate
   at particular frequencies, and so the unwanted frequencies are
   dramatically suppressed, and the wanted full signal (sine wave) will be
   abstracted by the tuned load. Provided the transmitter is not required
   to operate over a very wide band of frequencies, this arrangement works
   extremely well. Other residual harmonics can be removed using a filter.

                   image:Electronic_Amplifier_Class_C.png

   Class C Amplifier

Class D

   A class D amplifier is a power amplifier where all power devices are
   operated in on/off mode. Output stages such as those used in pulse
   generators are examples of class D amplifiers. Mostly though, the term
   applies to devices intended to reproduce signals with a bandwidth well
   below the switching frequency. These amplifiers use pulse width
   modulation, pulse density modulation (sometimes referred to as pulse
   frequency modulation) or more advanced form of modulation such as Sigma
   delta modulation (see for example Analog Devices AD1990 Class-D audio
   power amplifier). The input signal is converted to a sequence of pulses
   whose averaged value is directly proportional to the amplitude of the
   signal at that time. The frequency of the pulses is typically ten or
   more times the highest frequency of interest in the input signal. The
   output of such an amplifier contains unwanted spectral components
   (i.e.. the pulse frequency and its harmonics) that must be removed by a
   passive filter. The resulting filtered signal is then an amplified
   replica of the input.

   The main advantage of a class D amplifier is power efficiency. Because
   the output pulses have a fixed amplitude, the switching elements
   (usually MOSFETs, but valves and bipolar transistors were once used)
   are switched either on or off, rather than operated in linear mode.
   This means that very little power is dissipated by the transistors
   except during the very short interval between the on and off states.
   The wasted power is low because the instantaneous power dissipated in
   the transistor is the product of voltage and current, and one or the
   other is almost always close to zero. The lower losses permit the use
   of a smaller heat sink while the power supply requirements are lessened
   too.

   Class D amplifiers can be controlled by either analog or digital
   circuits. A digital controller introduces additional distortion called
   quantisation error caused by its conversion of the input signal to a
   digital value.

   Class D amplifiers were widely used to control motors, and almost
   exclusively for small DC motors, but they are now also used as audio
   amplifiers. The relative difficulty of achieving good audio quality
   means that the vast majority appear in applications where quality is
   not a factor, such as miniature audio systems and "DVD-receivers". High
   quality Class D audio amplifiers are now, however, starting to appear
   in the market. Some of them even outperform classical designs.
   Recently, several manufacturers are offering built modules ready to be
   integrated in audio systems. An early and prolific area of application
   is high-powered, high-fidelity subwoofer amplifiers in cars. Because
   subwoofers are generally limited to a bandwidth of no higher than 150
   Hz, the switch speed for the amplifier does not have to be as high as
   for a full range amplifier. They have become so inexpensive that a true
   1 kW of power output can be had for less than 250USD (retail).
   Efficiencies are in the 80% to 95% range.

D does not stand for "digital"

   The letter D used to designate this type of amplifier is simply the
   next letter after C, and does not stand for digital. Class D and Class
   E amplifiers are sometimes mistakenly described as "digital" because
   the output waveform superficially resembles a pulse-train of digital
   symbols, but a Class D amplifier merely converts an input waveform into
   a continuously pulse-width modulated (square wave) analog signal. (A
   digital waveform would be pulse-code modulated.)

Specialty classes

Class E/F

   The class E/F amplifier is a highly efficient switching power
   amplifier, typically used at radio frequencies. The main concept used
   in this amplifier is to model the active switching device, such as a
   transistor or MOSFET, as a linear combination of two parts: (1) a
   (theoretical) "perfect" switching element, and (2) a complex network of
   parasitic elements attached to it (capacitors, inductors and
   resistors). After the decomposition, it becomes trivial to eliminate
   the losses of each part:

   (1) The "perfect" switching element should be switched ON during
   zero-voltage crossing, and should be switched OFF during zero-current
   crossing. Thus the switching element either conducts current, or has
   some non-zero voltage on it, but never both at the same time. Because
   the dissipated power is equal to current x voltage, it becomes zero.
   This can be arranged by adjusting the phase (capacitor) and DC bias
   (resistor) of the signal going into the transistor input.

   (2) the Imaginary part of the impedance of the parasitic elements can
   be tuned, one by one, by matching them to another passive element with
   the complex conjugate impedance, thus leaving only the real part of the
   complex impedance.

   In theory, the only remaining loss is the real part of the impedance of
   the parasitic elements in the system, which cannot be avoided. This
   class of amplifier is unique to radio frequency ranges, where the
   amplifier analysis is usually done in the frequency domain and not in
   the voltage/current domain. This class is further divided to subclasses
   depending on which harmonics of the signal are taken into account
   during zero-voltage switching (ZVS) and zero-current switching (ZCS),
   with names such as Class E/F2,odd; Class F^-1; and so on. It is still
   an active area of research and new variants appear from time to time,
   usually with the letters "E" and "F" somewhere in class name.

   The figure below shows a schematic of a class-E/F amplifier that uses
   this principle to achieve high efficiency.

                              image:Class-e.jpg

   Class E Amplifier

   The switch is periodically opened and closed at the frequency of
   operation. Usually, but not always, the switching duty ratio is 50%.
   The RF choke has comparatively large inductance so that in effect it
   functions as a constant current source. Other passive device values are
   chosen such that the following conditions are satisfied simultaneously.
   (1) The voltage across the switch at the instant of closing is zero.
   (2) The time derivative of voltage across the switch is at zero when
   the switch turns on. Moreover, Ls and Cs forms a resonating filter at
   the frequency of operation.

   In practical implementations a transistor is substituted for a switch,
   but is operated either in saturation (on) or in cut-off (off). The
   theoretical efficiency of a class-E amplifier is 100% with ideal
   components. However, practical circuits do exhibit a number of
   weaknesses that makes them less than 100% efficient. These effects
   include finite switching speed, finite on-resistance and non-zero
   saturation voltage of the transistor as well as lossy passive
   components at high frequencies. Typical efficiency is about 60% at an
   operating frequency of 1-2 GHz.

   This amplifier class is specially designed for the amplification of
   square waves, such as those used to transmit data in purely digital
   form. “Square” waves or pulses have special needs due to their
   frequency characteristics, since they require the faithful reproduction
   of the very high frequencies present in their leading and trailing
   edges, without adding artifacts such as ringing or overshoot during the
   amplification process. Consideration must be made as well for the lower
   frequency components introduced by the switching levels, such as the
   impedance of the output load, which is often in the form of a
   transmission line.

   The class E amplifier was invented in 1972 by Nathan O. Sokal and Alan
   D. Sokal, and details were first published in 1975 . Some earlier
   reports on this operating class have been published in Russian.

Class G

   Class G amplifiers are a more efficient version of class AB amplifiers,
   which use "rail switching" to decrease power consumption and increase
   efficiency. The amplifier has several power rails at different
   voltages, and switches between rails as the signal output approaches
   each. Thus the amp increases efficiency by reducing the "wasted" power
   at the output transistors.

Class H

   Class-H amplifiers mostly feature 2/3 Tiers[also known as different
   Supply voltage level Rails], but they are vastly different from the
   Class-G, because in Class-H the amplifier rails are actually switched
   for finite time in Square Shaped Waveform [usually known as packet
   envelope]in accordance with PWM reference obtained from analog
   signal...from Lower Tier to Upper as the voltage level exceeds the
   threshold...

Other classes

   Several audio amplifier manufacturers have started "inventing" new
   classes as a way to differentiate themselves. These class names usually
   do not reflect any revolutionary amplification technique, and are used
   mostly for marketing purposes. This can easily be determined by the
   fact that the class name is trademarked or copyrighted. For example,
   Crowns K and I-Tech Series as well as several other models utilise
   Crowns patented Class-I (or BCA) technology. Lab Gruppen use a form of
   class D amplifier called class TD or Tracked Class D which tracks the
   waveform to more accurately amplify it without the drawbacks of
   traditional class D amplifiers.

   " Class T" is a trademark of TriPath company, which manufactures audio
   amplifier IC's. This new class "T" is a revision of the common class D
   amplifier, but with changes to ensure fidelity over the full audio
   spectrum, unlike traditional class D designs. It operates at a
   frequency of 650kHz, with a proprietary modulator. Class Z is a
   trademark of Zetex semiconductor is a direct digital feedback
   technology.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electronic_amplifier"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
