   #copyright

Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: British History Post
1900; Political People


                   Elizabeth II
   Queen of the United Kingdom and
   the other Commonwealth Realms
   Her Majesty The Queen circa 2003
   Her Majesty The Queen circa 2003
       Reign     6 February 1952 -
    Coronation   2 June 1953
    Predecessor  George VI
   Heir Apparent Charles, Prince of Wales
      Consort    Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh
                       Issue
   Charles, Prince of Wales
   Anne, Princess Royal
   Prince Andrew, Duke of York
   Prince Edward, Earl of Wessex
                     Full name
   Elizabeth Alexandra Mary Windsor
                      Titles
   HM The Queen
   HRH The Duchess of Edinburgh
   HRH The Princess Elizabeth
   HRH Princess Elizabeth of York
    Royal House  House of Windsor
   Royal anthem  God Save the Queen
      Father     George VI
      Mother     Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon
       Born      21 April 1926
                 Mayfair, London
     Baptised    29 May 1926
                 Buckingham Palace, London

                British Royalty
                  Royal Family
                  HM The Queen
     * HRH The Duke of Edinburgh
          + HRH The Prince of Wales
            HRH The Duchess of Cornwall
               o HRH Prince William of Wales
               o HRH Prince Henry of Wales
          + HRH The Duke of York
               o HRH Princess Beatrice of York
               o HRH Princess Eugenie of York
          + HRH The Earl of Wessex
            HRH The Countess of Wessex
               o Lady Louise Windsor
          + HRH The Princess Royal
     * HRH The Duke of Gloucester
       HRH The Duchess of Gloucester
     * HRH The Duke of Kent
       HRH The Duchess of Kent
     * HRH Prince Michael of Kent
       HRH Princess Michael of Kent
     * HRH Princess Alexandra

   Elizabeth II (Elizabeth Alexandra Mary Windsor; born 21 April 1926) is
   Queen of 16 sovereign states, holding each crown and title equally.
   However, she is more directly involved with the United Kingdom, where
   the Royal Family resides, and the Monarchy is historically indigenous.

   Apart from the United Kingdom, Elizabeth II is also Queen of Canada,
   Australia, New Zealand, Jamaica, Barbados, the Bahamas, Grenada, Papua
   New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
   the Grenadines, Antigua and Barbuda, Belize, and Saint Kitts and Nevis,
   where she is represented by Governors-General. The 16 countries of
   which she is queen are known as Commonwealth Realms, and their combined
   population is 128 million.

   She is presently the world's only monarch who is simultaneously Head of
   State of more than one independent nation. In legal theory she is the
   most powerful head of state in the world, although in practice she
   personally exercises very little political executive power.

   Elizabeth became Queen of the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New
   Zealand, South Africa, Pakistan and Ceylon upon the death of her
   father, George VI, on 6 February 1952. As other colonies of the British
   Empire (now the Commonwealth of Nations) attained independence from the
   UK during her reign, she acceded to the newly created thrones as Queen
   of each respective realm so that throughout her 54 years on the throne
   she has been Monarch of 32 nations, half of which either moved to
   different royal houses, or became republics.

   Elizabeth also holds the positions of Head of the Commonwealth, Lord
   High Admiral, Supreme Governor of the Church of England (styled
   Defender of the Faith) and Lord of Mann. Following tradition, she is
   also styled Duke of Lancaster and Duke of Normandy. She is also
   Commander-in-Chief of the Armed forces of many of her Realms.

   Elizabeth is currently the second-longest-reigning head of state in the
   world and the fifth-longest serving British monarch. Her reign of over
   half a century has seen ten different Prime Ministers of the United
   Kingdom and numerous Prime Ministers in the Commonwealth Realms of
   which she is (or was) also Head of State; between them she has had a
   total of 138 Prime Ministers during her reign.

Early life

   Elizabeth was born at 17 Bruton Street, in Mayfair, London, on 21 April
   1926. Her father was Prince Albert, Duke of York (the future George
   VI), the second eldest son of George V and Queen Mary. Her mother was
   The Duchess of York (née Lady Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon, later Queen
   Elizabeth, and, after her daughter's accession to the throne, the Queen
   Mother), the daughter of Claude George Bowes-Lyon, 14th Earl of
   Strathmore and Kinghorne and his wife, Nina Cecilia Cavendish-Bentinck,
   the Countess of Strathmore and Kinghorne.

   She was baptised in the Music Room of Buckingham Palace by Cosmo Lang,
   the Archbishop of York. Her godparents were King George and Queen Mary,
   the Princess Royal, the Duke of Connaught, the Earl of Strathmore and
   Lady Elphinstone.

   Elizabeth was named after her mother, while her two middle names are
   those of her paternal great-grandmother, Queen Alexandra, and
   grandmother, Queen Mary, respectively. As a child her close family knew
   her as "Lilibet". Her grandmother Queen Mary doted on her and George V
   found her very entertaining. At 10 years old, the young Princess was
   introduced to a preacher at Glamis Castle. As he left, he promised to
   send her a book. Elizabeth replied, "Not about God. I already know all
   about Him".

   As a granddaughter of the British sovereign in the male line, she held
   the title of a British princess with the style Her Royal Highness. Her
   full style was Her Royal Highness Princess Elizabeth of York. At the
   time of her birth, she was third in the line of succession to the
   crown, behind her father and her uncle, the Prince of Wales. Although
   her birth generated public interest, there was no reason at the time to
   believe that she would ever become queen, as it was widely assumed that
   her uncle, the Prince of Wales, would marry and have children in due
   course.

   However, due to his wife Wallis Simpson's reproductive issues, Edward
   was destined not to have any legitimate heirs. Since Elizabeth's
   parents had no sons, who would have had precedence over her regardless
   of when they were born, she would eventually have become queen whether
   Edward had abdicated or not, assuming she outlived her father.

Education

   The young Princess Elizabeth was educated at home, as was her younger
   sister, Princess Margaret, under the supervision of her mother, then
   the Duchess of York. Her governess was Marion Crawford, better known as
   "Crawfie". She studied history with C. H. K. Marten, Provost of Eton,
   and also learned modern languages; she speaks French fluently. She was
   instructed in religion by the Archbishop of Canterbury and has remained
   a devout member of the Church of England.

Heiress presumptive

   When her father became King, in 1936 upon the abdication of her uncle,
   King Edward VIII, she became Heiress Presumptive and was thenceforth
   known as Her Royal Highness The Princess Elizabeth. There was some
   demand in Wales for her to be created The Princess of Wales, but the
   King was advised that this was the title of the wife of the Prince of
   Wales, not a title in its own right. Some feel the King missed the
   opportunity to make an innovation in Royal practice, by re-adopting
   King Henry VIII's idea of proclaiming his eldest daughter, Lady Mary,
   Princess of Wales in her own right.

   Elizabeth was thirteen years old when World War II broke out, and she
   and her younger sister, Princess Margaret, were evacuated to Windsor
   Castle, Berkshire. There was some suggestion that the princesses be
   sent to Canada, but their mother refused to consider this, famously
   saying, "The children could not possibly go without me, I will never
   leave the King, and the King will never leave his country." In 1940,
   Princess Elizabeth made her first broadcast, addressing other children
   who had been evacuated.

Military career

   In 1945, Princess Elizabeth convinced her father that she should be
   allowed to contribute directly to the war effort. She joined the
   Women's Auxiliary Territorial Service, where she was known as No 230873
   Second Subaltern Elizabeth Windsor, and was trained as a driver. This
   training was the first time she had been taught together with other
   students. It is said that she greatly enjoyed this and that this
   experience led her to send her own children to school rather than have
   them educated at home. She was the first, and so far only, female
   member of the royal family to actually serve in the armed forces,
   though other royal women have been given honorary ranks. During the VE
   Day celebrations in London, she and her sister dressed in ordinary
   clothing and slipped into the crowd secretly to celebrate with
   everyone.
   Princess Elizabeth changing the wheel of a lorry (truck) during the
   war.
   Enlarge
   Princess Elizabeth changing the wheel of a lorry (truck) during the
   war.

Royal duties

   Elizabeth made her first official overseas visit in 1947, when she
   accompanied her parents to South Africa. During her visit to Cape Town
   she and her father were accompanied by Jan Smuts when they went to the
   top of Table Mountain by cable car. On her 21st birthday, she made a
   broadcast to the British Commonwealth and Empire, pledging to devote
   her life to the service of the people of the Commonwealth and Empire.

Marriage

   Elizabeth married The Duke of Edinburgh (born Prince Philip of Greece
   and Denmark) on 20 November 1947. The Duke is Queen Elizabeth's second
   cousin once removed; they are both descended from Christian IX of
   Denmark (she being a great-great-granddaughter through Alexandra of
   Denmark, and the Duke a great-grandson through George I of Greece). The
   couple are also third cousins; they share Queen Victoria as a
   great-great-grandmother. Prince Philip had renounced his claim to the
   Greek throne and was simply referred to as Lieutenant Philip
   Mountbatten before being created Duke of Edinburgh prior to their
   marriage. The marriage was controversial. Greece's royal family was
   considered minor and in any event had received bad press in preceding
   decades. Furthermore, Philip was Greek Orthodox, with no financial
   resources behind him, and had sisters who had married Nazi supporters.
   Elizabeth's mother was reported in later biographies to have strongly
   opposed the marriage, even referring to Philip as "the Hun".

   After their wedding, Philip and Elizabeth took up residence at Clarence
   House, London. At various times between 1946 and 1953, the Duke of
   Edinburgh was stationed in Malta as a serving Royal Navy officer. Lord
   Mountbatten of Burma had purchased the Villa Gwardamangia (also
   referred to as the Villa G'Mangia), in the hamlet of Gwardamangia in
   Malta, in about 1929. Princess Elizabeth stayed there when visiting
   Philip in Malta. Philip and Elizabeth lived in Malta for a period
   between 1949 and 1951 (Malta being the only other country in which the
   Queen has lived, although at that time Malta was a British
   Protectorate).

   On 14 November 1948, Elizabeth gave birth to her first child, Prince
   Charles of Edinburgh. Several weeks earlier, letters patent had been
   issued so that her children would enjoy a royal and princely status
   they would not otherwise have been entitled to. Otherwise they would
   have been styled merely as children of a duke. The couple had four
   children (see below) in all. Though the Royal House is named Windsor,
   it was decreed, via a 1960 Order-in-Council, that those descendants of
   Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip who were not Princes or Princesses
   of the United Kingdom should have the personal surname
   Mountbatten-Windsor. In practice all of their children, in honour of
   their father, have used Mountbatten-Windsor as their surname (or in
   Anne's case, her maiden surname). Both Charles and Anne used
   Mountbatten-Windsor as their surname in the published banns for their
   first marriages.

Succession

   Monarchical Styles of
   Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
   Ireland
   Reference style: Her Majesty
   Spoken style: Your Majesty
   Alternative style: Ma'am

   As her father's health declined during 1951, Elizabeth was soon
   frequently standing in for him at public events. She visited Greece,
   Italy and Malta (where Philip was then stationed) during that year. In
   October, she toured Canada and visited President Harry S. Truman in
   Washington, D.C. In January 1952, Elizabeth and Philip set out for a
   tour of Australia and New Zealand. They had reached Kenya when word
   arrived of the death of her father, on 6 February 1952, from lung
   cancer.

   Elizabeth was staying at the Treetops Hotel in Thika, just two hours
   away from Nairobi today, when she was told of her own succession to the
   throne — a unique circumstance for any such event. She was the first
   British monarch since the accession of George I to be outside the
   country at the moment of succession, and also the first in modern times
   not to know the exact time of her accession (because her father had
   died in his sleep at an unknown time). On the night her father died,
   the Chief Justice of Kenya Sir Horace Hearne, who would later accompany
   the Royal Party back to the UK, escorted the Princess Elizabeth, as she
   then was, to a dinner at the Treetops Hotel, which is now a very
   popular tourist retreat in Kenya. It was there that she "went up a
   princess and came down a Queen".

   After Prince Philip broke to Elizabeth the news of her father's death,
   Martin Charteris, then Assistant Private Secretary to the new Queen,
   asked her what she intended to be called. "Elizabeth, of course," she
   replied. The royal party returned immediately to England.

   Elizabeth II's Proclamation of Accession was read at St James's Palace,
   on Thursday, 7 February, 1952. In Canada, a separate proclamation was
   issued by the Queen's Privy Council for Canada on the same day.

   The following year, the Queen's grandmother, Queen Mary, died of lung
   cancer on 24 March 1953. Reportedly, the Dowager Queen's dying wish was
   that the coronation not be postponed. Elizabeth's coronation took place
   in Westminster Abbey, on 2 June 1953.

Life as Queen

Residence

   After the Coronation, Elizabeth and Philip moved to Buckingham Palace,
   in central London. It is reported, however, that, as with many of her
   predecessors, she dislikes the Palace as a residence and considers
   Windsor Castle, west of London, to be her home. She also spends time at
   Balmoral Castle, in Scotland, and at Sandringham House, in Norfolk.

Travels

   Queen Elizabeth is the most widely-travelled British head of state in
   history. In 1953–1954 she and Philip made a six-month around-the-world
   tour, becoming the first British monarch to circumnavigate the globe.
   She also became the first reigning monarch of Australia, New Zealand
   and Fiji to visit those nations (which she visited again numerous times
   following). In October 1957, she made a state visit to the United
   States and toured Canada, opening the first session of that nation's
   23rd parliament and addressing the United Nations General Assembly. In
   1959, she made another tour of Canada, as well as undertaking a state
   visit to the United States as Queen of Canada, hosting the return
   dinner for President Dwight D. Eisenhower at the Canadian embassy in
   Washington. In February 1961, she visited Ankara, as the guest of
   Turkish President Cemal Gürsel, and later toured India and Pakistan for
   the first time. She has made state visits to most European countries
   and to many outside Europe. She toured the United States for the 1976
   Bicentennial, attending festivities with President Ford, and again in
   1991 at the invitation of President George H.W. Bush, during which she
   became the first British monarch to address a joint session of the
   United States Congress. She regularly attends Commonwealth Heads of
   Government meetings.

Empire to Commonwealth

   At the time of Elizabeth's accession, there was much talk of a "new
   Elizabethan age". Elizabeth's role has been to preside over the United
   Kingdom as it has shared world economic and military power with a
   growing host of independent nations and principalities. As nations have
   developed economically and culturally, Queen Elizabeth has witnessed,
   over the past 50 years, a gradual transformation of the British Empire
   into its modern successor, the Commonwealth. She has worked hard to
   maintain links with former British possessions, and in some cases, such
   as South Africa, she has played an important role in retaining or
   restoring good relations.

Golden Jubilee

   In 2002, she celebrated her Golden Jubilee, marking the 50th
   anniversary of her accession to the Throne. The year saw an extensive
   tour of the Commonwealth Realms, including numerous parades and
   official concerts.

Family relations

   The Jubilee year coincided with the deaths, within a few months, of
   Elizabeth's mother and sister. Elizabeth's relations with her children
   have become much warmer since these deaths. She is particularly close
   to her daughter-in-law, Sophie, The Countess of Wessex. She is known to
   have disapproved of Prince Charles's long-standing relationship with
   Camilla Parker-Bowles, but with their recent marriage, has come to
   accept it. On the other hand, she is very close to her grandchildren,
   noticeably Prince William, Princess Beatrice and Zara Phillips.

Health and longevity

   In late February 2003, the Queen's reign, then just over 51 years,
   surpassed the reigns of all four of her immediate predecessors combined
   — (Edward VII, George V, Edward VIII and George VI). She is currently
   the second-longest-serving head of state in the world, after King
   Bhumibol of Thailand (fourth if one includes the rulers of the
   subnational entity Ras Al Khaimah and of the Government of Tibet in
   Exile), and the fifth-longest serving British or English monarch. Her
   reign of over half a century has seen ten different Prime Ministers of
   the United Kingdom and numerous Prime Ministers in the Commonwealth
   Realms.

   In June 2005, she was forced to cancel several engagements after
   contracting what the Palace described as a bad cold. Nonetheless, the
   Queen has been described as being in excellent health, and is rarely
   ill.

   In October 2006, she suffered a burst blood vessel in her right eye,
   causing her entire eye to appear deep red in colour. While the palace
   would not comment on the Queen's condition, medical experts stated that
   the Queen would be in no pain and that her eye would heal within a week
   or two with no lasting damage. They also stated, blood vessel bursts
   are common for seniors but can also be a sign of high blood pressure.
   Later that month, on 26 October, she was due to officially open the new
   Emirates Stadium, the home of Arsenal F.C., but she was forced to
   cancel the engagment due to a strained back muscle that had troubled
   her since the end of her Balmoral holiday . Her back troubles appear to
   be ongoing. There was serious concern in November 2006 that she
   wouldn't be well enough to open parliament and plans were drawn for the
   Queen's possible absence. However, she was able to attend.

Reducing duties

   On Friday, 21 April 2006, the Queen turned 80, making her the third
   oldest reigning monarch in British and Commonwealth history. She has
   begun to hand over some public duties to her children, as well as to
   other members of the royal family, and in early 2006, reports began to
   surface that the Queen planned to significantly reduce her official
   duties, though she has made it clear that she has no intention of
   abdicating. It is believed by both the press and palace insiders that
   Prince Charles will start to perform many of the day-to-day duties of
   the Monarch, while the Queen will effectively go into "retirement". It
   was later confirmed by the Palace that Prince Charles will begin to
   hold the regular audiences with the Prime Minister and other
   Commonwealth leaders, but also that, while the Queen would be
   increasing the length of her weekends by two days, she would continue
   with public duties well into the future. Buckingham Palace is also
   reported to be considering giving the Prince more access to government
   papers, and is to allow him to preside over more investitures, meet
   more foreign dignitaries and take the place of the Queen in welcoming
   ambassadors at the Court of St. James's.

   It has been rumoured that her recent trip to Canada and Australia will
   be amongst her last visits to her Commonwealth Realms, though both the
   Canadian and Australian governments and the Palace have denied it.

   In November, 2006, the Queen announced that she and her husband would
   be making a state visit to the United States in May of 2007, in honour
   of the 400th anniversary of the Jamestown settlement.

   Despite her good health and intention to stay on the throne, some saw
   the wedding of the Prince of Wales to Camilla as a message from the
   Queen that by allowing Charles to marry, she is attempting to ensure
   that Charles' succession to the throne will go as smoothly as possible.
   In 2004, a copy of the Queen's newly-revised funeral plans was stolen,
   much to the Queen's anger. And for the first time, in September 2005, a
   mock version of the Queen's funeral march was held in the middle of the
   night (this was also done once a year after the late Queen Mother
   turned 80).

   If the Queen lives until 21 December 2007, she will become the oldest
   reigning monarch in both British and the Commonwealth Realms' history,
   surpassing King George III and Queen Victoria, both of whom died before
   the age of 82.

   Should she still be reigning on 9 September 2015, at the age of 89, her
   reign will surpass that of Queen Victoria and she will become the
   longest reigning monarch in British history. If she lives that long,
   and the Prince of Wales does also, he would be the oldest to succeed to
   the throne, surpassing William IV, who was 64.

   Shortly before her 80th birthday, polls were conducted that showed the
   majority of the British public wish for the Queen to remain on the
   throne until her death — many feel that the Queen has become an
   institution in herself.

Views and perceptions

   Elizabeth is a conservative in matters of religion, moral standards and
   family matters. She has a strong sense of religious duty and takes her
   Coronation Oath seriously. This is one reason (as well as the example
   set by her abdicated uncle) why it is considered highly unlikely that
   she will ever abdicate. For years, she refused to acknowledge Prince
   Charles's relationship with Camilla Parker-Bowles, but since their
   marriage, an appearance of acceptance has been established.

   Elizabeth's political views are supposed to be less clear-cut, as she
   has done little in public to reveal what they might be. However, there
   is some evidence to suggest that, in economic terms, she leans towards
   a One Nation point of view. During Margaret Thatcher's years as Prime
   Minister, it was rumoured that the Queen worried that Mrs. Thatcher's
   economic policies were fostering social divisions, and she was
   reportedly alarmed by high unemployment, a series of riots in 1981, and
   the violence of the miners' strike. Mrs. Thatcher once said to Brian
   Walden, referring to the Social Democratic Party: "The problem is, the
   Queen is the kind of woman who could vote SDP." It is believed that her
   favourite Prime Ministers have been Winston Churchill, Harold Macmillan
   and Harold Wilson. She was thought to have very good relations with her
   current Prime Minister, Tony Blair, during the first years of his term
   in office; however, there has been mounting evidence in recent years
   that her relationship with Blair has hardened.

   The only public issues on which Elizabeth makes her views known are
   those affecting the unity of each of her Realms. During an event in
   Westminster Hall marking her Silver Jubilee, in 1977, her speech was
   considered by some to be critical of the then Government's devolution
   proposals. She has spoken in favour of the continued union of England
   and Scotland, angering some Scottish nationalists. Her statement of
   praise for the Northern Ireland Belfast Agreement raised some
   complaints among some Unionists (who were traditionally strong
   monarchists). Ian Paisley, leader of the far-right Democratic Unionist
   Party and founder of the evangelical Free Presbyterian church, famously
   broke with Unionism's traditional deference for the British Crown by
   calling the Queen "a parrot" of Tony Blair and suggested that her
   support for the Belfast Agreement would weaken the monarchy's standing
   amongst Northern Irish Protestants, a substantial number of whom
   remained opposed to certain parts of the Agreement. However, Paisley's
   criticism of the Queen on this matter was rejected by more traditional
   and moderate unionists.

   Also, while not speaking directly against Quebec sovereignty in Canada,
   she has publicly praised Canada's unity and expressed her wish to see
   the continuation of a unified Canada, sometimes courting controversy
   over the matter. (See Constitutional controversies below). Like her
   mother, Elizabeth has shown an affection for Canada, stating in 1983,
   when departing California, "I am going home to Canada tomorrow," and at
   a dinner in Saskatchewan in 2005: "this country and Canadians
   everywhere have been a constant presence in my life and work." She has
   also stated that Canada feels like "a home away from home."
   With Adrienne Clarkson, then Governor-General of Canada, during her
   tour of Alberta and Saskatchewan in 2005.
   Enlarge
   With Adrienne Clarkson, then Governor-General of Canada, during her
   tour of Alberta and Saskatchewan in 2005.

   The Queen's personal fortune has been the subject of speculation for
   many years. Sometimes estimated at US$10 short billion, recently Forbes
   magazine conservatively estimated her fortune at around US$500 million
   (£280 million). This figure seems to agree with official Palace
   statements that called reports of the Queen's supposed
   multibillion-dollar wealth "grossly overexaggerated".

   Her personal relationships with world leaders are warm and informal. On
   a BBC documentary broadcast in 2002, Queen & Country, she was shown
   teasing former Prime Minister Sir Edward Heath about how he could
   travel to world trouble spots like Iraq because politicians saw him as
   "expendable" — he laughed at the comment. Mary McAleese, now President
   of Ireland, recounted how, as Pro Vice-Chancellor of the Queen's
   University of Belfast, she was, to her shock, invited to a lunch with
   the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh, on the basis that the Queen wished
   to talk to her, as a leading Northern Ireland nationalist, and hear her
   views on Anglo–Irish relations. The two women struck up an instant
   rapport, with McAleese, during the 1997 Irish presidential election,
   calling the Queen "a dote" (a Hiberno-English term meaning a "really
   lovely person") in an Irish Independent interview. Nelson Mandela, in
   the BBC documentary, repeatedly referred to her as "my friend,
   Elizabeth". She has a very friendly relationship with Jacques Chirac of
   France, who is the only Head of State allowed to drink his favoured
   Corona-brand beer at official dinners at Buckingham Palace instead of
   the fine French wines of the Palace's cellar.

Recent public image

   Elizabeth's public image has softened noticeably in recent years,
   particularly since the death of the Queen Mother. Although she remains
   reserved in public, she has been seen laughing and smiling much more
   than in years past, and, to the shock of many, she shed tears during
   emotional occasions such as at Remembrance Day services, the memorial
   service at St Paul's Cathedral for those killed in the September 11,
   2001 attacks, and in Normandy, for the 60th anniversary of D-Day, where
   she addressed the Canadian troops.

   Queen Elizabeth has never suffered from severe public disapproval.
   However, in 1997, she and other members of the Royal Family were
   perceived in the British tabloid press as cold and unfeeling when they
   did not participate in the public outpouring of grief at the death of
   Diana, Princess of Wales. Some people deny that Elizabeth held negative
   feelings towards Diana and thought that she had damaged the institution
   of the monarchy and cite as evidence of this is the Queen bowing to
   Diana's coffin as it passed Buckingham Palace, something unprecedented
   and unexpected. She also gave a live television broadcast paying
   tribute to Diana. These actions redressed tabloid opinion. Elizabeth's
   behaviour during the funeral is believed to have resulted from strong
   advice from the Queen Mother and Tony Blair. Many biographers of both
   the Queen and Diana agree that there indeed was a fondness between the
   two women.

Constitutional role

Role in government

   The Queen (wearing the insignia of the Sovereign of the Order of Canada
   and of the Order of Military Merit) pictured with her husband, Prince
   Philip, Duke of Edinburgh.
   Enlarge
   The Queen (wearing the insignia of the Sovereign of the Order of Canada
   and of the Order of Military Merit) pictured with her husband, Prince
   Philip, Duke of Edinburgh.

   Constitutionally, the Queen is an essential part of the legislative
   process of her Realms. The Queen-in-Parliament (the Queen, acting with
   the advice and consent of Parliament), in each country, is an integral
   part of Parliament, along with the upper and lower houses. In all of
   her realms outside of the United Kingdom, she retains her
   constitutional powers, but her direct participation usually consists
   only of the appointment of representatives within the Realm in
   question, usually a Governor-General, who exercises her executive power
   in a fashion closely resembling her own exercise of power within the
   United Kingdom - in Canada, this participation stretches to include the
   appointment of additional Senators to break deadlocks in the Canadian
   Senate.

   In practice, much of the Queen's role in the legislative process is
   ceremonial, as her reserve powers are rarely exercised. For example,
   the Queen may legally withhold Royal Assent from Bills, but no monarch
   has refused his or her assent to a Bill since Queen Anne, in 1708. In
   Realms outside of the United Kingdom, the power to give Royal Assent is
   also practised by her designated representative in the Realm. The
   Queen, or her Governors-General, in the Realms outside the United
   Kingdom, also gives a speech at the annual State Opening of Parliament,
   outlining the government's legislative agenda for the year, but the
   speech is written by government ministers and reflects the view of the
   elected government.

   The Queen also has a functional role in executive government. In the
   United Kingdom, she chooses her prime minister in accordance with
   constitutional requirements. In her realms outside the United Kingdom,
   this power is exercised by her representatives. In reality no actual
   choice is required, as the issue of whom to ask to form a government is
   clear from who controls the House of Commons, except in exceptional
   circumstances. She also decides the basis on which a person is asked to
   form a government. That is, whether a government should be formed
   capable of surviving in the House of Commons — the standard requirement
   — or capable of commanding majority support in the House of Commons
   (i.e. forming a coalition if no one party has a majority). This
   requirement was last set in 1940, when King George VI asked Winston
   Churchill to form a government capable of commanding a majority in
   parliament. This necessitated the wartime coalition. The requirement is
   normally only made in emergencies or in wartime, and happened only
   three times in the 20th century: with Andrew Bonar Law and David Lloyd
   George in 1916 (Bonar Law declined and recommended King George V ask
   Lloyd George to form a government), and Churchill, in 1940. To date,
   Elizabeth has never set it. All of her prime ministers have had to meet
   the lower requirement of simply surviving in the House of Commons. The
   Queen also appoints ministers of the United Kingdom and all government
   is carried out legally in her name.

   Theoretically, she still holds a large proportion of power in
   international affairs. The Queen, as Head of State, has the power to
   declare war, to make peace, to recognise foreign states, to conclude
   treaties, and to take over, or give up, territory, on behalf of the
   United Kingdom. In her other realms, she leaves the exercise of these
   powers to her representatives, who likewise exercise it at the behest
   of elected governments.

   United Kingdom Orders-in-Council are issued only when approved by her
   at Privy Council meetings. Canadian Orders are issued only when
   approved by her Governor General-in- Council. She has access to all
   government minutes and documentation from all her Realms, and has a
   weekly meeting with the British Prime Minister when the British
   parliament is in session. In the UK, she also signs executive orders,
   financial papers and treasury papers, with her signature required on
   all major financial transactions of state (countersigned by the
   relevant minister). The role of Commander-in-Chief is held, in each
   realm, either by the Queen, or by her Governor-General, as her
   representative.

   On three occasions during her reign, the Queen has had to deal with
   constitutional problems over the formation of UK governments. In 1957
   and again in 1963, the absence of a formal open mechanism within the
   Conservative Party for choosing a leader meant that following the
   sudden resignations of Sir Anthony Eden and Harold Macmillan it fell on
   the Queen to decide whom to commission to form a government. In 1957,
   Eden did not proffer advice, and so the Queen consulted Lords Salisbury
   and Kilmuir for the opinion of the Cabinet, and Winston Churchill, as
   the only living former Conservative Prime Minister (following the
   precedent of George V consulting Salisbury's father and Arthur Balfour
   upon Andrew Bonar Law's resignation in 1923). In October 1963, the
   outgoing Prime Minister, Harold Macmillan, advised the Queen to appoint
   the late Alec Douglas-Home, the Earl of Home.

   On the third occasion, in February 1974, an inconclusive general
   election result meant that in theory the outgoing Prime Minister Edward
   Heath, who had won the popular vote, could stay in power if he formed a
   coalition government with the Liberals. Rather than immediately resign
   as prime minister he explored the option and only resigned when the
   discussions foundered. (Had he chosen to, he could have stayed on until
   defeated in the debate on the Queen's Speech.) Only when he resigned
   was the Queen able to ask the Leader of the Opposition, the Labour
   Party's Harold Wilson, to form a government. His minority government
   lasted for 8 months before a new general election was held.

   In all three cases, she appears to have acted in accordance with
   constitutional tradition, following the advice of her senior ministers
   and Privy Councillors. Indeed, since constitutional practice in the UK
   is based on tradition and precedent rather than a written set of rules,
   it is generally accepted that the Sovereign cannot be acting
   unconstitutionally when acting on the advice of her or his ministers.

Relations with ministers

   Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Phillip, Ernest Harmon Air Force Base
   visit 1959
   Enlarge
   Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Phillip, Ernest Harmon Air Force Base
   visit 1959

   British Prime Ministers take their weekly meetings with the Queen very
   seriously. One Prime Minister said he took them more seriously than
   Prime Minister's Questions in the House of Commons, because she would
   be better briefed and more constructive than anything he would face at
   the dispatch box. Elizabeth also has regular meetings with her
   individual British ministers, and occasional meetings with ministers
   from her other Realms.

   As with her British Prime Ministers, some Canadian Prime Ministers have
   commented on the Queen's knowledge of Canadian and international
   affairs. Former Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau stated, "I was always
   impressed not only by the grace she displayed in public at all times,
   but by the wisdom she showed in private conversation." (Memoirs, Pierre
   E. Trudeau.)

   The Queen also meets the First Minister of Scotland. The royal palace
   in Edinburgh, the Holyrood Palace, once home to Scottish kings and
   queens such as Mary, Queen of Scots, is now regularly used again, with
   at least one member of the Royal Family (often the Prince of Wales or
   Princess Royal) in residence. She also receives reports from the new
   National Assembly for Wales, and is continually kept abreast of goings
   on with her other governments. The Government of Wales Act of 2006
   means that from 2007 the Queen will have a role in relation to Wales
   separate to her role as Queen of the UK. She will appoint Welsh
   Ministers and enact Welsh Orders in Council.
   Queen Elizabeth II with Maharaja Jayachamaraja Wodeyar Bahadur.
   Enlarge
   Queen Elizabeth II with Maharaja Jayachamaraja Wodeyar Bahadur.

   Though bound by convention not to intervene directly in politics, her
   length of service, and the fact that she has seen a great many prime
   ministers come and go in all of her realms, combined with her knowledge
   of world leaders, means that when she does express an opinion, however
   cautiously, her words are taken seriously. In her memoirs, Margaret
   Thatcher offered the following description of her weekly meetings with
   Elizabeth: "Anyone who imagines that they are a mere formality or
   confined to social niceties is quite wrong; they are quietly
   businesslike and Her Majesty brings to bear a formidable grasp of
   current issues and breadth of experience."

   During an argument within the Commonwealth over sanctions on South
   Africa, Elizabeth made a pointed reference to her role as Head of the
   Commonwealth, which was interpreted at the time as a disagreement with
   Thatcher's policy of opposing sanctions. However, whatever the
   differences between them, Thatcher has clearly conveyed her personal
   admiration for the Queen and believes that the image of animosity
   between the two of them has been played up because they are both women.
   In the aforementioned BBC documentary Queen & Country, Thatcher
   describes Elizabeth as "marvelous" and "a perfect lady" who "always
   knows just what to say," referring in particular to her final meeting
   with the sovereign as prime minister. Since leaving office, Thatcher
   has been awarded a life peerage, the Order of Merit, and the Order of
   the Garter, which would seem to indicate a basic respect for Thatcher
   on the part of Elizabeth. In October 2005, the Queen and Prince Philip
   attended Thatcher's 80th birthday party in London.

Canadian national unity

   In a speech to the Quebec Legislature, at the height of the Quiet
   Revolution of 1964, she ignored the national controversy (including
   riots during her appearance in Quebec City -— see History of Monarchy
   in Canada) in favour of praising Canada's two "complementary cultures",
   speaking, in both French and English, about the strength of Canada's
   two founding peoples, stating, "I am pleased to think that there exists
   in our Commonwealth a country where I can express myself officially in
   French," and, "whenever you sing [the French words of] ' O Canada' you
   are reminded that you come of a proud race."

   In 1995, during a separatist referendum campaign, 29-year-old Pierre
   Brassard, a DJ for Radio CKOI-FM Montreal, tricked her into speaking
   with him, in both French and English, for 14 minutes, pretending to be
   Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chrétien. When told that the separatists
   were showing a lead, the Queen did reveal that she felt the "referendum
   may go the wrong way," adding, "if I can help in any way, I will be
   very happy to do so". However, she pointedly refused to accept
   "Chrétien's" advice that she intervene on the issue without first
   seeing a draft speech sent by him. Her tactful handling of the call won
   plaudits from the DJ.

Rhodesia

   On 18 November 1965, the Governor of Rhodesia, Sir Humphrey Vicary
   Gibbs, was made a Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, an
   honour in the personal gift of the Queen, a week after Ian Smith had
   made his Unilateral Declaration of Independence. Gibbs was intensely
   loyal to Rhodesia, and, although he had refused to accept the UDI, the
   award was criticised by some as badly timed. Others praised it as
   indicating support for her Rhodesian representative in the face of an
   illegal action by her Rhodesian prime minister.

Australia

   During the Australian constitutional crisis of 1975, when the
   Governor-General of Australia Sir John Kerr dismissed Gough Whitlam
   from the office of Prime Minister, the Queen received petitions and
   letters from Whitlam, the Speaker and private citizens asking the Queen
   to reverse the action of the Governor-General. The Queen's Private
   Secretary quite correctly answered these petitions and letters by
   saying the matter was under the Australian Constitution for the
   Governor-General of Australia to decide. Whitlam and others many years
   later declared their support for Australia becoming a republic.
   Evidence suggests that the Queen did not approve of Governor-General
   Kerr's removal of the elected government. The Australian people
   rejected a referendum to move to a republic in November 1999 with a
   vote favouring the retention of the constitutional monarchy. The Queen
   was warmly greeted on her recent visit to Australia in March 2006.

The United Kingdom

   In her speech to Parliament at the Silver Jubilee in 1977, Elizabeth
   stated, "I cannot forget that I was crowned Queen of the United Kingdom
   of Great Britain and Northern Ireland". This reference came at a time
   when the Labour government was attempting to introduce a controversial
   devolution scheme to Scotland and Wales, and was interpreted as
   opposition to devolution. However, in the late 1990s, after referendums
   approved a devolution scheme, Elizabeth sent her best wishes to the new
   Scottish Parliament, the first session of which she opened in person.
   Her reference in the Silver Jubilee speech is also believed, by some,
   to refer to the disturbances in Northern Ireland at that time.

Relations with world leaders

   Elizabeth has developed friendships with many foreign leaders,
   including Nelson Mandela, Mary Robinson, Ronald Reagan, and George H.
   W. Bush, whose son, George W. Bush, was the first American president in
   more than 80 years to stay at Buckingham Palace. On occasion, such
   contacts have proved highly beneficial for the United Kingdom. For
   example, John Major, as British Prime Minister, once had difficulty
   working with Australian Prime Minister John Howard. The Queen suggested
   to Major that he and the leader shared a mutual sporting interest —
   that Howard was, like Major, a cricket fan. Major then broke the ice to
   establish a personal relationship which ultimately benefited both
   countries. Similarly, she displayed initiative when Irish President
   Mary Robinson began visiting Great Britain, by suggesting that she
   invite Robinson to visit her at the Palace. The Irish Government
   enthusiastically supported the idea. The result was the first ever
   visit by an Irish President to meet the British monarch.

Religious role

   In some Realms, the Queen is the Sovereign " by Grace of God," and, in
   the United Kingdom, is the Supreme Governor of the Church of England.
   As with her predecessors, the Coronation itself took place within the
   context of a church service, at Westminster Abbey, imbued with
   theological, as well as constitutional, meaning. In some Realms, the
   Queen retains the ancient title Fidei Defensor, a title first granted
   in 1521 by Pope Leo X to King Henry VIII, prior to the Reformation.
   Other Commonwealth nations have removed those words from the Queen's
   title.

   The Church of England remains the established church in England;
   archbishops and bishops are formally appointed by the Crown and sit in
   the House of Lords as Lords Spiritual. The Queen takes a keen personal
   interest in the Church, but, in practice, delegates authority in the
   Church of England to the Archbishop of Canterbury. The Queen regularly
   worships at St George's Chapel at Windsor Castle, or at St. Mary
   Magdalene Church when staying at Sandringham House, Norfolk. Certain
   churches (known as Royal Peculiars) have royal patronage, and are
   outside the normal diocesan administrative structures; the best-known
   example is Westminster Abbey. There are six Royal chapels outside of
   the UK.

   The role of the Sovereign differs considerably in the other three
   nations of the United Kingdom. In Scotland, the Church of Scotland,
   with a Presbyterian system of church government, is recognised in law
   as the "national church" in which the Queen is an ordinary member. Her
   first act as monarch was to swear to uphold and protect the reformed
   church in Scotland; a similar oath for England had to wait for the
   coronation. The Royal Family regularly attends services at Crathie Kirk
   when holidaying at Balmoral Castle, and when in residence at the Palace
   of Holyroodhouse, in Edinburgh, the family attends services at the Kirk
   of the Canongate. The Queen has attended the annual General Assembly of
   the Church of Scotland on several occasions, most recently in 1977 and
   2002, although, in most years, she appoints a Lord High Commissioner to
   represent her. Unusually for the Church of Scotland, Glasgow Cathedral
   and Dunblane Cathedral are both owned by the Crown.

   In Wales, Northern Ireland, and the other Realms, there is no official
   religion established by law. The Church in Wales and the Church of
   Ireland were both disestablished, in 1920 and 1871 respectively. Though
   Canadian coins are minted with the inscription D.G. Regina (Queen by
   the Grace of God) around her portrait, and her Canadian title includes
   the phrase "Defender of the Faith", Elizabeth II, as Queen of Canada,
   plays no religious role in the country. (See Monarchy in Canada:
   Cultural Role.)

   The Queen made particular reference to her Christian convictions in her
   Christmas Day television broadcast in 2000, in which she spoke about
   the theological significance of the Millennium as the marking the
   2000th anniversary of the birth of Jesus Christ: "To many of us, our
   beliefs are of fundamental importance. For me, the teachings of Christ,
   and my own personal accountability before God provide a framework in
   which I try to lead my life. I, like so many of you, have drawn great
   comfort in difficult times from Christ's words and example."

   The Queen often meets with leaders from other religions as well. She is
   Patron of the Council of Christians & Jews (CCJ) in the UK.

Personality and image

   The four portraits of Elizabeth on British coinage.
   Enlarge
   The four portraits of Elizabeth on British coinage.

   Elizabeth has never given press interviews, and her views on political
   issues are largely unknown except to those few heads of government who
   share her confidence. She is also regarded privately as an excellent
   mimic. Conservative in dress, she is well known for her solid-colour
   overcoats and decorative hats which allow her to be seen easily in a
   crowd. She attends many cultural events as part of her public role. Her
   main leisure interests include horse racing, photography, and dogs,
   especially her Pembroke Welsh Corgis.

   Elizabeth's first appearance on live television was in Prescott,
   Ontario in 1959 when, as Queen of Canada, she opened the Saint Lawrence
   Seaway. She has given an annual Christmas Message to the Commonwealth
   every year apart from 1969 since she became Queen.

   In matters of diplomacy, Elizabeth is formal, and royal protocol is
   generally very strict. Though some of the traditional rules for dealing
   with the Monarch have been relaxed during her reign ( bowing is no
   longer required, for example), other forms of close personal
   interaction, such as touching, are discouraged by officials. At least
   four people are known to have broken this rule, the first being Alice
   Frazier in 1991 during the Queen's 13-day United States visit, when
   Elizabeth, accompanied by Barbara Bush and Jack Kemp, visited a
   government housing project in Washington. The second was Paul Keating,
   Prime Minister of Australia, when he was photographed with his arm
   around the Queen in 1992 (and was afterwards dubbed the "Lizard of Oz"
   by the British tabloid press). The third was the cyclist Louis Garneau,
   who did the same ten years later. However the Queen appeared to take no
   offence at their actions, and Keating stayed as the Queen's guest in
   her private Balmoral home. The fourth was John Howard, the conservative
   Australian Prime Minister who succeeded Keating.

   Her former prime ministers speak highly of her. Since becoming Queen,
   she spends an average of three hours every day "doing the boxes" —
   reading state papers sent to her from her various departments,
   embassies, and government offices. Having done so since 1952, she has
   seen more of British public affairs from the inside than any other
   person, and is thus able to offer advice to Tony Blair based on her
   experiences with John Major, Harold Wilson, Margaret Thatcher, Harold
   Macmillan, Edward Heath, Winston Churchill and other senior leaders.
   She takes her responsibilities in this regard seriously, once
   mentioning an "interesting telegram" from the Foreign Office to
   then-Prime Minister Winston Churchill, only to find that her prime
   minister had not bothered to read it when it came in his box. To date,
   Sir Alec Douglas-Home was the last Prime Minister of the United Kingdom
   to be chosen personally by Queen Elizabeth, in 1963.

   Always a popular figure in the United Kingdom, not to mention other
   countries, opinion polls have almost always shown that she has an
   excellent approval rating, currently over 80%; and often significantly
   higher than that of her elected Prime Ministers. Since she has little
   political power in the day-to-day running of the country outside of her
   traditional ceremonial and advisory duties, she is unlikely to be held
   responsible for unpopular policies followed by elected politicians.

   In 2006, the Queen came close to an orthodox interview when she agreed
   to be portrait-painted by the popular Australian artist and personality
   Rolf Harris, who engaged in small talk with her, on film, and with
   Palace permission. It was shown on the BBC. However, their conversation
   ventured little beyond previous portraits of the Queen and Royal art
   history in general, and the Queen's responses to Harris's
   conversational overtures were notably crisp and monosyllabic.

   The journalist and BBC Radio 4 presenter John Humphrys has long stated
   that his career ambition is to get the first full interview with the
   Queen.

   The Queen is the subject of " Her Majesty", written by Paul McCartney
   and featured on the Beatles' final album Abbey Road ( 1969); McCartney
   played the song at the Party at the Palace concert during the Golden
   Jubilee in 2002. In 1977, The Sex Pistols issued " God Save the Queen",
   which became a controversial hit single, inspiring the punk rock
   movement with its lyrics suggesting there was "no future" and comparing
   England to a " fascist regime". The Smiths released the song and album
   The Queen Is Dead in 1986. The Pet Shop Boys have a track called
   Dreaming of the Queen. The Queen also plays detective in the Her
   Majesty Investigates series of mystery novels by C.C. Benison, which
   includes Death at Buckingham Palace and Death at Windsor Castle.

   A 2006 film called The Queen starring Helen Mirren takes an intimate,
   behind-the-scenes glimpse at the interaction between Queen Elizabeth II
   and British Prime Minister Tony Blair during their struggle following
   the death of Diana, Princess of Wales, to reach a compromise between
   treating her death as a private tragedy for the Royal Family and
   appeasing the public's demand for an overt display of mourning.

Patronage of Charities

   The Queen is Patron of more than 620 charities and organisations
   including:
     * The Campaign to Protect Rural England (CPRE)
     * Fauna and Flora International
     * The Kennel Club
     * NSPCC
     * Queen Elizabeth Hospital for Children
     * The Royal School of Church Music
     * The Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge ( SPCK)
     * The Boys' Brigade
     * Queens' College, Cambridge

Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles

     * 1926-1936: Her Royal Highness Princess Elizabeth of York
     * 1936-1947: Her Royal Highness The Princess Elizabeth
     * 1947-1952: Her Royal Highness The Princess Elizabeth, Duchess of
       Edinburgh
     * 1952-Present: Her Majesty The Queen (The full style and titles of
       Queen Elizabeth II are various; see List of titles and honours of
       Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom)

   Following Elizabeth's accession, a decision was reached by Commonwealth
   Prime Ministers at the Commonwealth Conference of 1953, whereby the
   Queen would be accorded different styles and titles in each of her
   Realms, reflecting that in each state she acts as the Monarch of that
   state, regardless of her other roles. Traditionally, Elizabeth II's
   titles as Queen Regnant are listed by the order in which the remaining
   original Realms first became Dominions of the Crown: The United Kingdom
   of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (original dominion), Canada
   (1867), Australia (1901), and New Zealand (1907); followed by the order
   in which the former Crown colony became an independent Realm: Jamaica
   (1962), Barbados (1966), the Bahamas (1973), Grenada (1974), Papua New
   Guinea (1975), the Solomon Islands (1978), Tuvalu (1978), Saint Lucia
   (1979), Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (1979), Antigua and Barbuda
   (1981), Belize (1981), and Saint Kitts and Nevis (1983).

Scottish controversy

   However, in Scotland, the title Elizabeth II caused some controversy,
   as there has never been an Elizabeth I in Scotland. In a rare act of
   sabotage, new Royal Mail post boxes in bearing the initials "E II R" in
   Scotland were vandalised. (Prior to Queen Elizabeth, Scottish boxes had
   borne the monarch's initials, but no crown.) To avoid further problems,
   post boxes and Royal Mail vehicles in Scotland now bear only the Crown
   of Scotland and no Royal cypher.

   A legal case, MacCormick v. Lord Advocate (1953 SC 396), was taken to
   contest the right of the Queen to style herself Elizabeth II within
   Scotland, arguing that to do so would be a breach of the Act of Union.
   The case was lost on the grounds that the pursuers had no title to sue
   the Crown, and also that the numbering of monarchs was part of the
   royal prerogative, and not governed by the Act of Union.

   There are also two other matters of controversy, publicised much less.
   First, the argument that the monarch was addressed as Your Grace,
   rather than Majesty, in pre-Union Scotland, and, second, that the
   preferred title had been King/Queen of Scots rather than of Scotland
   (although the latter was by no means unknown).

   At the royal opening of the Scottish Parliament in 1999, the presiding
   officer David Steel referred to her as, "not only the Queen of the
   United Kingdom but seated as you are among us in the historic and
   constitutionally correct manner as Queen of Scots".

   Future British monarchs will be numbered according to either English or
   Scottish predecessors, whichever number is higher. Applying this policy
   retroactively to monarchs since the Act of Union yields the same
   numbering. However, equivalent rules have not been established in the
   Commonwealth Realms.

Styles

   The Queen has many titles within her various Realms and territories. In
   common practice, however, Queen Elizabeth II is referred to simply as
   "The Queen" or "Her Majesty". When in conversation with The Queen, one
   initially uses "Your Majesty", and thereafter "Ma'am".

   In common practice, styled as "Her Majesty" The Queen (and, when the
   distinction is necessary, "Her Britannic Majesty," "Her Australian
   Majesty," or "Her Canadian Majesty," etc.)

Honours

Arms

   The Queen's personal flag, used when she is representing the
   Commonwealth
   Enlarge
   The Queen's personal flag, used when she is representing the
   Commonwealth

   The Queen has coats of arms in each of her Realms; these arms are also
   sometimes used by government agencies or ministries to symbolise the
   Crown. In the UK, they are known as the Royal coat of arms of the
   United Kingdom. Every British monarch has used these arms since the
   reign of Queen Victoria. A separate Royal Arms exists, for use in
   Scotland, which gives priority to Scottish elements and features the
   insignia of the Order of the Thistle. The Royal Coat of Arms of Canada
   has been used by each monarch of Canada since George V; it is based on
   the British Royal Arms but contains unique Canadian elements. The Queen
   also has Arms for use as sovereign of Australia, New Zealand, Jamaica,
   Barbados, the Bahamas, Grenada, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands,
   Tuvalu, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Antigua and
   Barbuda, Belize, and Saint Kitts and Nevis. Each of these is different
   from the Royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom.

   The Royal Standard is the Queen's flag, and is a banner of the Royal
   Arms. In some of the Commonwealth Realms, the Queen has an official
   standard for use when acting as Queen of that Realm. Australia,
   Barbados, Canada, Jamaica, and New Zealand each have their own Royal
   Standard, each one a defaced banner of the relevant coat of arms,
   including the Queen's personal badge: a crowned letter E inside a
   circle of roses on a blue disc. This badge was also used in the Queen's
   personal flags in former realms, and also forms the flag used by the
   Queen as Head of the Commonwealth.

   From 1936 until her succession, Princess Elizabeth's arms were the
   Royal Arms, differenced by a label of three points argent (white), the
   centre bearing a Tudor Rose and the first and third points bearing a
   red cross.

Ancestry

   Queen Elizabeth is the male-line great-granddaughter of Edward VII, who
   inherited the crown from his mother, Queen Victoria. His father,
   Victoria's consort, was Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha; hence
   Queen Elizabeth is a patrilineal descendant of the German princely
   house of Wettin. Other notable members of the princely house are King
   Albert II of Belgium and former King Simeon II of Bulgaria. Through
   Victoria (as well as several other of her great-great-grandparents),
   she is descended from many English monarchs extending back to the House
   of Wessex in the 7th century, and from the Scottish royal house, the
   House of Stuart, and its predecessors, which can be traced back to the
   6th century. There is a direct line of descent from William the
   Conqueror to Queen Elizabeth. As a great-great-granddaughter of Queen
   Victoria, she is related to the heads of most other reigning and
   non-reigning European royal houses such as the former Hohenzollern
   royal houses of Germany and Romania. Through her great-grandmother
   Queen Alexandra, she is descended from the Danish royal house of
   Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg, a line of the North German
   house of Oldenburg, and one of the oldest in Europe ; other members are
   the Duke of Edinburgh, Margrethe II of Denmark, Harald V of Norway,
   Queen Sofia of Spain, Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden and former King
   Constantine II of Greece, who are also all descended from Queen
   Victoria. She is further related to all ruling hereditary monarchs of
   Europe, as a descendant of Johan Willem Friso, Prince of Orange
   (1687–1711), common ancestor to all reigning European royal houses.

Issue

   Name Birth Marriage Issue
   The Prince Charles, Prince of Wales 14 November 1948 married (1), 29
   July 1981, Lady Diana Spencer; divorced, 28 August 1996
   (2), 9 April 2005, Camilla Parker-Bowles Prince William of Wales

   Prince Harry of Wales
   The Princess Anne, Princess Royal 15 August 1950 married (1), 14
   November 1973, Captain Mark Phillips; divorced, 28 April 1992
   (2), 12 December 1992, Commander Timothy Laurence Peter Phillips

   Zara Phillips
   The Prince Andrew, Duke of York 19 February 1960 married , 23 July
   1986, Sarah Ferguson; divorced, 30 May 1996 Princess Beatrice of York

   Princess Eugenie of York
   The Prince Edward, Earl of Wessex 10 March 1964 married, 19 June 1999,
   Sophie Rhys-Jones The Lady Louise Windsor

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elizabeth_II_of_the_United_Kingdom"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
