   #copyright

Emma Roberts

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Actors, models and
celebrities

   CAPTION: Emma Roberts

   Emma Roberts in 2005
      Born:    February 10, 1991 (age 15)
               Rhinebeck, New York
   Occupation: Actress/ Singer

   Emma Rose Roberts (born February 10, 1991) is an American child
   actress. She is the daughter of actor Eric Roberts, and the niece of
   actress Julia Roberts, and made her acting debut at the age of nine in
   the film Blow. She is perhaps best known for her role as the lead
   character in the Nickelodeon television series Unfabulous, and for her
   role in the film Aquamarine.

   Roberts is also a pop singer; her debut album, Unfabulous and More:
   Emma Roberts, was released in 2005.

Biography

Family

   Roberts was born in Rhinebeck, New York to actor Eric Roberts and his
   then girlfriend Kelly Cunningham. Her parents broke up shortly after
   her birth amid accusations of domestic violence, which eventually
   reached court. When Cunningham left the family home in September 1991
   along with her daughter, Eric's sister Julia Roberts bought a house for
   the pair to live in. She also sided with Cunningham in her successful
   custody battle over Emma, resulting in a rift between her and her
   brother for the years to come. Emma saw very little of her father
   following the custody decision, although her mother and Julia Roberts
   remained close.

   Emma's half sister, Grace Nickels — the daughter of her mother and
   former L.A. Guns bassist Kelly Nickels — was born in early 2001. In a
   2005 interview, Roberts stated that she is "definitely closer to [her]
   mum and stepdad and [she doesn't] see [her] real father much."

   Following the marriage of Eric Roberts to actress Eliza Simons (née
   Eliza Garrett) in 1992, Emma also has a stepbrother, Keaton Simons, and
   a stepsister, Morgan Simons (both children from Eliza Simons' first
   marriage with James Simons).

Career

   During her childhood, Roberts spent a lot of time on the sets of the
   films that her aunt was starring in. These experiences sparked a desire
   in Roberts, from the age of five, to follow her father and aunt into
   the film industry. Although her mother initially opposed, wanting her
   daughter to have a normal childhood, Roberts made her acting debut in
   Ted Demme's 2001 drama Blow — the first movie she ever auditioned for —
   at the age of nine. In the film she portrayed Kristina Jung, the
   daughter of Johnny Depp's character, cocaine smuggler George Jung. As
   the film is rated R, her mother reportedly will not allow Roberts to
   see it before she turns eighteen. However, director Ted Demme produced
   a tape for her that featured only the scenes she appeared in.

   In 2001, Roberts also had a role in Leif Tilden's 10-minute short
   bigLove (which also starred her future step-father, Kelly Nickels), and
   was an uncredited extra in one of Julia Roberts' scenes in America's
   Sweethearts. She went on to appear in smaller roles in two family
   films: in 2002's Grand Champion, as the sister of the main character
   Buddy (Jacob Fisher); and in 2003's Spymate, as the kidnapped daughter
   of former secret agent Mike Muggins ( Chris Potter), who tries to
   rescue her with the help of a spy monkey. Grand Champion had a brief
   theatrical release in August 2004, while Spymate was not released until
   February 2006, when it was given a theatrical run in Canada, followed
   by its DVD release in April 2006. In August 2003, Roberts was scheduled
   to shoot an independent film called Daisy Winters, starring as the
   title character, alongside Rachel Weisz. However, the film, which would
   have been Roberts' first leading role, never began shooting due to
   financial problems.

   Roberts became a teen idol at the age of thirteen, starring as the lead
   character Addie Singer in the Nickelodeon series Unfabulous, which
   debuted in September 2004. While Nickelodeon had wanted to cast her for
   the role from the beginning, series creator Sue Rose was not convinced
   of her acting ability until she saw Roberts auditioning for the role,
   singing a song and playing along on the guitar. The teen sitcom earned
   Roberts a Teen Choice Award nomination and two Young Artist Award
   nominations in 2005. The series became one of the network's
   most-watched programs and was quickly recommissioned for a second
   season.

   As her character on Unfabulous writes songs and plays guitar,
   Nickelodeon soon considered a career in music for Roberts as well,
   following the lead of other actress/ pop singers such as Hilary Duff
   and Lindsay Lohan. Roberts first contributed the song "If I Had It My
   Way" to the soundtrack of Disney's 2005 film Ice Princess. This was
   followed by her debut album, Unfabulous and More: Emma Roberts, which
   was released on September 27, 2005 and is featured as the soundtrack to
   Unfabulous. The album was rather unsuccessful: it peaked at #46 on the
   Billboard's Top Heatseekers, and the two music videos released
   simultanious to promote the album, "I Wanna Be" and "Dummy", received
   only little airplay.

   In 2006, Roberts returned to the big screen, starring alongside Sara
   Paxton and singer JoJo in Aquamarine. In the film two teenagers (played
   by Roberts and JoJo) find a mermaid (Paxton) in their swimming pool.
   Roberts also contributed a cover version of Weezer's 2001 single "
   Island in the Sun" to the film's soundtrack. Following Aquamarine, she
   was scheduled to star in Camp Couture (produced by her mother, Kelly
   Cunningham) and Bras and Broomsticks (based on the book of the same
   name by Sarah Mlynowski), but neither film went into full production.

   On May 15, 2006 Roberts was featured on MTV's Punk'd with pop singer
   Teddy Geiger. Roberts recently signed a contract with Dooney & Bourke,
   becoming their new spokesmodel. She is also designing her own Dooney &
   Bourke handbag, named after her.

   In early 2006 Roberts finished shooting Nancy Drew, in which she stars
   in the title role of teen detective Nancy Drew, and which is set to be
   released June 15, 2007. She also signed on to star in 2008's Rodeo Gal.

Filmography

   Year Title Role Other notes
   2001 Blow Kristina Jung
   2001 bigLove Delilah short film
   2001 America's Sweethearts (uncredited extra)
   2002 Grand Champion Sister
   2003 Spymate Amelia was not released until 2006
   2004 Unfabulous Addie Singer television series (2004–present)
   2004 Drake & Josh episode " Honour Council" Addie Singer television
   series; guest appearance
   2006 Aquamarine Claire Brown
   2006 Unfabulous: The Perfect Moment Addie Singer made-for-TV movie
   2007 Nancy Drew Nancy Drew Scheduled to be released theatrically on
   June 15, 2007 in the U.S.

Discography

Album

     * Unfabulous and More: Emma Roberts (2005)

Single

     * " Santa Claus Is Comin' to Town" (2005, available at online music
       stores such as iTunes and MSN Music)

Others

     * "If I Had It My Way" on the soundtrack of Ice Princess (2005)
     * " Island in the Sun" on the soundtrack of Aquamarine (2006)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emma_Roberts"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
