   #copyright

Eurasian Jay

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

                  iEurasian Jay

                             Conservation status

   Least Concern (LC)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Aves
   Order:   Passeriformes
   Family:  Corvidae
   Genus:   Garrulus
   Species: G. glandarius

                                Binomial name

   Garrulus glandarius
   Linnaeus, 1758

   The Eurasian Jay (Garrulus glandarius) occurs over a vast region from
   Western Europe and north-west Africa to the eastern seaboard of Asia
   and down into south-east Asia. Across its vast range, several very
   distinct racial forms have evolved to look very different from each
   other, especially when forms at the extremes of its range are compared.

   A member of the widespread jay group, and about the size of the
   Jackdaw, it inhabits mixed woodland, particularly with oaks, and is an
   habitual acorn hoarder. In recent years, the bird has begun to migrate
   into urban areas, possibly as a result of continued erosion of its
   woodland habitat.

   Feeding in both trees and on the ground, it takes a wide range of
   invertebrates including many pest insects, acorns ( oak seeds, which it
   buries for use during winter), beech mast and other seeds, fruits such
   as blackberries, rowan berries etc., young birds, mice, small reptiles
   and small snakes.

   It nests in trees or large shrubs laying usually 4–6 eggs that hatch
   after 16–19 days and are fledged generally after 21–23 days. Both sexes
   typically feed the young.

   Its usual call is the alarm call which is a harsh, rasping screech and
   is used upon sighting various predatory animals, but the Jay is well
   known for its mimicry, often sounding so like a different species that
   it is virtually impossible to distinguish its true identity unless the
   Jay is seen. It will even imitate the sound of the bird it is
   attacking, such as a Tawny Owl, which it does mercilessly if attacking
   during the day. However, the Jay is a potential prey item for owls at
   night.

Gallery

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eurasian_Jay"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
