   #copyright

Eurasian Bullfinch

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

                    iBullfinch

                             Conservation status

   Least Concern (LC)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Aves
   Order:   Passeriformes
   Family:  Fringillidae
   Genus:   Pyrrhula
   Species: P. pyrrhula

                                Binomial name

   Pyrrhula pyrrhula
   (Linnaeus, 1758)

   The Bullfinch or Eurasian Bullfinch, Pyrrhula pyrrhula, is a small
   passerine bird in the finch family Fringillidae.

   This bird breeds across Europe and temperate Asia. It is mainly
   resident, but many northern birds migrate further south in the winter.

   Mixed woodland with some conifers is favoured for breeding, including
   parkland and gardens. It builds its nest in a bush or tree, laying 4-7
   eggs. The food is mainly seeds and buds of fruit trees, which can make
   it a pest in orchards.

   This species does not form large flocks outside the breeding season,
   and is usually seen as a pair or family group.

   The Bullfinch is a bulky bull-headed bird. The upper parts are grey;
   the cap, face, flight feathers and short thick bill are black; and the
   white rump and wing bars are striking in flight. The adult male has red
   underparts, but females and young birds have grey-buff underparts. The
   pleasant song of this unobtrusive bird contains fluted whistles.

   The Azores Bullfinch previously regarded as a subspecies of Eurasian
   Bullfinch, is today recognized as a distinct species.

   The European Bullfinch is peculiar among Passeriformes for having
   spermatozoa with a rounded head and a blunt acrosome (Birkhead et al.,
   2006).
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eurasian_Bullfinch"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
