   #copyright

European Greenfinch

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

               iEuropean Greenfinch

                             Conservation status

   Least Concern (LC)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Aves
   Order:   Passeriformes
   Family:  Fringillidae
   Genus:   Carduelis
   Species: C. chloris

                                Binomial name

   Carduelis chloris
   Linnaeus, 1758

                                  Synonyms

   Chloris chloris (but see article text)

   The European Greenfinch, or just Greenfinch, Carduelis chloris, is a
   small passerine bird in the finch family Fringillidae. The genus
   Carduelis might be split up and in this case, the greenfinches would be
   separated in their old genus Chloris again.

   This bird is widespread throughout Europe, north Africa and south west
   Asia. It is mainly resident, but some northernmost populations migrate
   further south.

   Woodland edges, farmland hedges and gardens with relatively thick
   vegetation are favoured for breeding. It nests in trees or bushes,
   laying 3-8 eggs.

   This species can form large flocks outside the breeding season,
   sometimes mixing with other finches and buntings. They feed largely on
   seeds, but also feed their young insects.

   The Greenfinch is 14-16 cm in length and is similar in size and shape
   to a Chaffinch, but is mainly green, with yellow in the wings and tail.
   The female and young birds are duller and have brown tones on the back.
   The bill is thick and conical. The song contains wheezes and twitters,
   and the male has a "butterfly" display flight.

Photo gallery

                      European Greenfinch

                                         European Greenfinch

                                                            European Greenfinch

   European Greenfinch

                      European Greenfinch

                                         European Greenfinch

                                                            European Greenfinch

   European Greenfinch
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Greenfinch"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
