   #copyright

European Kingfisher

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

               iEuropean Kingfisher

                             Conservation status

   Least Concern (LC)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Aves
   Order:   Coraciiformes
   Family:  Alcedinidae
   Genus:   Alcedo
   Species: A. atthis

                                Binomial name

   Alcedo atthis
   (Linnaeus, 1758)

   The European Kingfisher or Common Kingfisher, Alcedo atthis, is widely
   distributed in Europe, Africa, and Asia. It is resident except in
   northern areas where the rivers freeze. It will then move to milder
   regions. In most of its European range it is the only kingfisher.

   The general colour of the upper parts of the adult bird is bright
   metallic blue, cobalt on the back, and showing greenish reflections on
   the head and wings. The ear coverts and under parts are warm chestnut,
   the chin and sides of neck white.

   The bill is blackish and reddish orange at the base; the legs are
   bright red with a dark blue stripe. In the young the bill is black.
   Length averages 19 cm (7.5 inches) and wings average 7.5 cm (2.95
   inches).

   The flight of the Kingfisher is rapid, the short rounded wings whirring
   until they appear a mere blur. It usually flies near the water, but
   during courtship the male chases the female through and over the trees
   with loud shrill whistles.

   From February onwards the male has a trilling song, a modulated
   repetition of many whistles. He also signals with a whistle to the
   female when he is feeding her, this being his share of the nesting
   duties. This whistle is produced even when his bill is loaded with
   food, yet is clear and distinct. The female will reply and emerge from
   the nesting hole, and may fly to meet him, take the fish from him in
   the air, and return to the nest.

   The bird has regular perches or stands from which it fishes. These may
   be a few inches or many feet above the water. It sits upright, its tail
   pointed downwards. It drops suddenly with a splash and usually returns
   at once with a struggling captive.

   Large fish are beaten on a bough or rail; small fish and insects are
   promptly swallowed. A fish is usually lifted and carried by its middle,
   but its position is changed, sometimes by tossing it into the air,
   before it is swallowed head downwards.

   The Kingfisher sometimes hovers over the water, with body held almost
   vertical, the tail and head bent slightly forward and the bill inclined
   downward.

   It is a bird of the waterside, since it feeds entirely upon aquatic
   animals. It is frequent beside lakes, ponds, canals or dykes and
   streams.

   In winter, especially when inland waters are icebound, it may move to
   tidal marshes and the shore, taking its stand on the mussel or limpet
   covered rocks and diving into the shallow pools.

   Fish, aquatic insects and crustaceans are eaten. It eats numerous
   freshwater shrimps Gammarus.

   The nest is a tunnel in a sandy bank, usually, though not always over
   water. Both birds excavate, except when an old hole of a Sand Martin or
   Water Vole is appropriated. Most incline upward for about three feet
   before the nesting chamber is reached.

   There is no nest, but the six to seven or even more round white eggs
   are placed on a litter of fish bones and disgorged pellets. The eggs
   are pink. The first clutch is usually laid in April, but second broods
   are often in the nest at the end of July, and an exceptional case of
   young in early October is recorded.

   The young come to the mouth of the hole to be fed when old enough. They
   are at first without down and clothed with numerous small blue
   feathers. Their bills are steel-blue and their feet lighter colored
   than adults. When they leave the nest they differ little from their
   parents, except that the colours are duller, the spot on the neck is
   buff, and the grey margins to the breast feathers give a mottled
   appearance. Their call is then an insistent, continuous trill.

Gallery

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Kingfisher"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
