   #copyright

Euston Manifesto

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Politics and government

   The Euston Manifesto (pron. "yoosten", IPA /ˈjuːstən/) is a declaration
   of principles by a group on the democratic left. The statement is a
   reaction to what are asserted to be widespread violations of left-wing
   principles by other left-wingers. The manifesto states that "the
   reconfiguration of progressive opinion that we aim for involves drawing
   a line between forces on the Left that remain true to its authentic
   values, and currents that have lately shown themselves rather too
   flexible about these values."

   These alleged violations are largely in relation issues in the Middle
   East, such as the Iraq war, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the War
   On Terror etc. Broadly speaking, the group asserts that the left as a
   whole is overly critical of the actions of Western governments, such as
   the military presence in Iraq, and correspondingly is overly supportive
   of forces opposing Western governments, such as anti-Western Iraqi
   forces. As the document puts it, "we must define ourselves against
   those for whom the entire progressive-democratic agenda has been
   subordinated to a blanket and simplistic 'anti-imperialism' and/or
   hostility to the current US administration."

   The manifesto began as a conversation between friends, a gathering of
   (mainly British) academics, journalists, and activists. At their first
   meeting in London, they decided to write a "minimal manifesto", a short
   document summarising their core values. The original intention of its
   proposer was that the manifesto would provide a rallying point for a
   number of left-leaning blogs, to be collected by an aggregator, and the
   basis for a book collecting some of the best writing about related
   political questions. The group met more formally after the document's
   first drafting, at a branch of the O'Neill's Irish-themed pub chain on
   London's Euston Road — just across the road from the British Library —
   where the manifesto was named, and its content voted on. It was first
   published in the New Statesman on April 7, 2006.

   The manifesto proposes a "fresh political alignment," which involves
   "making common cause with genuine democrats, whether socialist or not,"
   in which the left stands for democracy, freedom, equality,
   internationalism, the open-source movement, and historical truth, while
   condemning all forms of tyranny, terrorism, anti-Americanism, racism,
   anti-Semitism, including any form of it that "conceal[s] prejudice
   against the Jewish people behind the formula of " anti-Zionism". The
   signatories say they "reject fear of modernity, fear of freedom,
   irrationalism, the subordination of women," and "reaffirm the ideas
   that inspired the great rallying calls of the democratic revolutions of
   the eighteenth century: liberty, equality and solidarity; human rights;
   the pursuit of happiness ... But we are not zealots. For we embrace
   also the values of free enquiry, open dialogue and creative doubt, of
   care in judgement and a sense of the intractabilities of the world. We
   stand against all claims to a total — unquestionable or unquestioning —
   truth."

Euston Manifesto Group

   The panel at the public launch of the Euston Manifesto. From left to
   right: Alan Johnson, Eve Garrard, Nick Cohen, Shalom Lappin and Norman
   Geras.
   Enlarge
   The panel at the public launch of the Euston Manifesto. From left to
   right: Alan Johnson, Eve Garrard, Nick Cohen, Shalom Lappin and Norman
   Geras.

   The authors and their collaborators call themselves the Euston
   Manifesto Group. There are about thirty members of the group, four of
   whom were most heavily involved in authoring the document: Norman
   Geras, Marxist scholar and professor emeritus at Manchester University;
   Damian Counsell; Alan Johnson, editor of Democratiya; and Shalom
   Lappin. Other members include Nick Cohen of The Observer, who
   co-authored with Geras the first report on the manifesto in the
   mainstream press; Marc Cooper of The Nation; Francis Wheen a journalist
   and authority on Marx; and historian Marko Attila Hoare. (see complete
   list)

   There are similarities between the manifesto and the aims of the
   non-partisan Henry Jackson Society which was launched at Cambridge
   University in March 2005. Some Henry Jackson Society members are among
   the signatories of the manifesto. Figures around the American journal
   Telos have launched an American chapter of the Euston group. Early
   signatories of the American statement included Ronald Radosh, Martin
   Peretz, Daniel Jonah Goldhagen, Michael Ledeen, and Walter Laqueur.

Reception

   The manifesto was published in the New Statesman and on The Guardian's
   blog, "Comment is Free," then was launched formally on May 25, 2006 at
   the Union Chapel in Islington.

   It generated much lively debate on British and American blogs on the
   day of publication. Its critics argued it contained too many statements
   of the obvious, that it had little to say about imperialism or the
   power of global corporations, and that it was in reality a front for
   its authors' support for the current foreign policies of the British
   and American governments. Its supporters countered that very little of
   the statement's content had been directly criticised and that its
   opponents were merely worried that its principles would win broad
   support on the British left, thus challenging the consensus among
   left-liberal opinion that they believe predominates in the mainstream
   media.

   The manifesto takes no position on the invasion of Iraq. However some
   of its most prominent contributors, including Nick Cohen, and the
   proprietors of the left-wing blog Harry's Place, supported the
   invasion. Of the manifesto's principal authors, two were broadly
   against the war; two were broadly in support. Of eight people
   advertised as attending a Euston Manifesto Group meeting at the 2006
   Labour Party Conference, six supported the Iraq War. One of these,
   Gisela Stuart MP, declared during the 2004 American presidential
   election that a victory by challenger John Kerry victory would prompt
   "victory celebrations among those who want to destroy liberal
   democracies."

   Some of the manifesto's authors have criticised certain anti-war
   figures and groups, notably George Galloway and the Stop the War
   Coalition for their alliances with Islamists. Although there is still
   disagreement within the group over the rationale for the war, the
   authors agree that, after the bombs stopped falling, the left should
   have united around a campaign to support Iraqi democrats, feminists,
   and progressives. Instead, in their view, alliances were formed with
   Islamist groups, Baathists, and the libertarian antiwar.com.

   The manifesto states that the left's political focus should be on
   reconstructing Iraq and instituting a stable democracy. Opponents
   reject this, saying that the question of invasion is still legitimate,
   and that refusal by some authors to oppose the invasion is
   unacceptable.

   As of November 2006, the left can be said as a whole to continue to
   focus on rationales for the war (for example whether the Iraqi
   government was or was not developing weapons of mass destruction, or
   whether oil was a motive), against what seems to be the aim of the
   manifesto (see for example ).

Summary

   The authors start by identifying themselves as "progressives and
   democrats" and calling for a new political alignment in which the left
   stands unambiguously for democracy, and against tyranny and terrorism.
   Additionally, the authors note that, while they all identify as
   leftists or liberals, their anti- totalitarian ideals are not exclusive
   to any one point on the political spectrum. Following this, the
   manifesto lists and explains the core principles of their ideology:

Democracy, tyranny, and human rights

   First and foremost, the authors say, the manifesto stands in support of
   pluralist democracy, including free expression, political freedom, and
   the separation of powers of government. The authors note that the most
   effective governments in the world today are democracies.

   Conversely, the authors strongly condemn tyrannical governments,
   regardless of the circumstances (i.e. during the Cold War, supporting
   right-wing dictators in opposition to Communism was immoral, just as
   supporting totalitarian communism was equally repugnant). The authors
   "draw a firm line" between themselves and those on the left who might
   support authoritarian regimes (e.g. those who support totalitarian
   communism in the pursuit of social progress).

   The authors strongly support the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
   dismissing all arguments against the idea of eternal truths. They do
   not believe that any circumstance can justify ignoring a human right,
   if it is a human right. Particularly, they reject cultural relativism,
   the belief that different cultures can have different standards, and
   one culture may not judge another. Also, they condemn what they see as
   a willingness by some on the left to criticise minor (although real)
   violations of rights at home, while ignoring or excusing much greater
   violations abroad.

Equality and development

   The manifesto is strongly supportive of egalitarian principles. While
   they intentionally do not specify their preferred economic system, they
   say that a fundamental tenet of left-liberalism must be economic and
   social equality between people of all races, religions, genders, and
   sexual orientations. Within this, they say labour unions are "bedrock
   organizations in the defence of workers' interests and are one of the
   most important forces for human rights, democracy-promotion and
   egalitarian internationalism." They also say "labour rights are human
   rights" and single out different, less-commonly represented people,
   including children and the sexually oppressed.

   As part of promoting economic equality, the authors call for supporting
   increased development in poorer nations in order to alleviate extreme
   poverty. Their prescription for this includes greater distribution of
   wealth within the trading system, and the radical reform of the World
   Trade Organization, World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund.
   They also call for fair trade, environmental protection, debt
   forgiveness, and more aid. They support the campaign to Make Poverty
   History.

Opposing anti-Americanism

   The authors stand unambiguously in support of America the country and
   people, while still allowing for criticism of its government and
   foreign policy. While noting that the United States is "not a model
   society," the authors note that it is a strong and stable democracy.
   Particularly, they commend America for its "vibrant culture." This
   said, they note that America has in the past supported dictators,
   contrary to the values of the manifesto.

Israel and Palestine

   The authors support the creation of a Palestine and the continuance of
   Israel, known as the two-state solution. They can see no reasonable
   resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in which one side's
   rights are subordinate to another's.

Against racism and terror

   The manifesto is opposed to all forms of racism, including
   anti-immigration, inter-tribal conflict, and other forms of
   discrimination. The authors draw particular attention to what they
   describe as the recent resurgence of anti-semitism, believing that some
   have attempted to hide anti-semitism under a cover of anti-Zionism.

   Using strong language, the authors condemn and reject all forms of
   terrorism (defined by them as the intentional targeting of civilians)
   and call it a violation of international law and the laws of war. In
   their view, nothing can excuse terrorism. They single out Islamist
   terrorism as particularly heinous. They do however defend Islam itself,
   saying that within that faith, the victims of terrorism's worst
   atrocities and its most vigorous opponents can be found.

A new internationalism

   The manifesto calls for the reform of international law in the
   interests of "global democracy and global development". It supports the
   doctrine of humanitarian intervention, and argues that a state's
   sovereignty should be respected only if "it does not torture, murder
   and slaughter its own civilians, and meets their most basic needs of
   life". If it fails in this duty, "there is a duty upon the
   international community of intervention and rescue". The form of such
   an intervention is not specified, but possible interpretations include
   diplomacy, economic sanctions, and military action. This implied
   support for military action is one of the main points of disagreement
   between the manifesto's authors and their critics.

Historical truth, openness, and heritage

   The manifesto argues that pluralism within the movements of the left is
   essential. The authors promise to criticise in forthright terms those
   leftists who ally with "illiberal theocrats" or other anti-democratic
   figures and organisations. Additionally, they promise to listen to the
   ideas of both the left and the right, if such communications is made in
   the hopes of furthering democracy.

   The manifesto emphasises the duty which genuine democrats have to
   respect historical truth, and to practice political honesty and
   straightforwardness. It claims that the reputation of the left was
   tarnished in this regard by the International Communist movement. It
   argues that some elements of the anti-war movement are guilty of making
   the same mistake in being too willing to work with " Islamist fascist"
   organisations.

   Later in the manifesto, the legacy of democratic movements is recalled.
   The authors say that they are the latest in a long line of activists
   committed to the spread of human rights and free expression. They
   recall specifically the revolutions of the eighteenth-century (most
   prominent among them the French Revolution).

Elaboration

   In the final section, the authors elaborate on specific world issues.
   Most prominently, the authors condemn those who call the Iraqi
   insurgency "freedom fighters" and reiterate their opposition to the
   previous Baathist regime. Furthermore, they argue that the focus of the
   left--regardless of how someone might have felt about the
   invasion--must be supporting the creation of a stable democracy in
   Iraq. Again, the authors espouse their egalitarian principles, saying
   that global inequality represents a "standing indictment of the
   international community."

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euston_Manifesto"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
