   #copyright

Evan Rachel Wood

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Actors, models and
celebrities

   Evan Rachel Wood
   Evan Rachel Wood
   Born          September 7, 1987
                 Raleigh, North Carolina
   Notable roles Thirteen

   Evan Rachel Wood (born September 7, 1987) is an American film,
   television and theatre actress, and singer. She began acting in the
   late 1990s, appearing in several television roles, including American
   Gothic and Once and Again. Wood made her debut as a lead film actress
   in 2002's Little Secrets, and became well known after her Golden
   Globe-nominated role in Thirteen, which gained her critical praise. She
   has since starred in several independent films, including Pretty
   Persuasion and Down in the Valley, and has several more starring roles
   in films yet to be released.

   Wood has been described by The Guardian newspaper as being "wise beyond
   her years" and as "one of the best actresses of her generation".

Biography

Early life

   Wood was born in Raleigh, North Carolina to Ira David Wood III, an
   award-winning actor, singer, theatre director and playwright, and Sara
   Lynn Moore, an actress. Her brother, Ira David IV, is also an actor and
   her aunt, Carol Winstead Wood, is a Hollywood production designer; she
   also has a half brother, Dana, from her mother's first marriage. Wood
   is Jewish.

   Wood and her brother were actively involved in their father's theatre,
   Theatre In The Park, while growing up; she appeared in a production of
   A Christmas Carol at the theatre when she was a few months old, and
   later starred as Helen Keller in a production of The Miracle Worker,
   under her father's direction.

Career

   Wood auditioned for the child role in Interview with the Vampire, which
   was eventually given to actress Kirsten Dunst. She appeared in several
   made-for-television films from 1994 and onwards, also playing an
   occasional role in the television series American Gothic. In early
   1997, Wood's parents separated and later divorced, and Wood moved with
   her mother to her mother's native Los Angeles, where Wood was cast in
   the supporting role of Jessie Sammler on the television show Once and
   Again. Wood's first major screen role was in the low-budget 1998 film,
   Digging to China, which also starred Kevin Bacon and Mary Stuart
   Masterson. Wood remembers the role as initially being "hard", but notes
   that it eventually led to her decision that acting is something she
   "might never want to stop doing".

   Wood left regular school at the age of eleven, and was home schooled,
   because of bullying and difficulty with teachers, who Wood says treated
   her like she was "spoiled" because she was an actress. She later drew
   upon her experiences with bullying to portray a malicious high school
   student in Pretty Persuasion.

   Wood subsequently appeared in a number of films catering to a teenage
   audience, including Little Secrets. She was set to have the leading
   role in the films Raise Your Voice and Mean Girls, but was unable to
   because of production scheduling changes. Wood's breakthrough movie
   role followed, with the 2003 film Thirteen, for which she was nominated
   for a Golden Globe Award as Best Actress - Drama. During the time of
   Thirteen's release, Vogue named Wood as one of the It Girls of
   Hollywood, and she appeared, along with the other actresses, on the
   magazine's July 2003 cover.

   Her next two starring roles were in the dark independent films, Pretty
   Persuasion (2005), in which she played a villainous, sexually active
   high-schooler, and Down in the Valley (2006), in which her character
   engages in a sexual relationship with an older man posing as a cowboy.
   Wood has commented on her choice of sexually themed roles, saying that
   she is not aiming for the "shock factor" in her film choices, and
   adding that she hopes her roles "spread awareness" about the
   consequences of deviant behaviour among teenagers, citing that she has
   known people who behave similarly to her film characters.

   In 2005, Wood starred in the music videos for Bright Eyes' "At the
   Bottom of Everything" and Green Day's " Wake Me Up When September
   Ends". In September of 2006, she received Premiere magazine's
   "Spotlight Award for Emerging Talent".

   Wood has roles in several as-yet unreleased films, including King of
   California, and Across the Universe, a musical directed by Julie Taymor
   and set in the United Kingdom, United States and Vietnam; she will
   perform musical numbers in the film. During August and September 2006,
   Wood filmed In Bloom, in which she plays a younger version of a
   character played by Uma Thurman.

Personal life

   Wood received her high school diploma at age fifteen. She has a black
   belt in Tae Kwon Do and enjoys singing, having recorded the songs
   "Christmas Isn't Christmas Without You" and "Silver and Gold" for the
   School's Out Christmas Album, which featured various artists. Wood is
   now considering taking part-time college courses, but is not yet
   pursuing a full-time college education.

   Wood has said that her character in Across the Universe, whom she
   describes as an "old soul, street smart and ahead of her time", is
   close to her real-life personality. Wood also describes herself as
   being "laid back" and "not a party girl", citing her choice to stay
   away from what is considered a typical Hollywood lifestyle.

   During 2006, Wood, who was described by the Guardian as an "
   Anglophile", dated her " Wake Me Up When September Ends" music video
   co-star, English actor Jamie Bell. She is also a friend of actor Joseph
   Gordon-Levitt.

Selected filmography

   Year Title Role Notes
   2007 Terra voice role; in production
   In Bloom filming
   The King of California Miranda post-production
   Across the Universe Lucy post-production
   2006 Running with Scissors Natalie
   Down in the Valley Tobe limited release
   2005 Pretty Persuasion Kimberly Joyce limited release
   The Upside of Anger Lavender 'Popeye' Wolfmeyer
   2003 The Missing Lily Gilekson
   Thirteen Tracy Louise Freeland Golden Globe nomination
   2002 Little Secrets Emily Lindstrom
   S1m0ne Lainey Christian
   1999 Down Will Come Baby Robin Garr made-for-television
   1998 Practical Magic Kylie Owens
   Digging to China Harriet Frankovitz limited release
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evan_Rachel_Wood"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
