   #copyright

Extinct birds

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

          This page refers only to birds that have gone extinct in
          historical times and were subject to scientific study. For a
          list of early taxa of birds known only from fossils, see Fossil
          birds. For birds extinct in Late Quaternary prehistoric times
          and (usually) known from specimens not completely fossilized,
          please refer to Late Quaternary prehistoric birds.

   Since 1500, over 140 species of birds have become extinct, and this
   rate of extinction seems to be increasing. The situation is exemplified
   by Hawai‘i, where 30% of all known recently extinct species originally
   lived. Other areas, such as Guam, have also been hard hit; Guam has
   lost over 60% of its native species in the last 30 years, many of them
   to the introduced Brown Tree Snake.

   There are today about 10,000 species of birds, with roughly 1200
   considered to be under threat of extinction. Except for a dozen or so
   species the threat is man-made.

   Island species in general, and flightless island species in particular
   are most at risk. The disproportionate number of rails in the list
   reflects the tendency of that family to lose the ability to fly when
   geographically isolated. Even more rails became extinct before they
   could be described by scientists; these taxa are listed in Later
   Quaternary Prehistoric Birds.

   The extinction dates given below are usually approximations of the
   actual date of extinction. In some cases, more exact dates are given as
   it is sometimes possible to pinpoint the date of extinction to a
   specific year or even day (the San Benedicto Rock Wren is possibly the
   most extreme example - its extinction could be timed with an accuracy
   of maybe half an hour). Extinction dates in the literature are usually
   the dates of the last verified record (credible observation or specimen
   taken); in many Pacific birds which became extinct shortly after
   European contact, however, this leaves an uncertainty period of over a
   century because the islands on which they used to occur were only
   rarely visited by scientists.
   Dodo, based on Roelant Savery's 1626 painting of a stuffed specimen -
   note that it has two left feet!
   Dodo, based on Roelant Savery's 1626 painting of a stuffed specimen -
   note that it has two left feet!

Extinct bird species

Struthioniformes

   The Ostrich and related ratites.
     * Elephant bird, Aepyornis maximus (Madagascar, 16th century?)

          The taxonomy of the elephant birds is not fully resolved; it is
          almost certain that at least one taxon survived until Recent
          times, but it is not clear which species the reports refer to,
          if there were indeed more than one.

     * Lesser Megalapteryx, Megalapteryx didinus (South Island, New
       Zealand, late 15th century?)

          Generally believed to have been extinct by 1500, this is the
          only moa species that according to current knowledge might have
          survived until later times, possibly as late as the 1830s.

     * King Island Emu, Dromaius ater (King Island, Australia, 1822)

          Extinct in the wild c.1805, the last captive specimen died in
          1822 in the Jardin des Plantes.

     * Kangaroo Island Emu, Dromaius baudinianus (Kangaroo Island,
       Australia, 1827)
     * West Coast Spotted Kiwi, Apteryx occidentalis (South Island, New
       Zealand, c.1900)

          A doubtful form known from a single bird; may be a Little
          Spotted Kiwi subspecies or a hybrid between that species and the
          rowi.

Tinamiformes

   Tinamous
     * Magdalena Tinamou, Crypturellus saltuarius (Colombia, late 20th
       century?)

          Sometimes considered a Red-legged Tinamou subspecies, this bird
          is only known from the 1943 type specimen. Recent research
          suggest it is still extant.

Anseriformes

   Ducks, geese and swans.
     * Korean Crested Shelduck, Tadorna cristata (Northeast Asia, late
       20th century?)

          A relict species from Northeast Asia. Officially critically
          endangered due to recent unconfirmed reports.

     * Réunion Shelduck, Alopochen kervazoi (Réunion, Mascarenes, c.1690s)
     * Mauritian Shelduck, Alopochen mauritianus (Mauritius, Mascarenes,
       late 1690s)
     * Amsterdam Island Duck, Anas marecula (Amsterdam Island, South
       Indian Ocean, c.1800)
     * Mauritian Duck, Anas theodori (Mauritius and Réunion, Mascarenes,
       late 1690s)
     * Mariana Mallard, Anas oustaleti (Marianas, West Pacific, 1981)
     * Finsch's Duck, Chenonetta finschi from New Zealand possibly
       survived to 1870
     * Pink-headed Duck, Netta caryophyllacea (East India, Bangladesh,
       North Myanmar, 1945?) -formerly Rhodonessa

          Officially critically endangered; recent surveys have failed to
          rediscover it.

     * Réunion Pochard, Aythya cf. innotata (Réunion, Mascarenes, c.1690s)

          A bone of a pochard found on Réunion seems to resolve the
          reports of canards other than the Mauritian Duck having occurred
          on the island. The taxonomic status of this form cannot be
          resolved until more material is found, however.

     * Labrador Duck, Camptorhynchus labradorius (Northeast North America,
       c.1880)
     * Auckland Islands Merganser, Mergus australis (Auckland Islands,
       Southwest Pacific, c.1902)

Galliformes

   Quails and relatives.
     * The Giant Scrubfowl, Megapodius molistructor, may have survived on
       New Caledonia to the late 18th century as evidenced by decriptions
       of the bird named "Tetrao australis" and later "Megapodius
       andersoni".
     * The Viti Levu Scrubfowl, Megapodius amissus of Viti Levu and
       possibly Kadavu, Fiji, may have survived to the early 19th or even
       the 20th century as suggested by circumstantial evidence.
     * Raoul Island Scrubfowl, Megapodius sp. (Raoul, Kermadec Islands,
       1876)

          A megapode is said to have inhabited Raoul Island until the
          population was wiped out in a volcanic eruption. It is not clear
          whether the birds represent a distinct taxon or derive from a
          prehistoric introduction by Polynesian seafarers.

     * New Zealand Quail, Coturnix novaezelandiae (New Zealand, 1875)
     * Himalayan Quail, Ophrysia superciliosa (North India, late 19th
       century?)

          Officially critically endangered. Not recorded with certainty
          since 1876, but thorough surveys are still required, and there
          is a recent set of possible (though unlikely) sightings around
          Naini Tal in 2003. A little-known native name from Western Nepal
          probably refers to this bird, but for various reasons, no survey
          for Ophrysia has ever been conducted in that country, nor is it
          generally assumed to occur there (due to the native name being
          overlooked).

Charadriiformes

   Great Auk (Pinguinus impennis), Natural History Museum, London, England
   Enlarge
   Great Auk (Pinguinus impennis), Natural History Museum, London, England

   Shorebirds, gulls and auks.
     * Javanese Lapwing, Vanellus macropterus (Java, Indonesia, mid-20th
       century)

          Officially classified as critically endangered, but as this
          conspicuous bird has not been recorded since 1940, it is almost
          certainly extinct.

     * Tahitian Sandpiper, Prosobonia leucoptera (Tahiti, Society Islands,
       19th century)
     * White-winged Sandpiper, Prosobonia ellisi (Moorea, Society Islands,
       19th century)

          Doubtfully distinct from P. leucoptera.

     * Eskimo Curlew, Numenius borealis (Northern North America, late 20th
       century?)

          May still exist; officially classified as critically endangered,
          possibly extinct.

     * Slender-billed Curlew, Numenius tenuirostris (Western Siberia,
       early 2000s?)

          May still exist; officially classified as critically endangered.
          Last seen in 1999 following several decades of increasing
          rarity.

     * Great Auk, Pinguinus impennis (North Atlantic, c.1844)
     * Canarian Black Oystercatcher, Haematopus meadewaldoi (Fuerteventura
       and Lanzarote, Canary Islands, early 20th century)

Gruiformes

   Rails and allies.
   " Leguat's Giant" or géant, a hypothetical giant rail from the
   Mascarenes, is based on his descriptions of flamingos, as Leguat was
   not familiar with their French name flamand or thought that it referred
   to other birds (it was in his time sometimes used for spoonbills, for
   example).
     * Antillean Cave-Rail, Nesotrochis debooyi from Puerto Rico and the
       Virgin Islands possibly survived into the Modern Era.
     * Hawkins' Rail, Diaphorapteryx hawkinsi (Chatham Islands, SW
       Pacific, 19th century)
     * Red Rail, Aphanapteryx bonasia (Mauritius, Mascarenes, c.1700)
     * Rodrigues Rail, Aphanapteryx leguati (Rodrigues, Mascarenes,
       mid-18th century)
     * Bar-winged Rail, Nesoclopeus poecilopterus (Fiji, Polynesia,
       c.1980)
     * New Caledonian Rail, Gallirallus lafresnayanus (New Caledonia,
       Melanesia, c.1990?)

          Officially classified as critically endangered, the last records
          were in 1984 and it seems that all available habitat is overrun
          by feral pigs and dogs which prey on this bird.

     * Wake Island Rail, Gallirallus wakensis (Wake Island, Micronesia,
       1945)
     * Tahiti Rail, Gallirallus pacificus (Tahiti, Society Islands, late
       18th - 19th century)
     * Dieffenbach's Rail, Gallirallus dieffenbachii (Chatham Islands, SW
       Pacific, mid-19th century)
     * Sharpe's Rail, Gallirallus sharpei (Indonesia?, 20th century?)

          A bird known from a single skin of unknown origin. A reseach
          project has been proposed to shed light on its relationships and
          possible place of origin.

     * Vava'u Rail, Gallirallus cf. vekamatolu (Vava'u, Tonga, early 19th
       century?)

          This bird is known only from a drawing by the 1793 Malaspina
          expedition, apparently depicting a species of Gallirallus. The
          'Eua Rail, Gallirallus vekamatolu, is known from prehistoric
          bones found on 'Eua, but this species cannot have been the bird
          depicted, as it was flightless. However, it probably was a close
          relative.

     * The Norfolk Island Rail, Gallirallus sp. may be the bird shown on a
       bad watercolor illustration made around 1800
     * Chatham Rail, Cabalus modestus (Chatham Islands, SW Pacific,
       c.1900)
     * Réunion Rail, Dryolimnas augusti (Réunion, Mascarenes, late 17th
       century)
     * Red-throated Wood-rail, Aramides gutturalis (Peru, 20th century?)

          Usually considered a badly prepared specimen of the Grey-necked
          Wood Rail, the single known individual of this bird may prove a
          distinct species though.

     * Ascension Island Rail, Mundia elpenor (Ascension, Island, Atlantic,
       late 17th century) - formerly Atlantisia
     * Saint Helena Crake, Porzana astrictocarpus (Saint Helena, Atlantic,
       early 16th century)
     * Laysan Rail, Porzana palmeri (Laysan Island, Hawaiian Islands,
       1944)
     * Hawaiian Rail, Porzana sandwichensis (Big Island, Hawaiian Islands,
       c.1890)

   The Laysan Rail was a diminutive omnivore
   Enlarge
   The Laysan Rail was a diminutive omnivore
     * Kosrae Island Crake, Porzana monasa (Kosrae, Carolines, c. mid-late
       19th century)
     * Miller's Crake, Porzana nigra (Tahiti, Society Islands, c.1800)

          Known only from paintings and descriptions; taxonomic status
          uncertain as the material is often believed to refer to the
          extant Spotless Crake.

     * Saint Helena Swamphen, Aphanocrex podarces (Saint Helena, Atlantic,
       16th century) - formerly Atlantisia
     * Lord Howe Swamphen, Porphyrio albus (Lord Howe Island, SW Pacific,
       early 19th century)
     * Réunion Swamphen or Oiseau bleu, Porphyrio coerulescens (Réunion,
       Mascarenes, 18th century)

          Known only from descriptions. Former existence of a Porphyrio on
          Réunion is fairly certain, but not proven to date.

     * Marquesas Swamphen, Porphyrio paepae (Hiva Oa and Tahuata,
       Marquesas)

          May have survived to c.1900. In the lower right corner of Paul
          Gauguin's 1902 painting Le Sorcier d'Hiva Oa ou le Marquisien à
          la cape rouge there is a bird which reminds of native
          descriptions of P. paepae.

     * The North Island Takahē, Porphyrio mantelli known from subfossil
       bones found on North Island, New Zealand, may have survived to 1894
       or later.
     * New Caledonia Swamphen, Porphyrio kukwiedei from New Caledonia,
       Melanesia, may have survived into historic times. The native name
       n'dino is thought to refer to this bird.
     * Samoan Wood Rail, Gallinula pacifica (Savai'i, Samoa, 1907?)

          Probably better placed in the genus Pareudiastes, unconfirmed
          reports from the late 20th century suggest it still survives in
          small numbers, and therefore it is officially classified as
          critically endangered.

     * Makira Wood Rail, Gallinula silvestris (Makira, Solomon Islands,
       mid-20th century?)

          Only known from a single specimen, this rail is probably better
          placed in its own genus, Edithornis. There are some unconfirmed
          recent records that suggest it still survives, thus, it is
          officially classified as critically endangered.

     * Tristan Moorhen, Gallinula nesiotis (Tristan da Cunha, Atlantic,
       late 19th century)
     * Mascarene Coot, Fulica newtoni (Mauritius and Réunion, Mascarenes,
       c.1700)
     * Rallidae gen. et sp. indet.

          Unknown rail from Amsterdam Island, one specimen found but not
          recovered. Extinct by 1800 or may have been straggler of extant
          species.

     * Fernando de Noronha Rail, Rallidae gen. et sp. indet. (Fernando de
       Noronha, W Atlantic, 16th century)

          A distinct species of rail inhabited Fernando de Noronha island,
          but it has not been formally described yet. Probably was extant
          at Western contact.

     * Tahitian "Goose", ?Rallidae gen. et sp. indet. (Tahiti, late 18th
       century?)

          Early travellers to Tahiti reported a "goose" that was found in
          the mountains. Altogether, a species of the rail genus Porphyrio
          seems the most likely choice.

Podicipediformes

   Grebes.
     * Colombian Grebe, Podiceps andinus (Bogotá area, Colombia, 1977)
     * Alaotra Grebe, Tachybaptus rufolavatus (Lake Alaotra, Madagascar,
       late 1980s?)

          Officially critically endangered, possibly extinct, declined
          through habitat destruction and hybridization with the Little
          Grebe. Disappeared from only known location in the 1980s.

     * Atitlán Grebe, Podilymbus gigas (Lake Atitlán, Guatemala, 1989)

Ciconiiformes

   Herons and related birds.
   The "Painted Vulture" (Sarcorhamphus sacra), a Floridan bird supposedly
   similar to the King Vulture, is based on a misidentification of the
   Crested Caracara.
     * Bermuda Night Neron, Nycticorax carcinocatactes (Bermuda, West
       Atlantic, 16th century)

          Sometimes assigned to the genus Nyctanassa

     * Réunion Night Heron, Nycticorax duboisi (Réunion, Mascarenes, late
       17th century)
     * Mauritius Night Heron, Nycticorax mauritianus (Mauritius,
       Mascarenes, c.1700)
     * Rodrigues Night Heron, Nycticorax megacephalus (Rodrigues,
       Mascarenes, mid-18th century)
     * Ascension Night Heron, Nycticorax olsoni (Ascension Island,
       Atlantic, late 16th century?)

          Known only from subfossil bones, but the description of a
          flightless Ascension bird by F. André Thevet cannot be
          identified with anything other than this species.

     * New Zealand Little Bittern, Ixobrychus novaezelandiae (New Zealand,
       late 19th century)

          Long considered to be vagrant individuals of the Australian
          Little Bittern, bones recovered from Holocene deposits indicate
          that this was indeed a distinct taxon, but it might not be a
          separate species.

     * Réunion Sacred Ibis, Threskiornis solitarius (Réunion, Mascarenes,
       early 18th century)

          This species was the base for the supposed "Réunion Solitaire",
          a supposed relative of the Dodo and the Rodrigues Solitaire.
          Given the fact that ibis, but no dodo-like bones were found on
          Réunion and that old descriptions match a flightless Sacred Ibis
          quite well, the "Réunion Solitaire" hypothesis has been refuted.

Pelecaniformes

   Cormorants and related birds.
     * Spectacled Cormorant, Phalacrocorax perspicillatus (Komandorski
       Islands, North Pacific, c. 1850)

Procellariiformes

   Petrels and storm-petrels.
     * Guadalupe Storm-petrel, Oceanodroma macrodacyla (Guadalupe, East
       Pacific, 1910s)

          Officially critically endangered, possibly extinct, but a
          thorough survey in 2000 concluded the species was certainly
          extinct.

     * St Helena Bulwer's Petrel, Bulweria bifax (Saint Helena, Atlantic,
       early 16th century)
     * Jamaica Petrel, Pterodroma caribbaea (Jamaica, West Indies)

          Possibly a subspecies of the Black-capped Petrel; unconfirmed
          reports suggest it might survive. Officially classified as
          critically endangered, possibly extinct.

     * Pterodroma cf. leucoptera (Mangareva, Gambier Islands, 20th
       century?)

          A wing of a carcass similar to Gould's Petrel was recovered on
          Mangareva in 1922, where it possibly bred. No such birds are
          known to exist there today.

     * St Helena Petrel, Pseudobulweria rupinarum (Saint Helena, Atlantic,
       early 16th century)

Sphenisciformes

   Penguins
     * The Chatham Islands Penguin, Eudyptes sp. (Chatham Islands, SW
       Pacific), is only known from subfossil bones, but a bird kept
       captive at some time between 1867 and 1872 might refer to this
       taxon.

Columbiformes

   Pigeons, doves and dodos.
     * St Helena Flightless Pigeon, Dysmoropelia dekarchiskos, possibly
       survived into the Modern Era.
     * Passenger Pigeon, Ectopistes migratorius (Eastern North America,
       1914)

          The passenger pigeon was once probably the most common bird in
          the world, a single swarm numbering up to several billion birds.
          It was hunted close to extinction for food and sport in the late
          19th century. The last individual died in the Cincinnati Zoo in
          1914.

     * The Silvery Pigeon, Columba argentina, has not been reliably
       observed since 1931 and may be extinct. It is difficult to
       distinguish from the common Pied Imperial Pigeon, however.
     * Bonin Wood-pigeon, Columba versicolor (Nakodo-jima and Chichi-jima,
       Ogasawara Islands, c.1890)
     * Ryukyu Wood-pigeon, Columba jouyi (Okinawa and Daito Islands,
       Northwest Pacific, late 1930s)
     * Réunion Pink Pigeon, Streptopelia duboisi (Réunion, Mascarenes,
       c.1700)

          Its generic allocation is not fully resolved. There seems to
          have been at least another species of pigeon on Réunion
          (probably an Alectroenas), but bones have not yet been found. It
          disappeared at the same time.

     * Rodrigues Turtle Dove, Streptopelia rodericana (Rodrigues,
       Mascarenes, before 1690?)

          Its generic allocation is not fully resolved. A possible
          subspecies of the Madagascar Turtle Dove, this seems not to be
          the bird observed by Leguat. Introduced rats might have killed
          it off in the late 17th century.

     * Liverpool Pigeon, "Caloenas" maculata

          Also known as the Spotted Green Pigeon, the only specimen has
          been in Liverpool Museum since 1851, and was probably collected
          on a Pacific island for Edward Stanley, 13th Earl of Derby. It
          has been suggested that this bird came from Tahiti based on
          native lore about a somewhat similar extinct bird called titi,
          but this has not been verified.

     * Sulu Bleeding-heart, Gallicolumba menagei (Tawitawi, Philippines,
       late 1990s?)

          Officially listed as critically endangered. Only known from 2
          specimens taken in 1891, there have been a number of unconfirmed
          reports from all over the Sulu Archipelago in 1995. However,
          these reports stated that the bird had suddenly undergone a
          massive decline, and by now, habitat destruction is almost
          complete. If not extinct, this species is very rare, but the
          ongoing civil war prevents comprehensive surveys.

     * Norfolk Island Ground Dove, Gallicolumba norfolciensis (Norfolk
       Island, Southwest Pacific, c.1800)
     * Tanna Ground Dove, Gallicolumba ferruginea (Tanna, Vanuatu, late
       18th-19th century)

          Only known from descriptions of 2 now-lost specimens.

     * Thick-billed Ground Dove, Gallicolumba salamonis (Makira and Ramos,
       Solomon Islands, mid-20th century?)

          Last recorded in 1927, only 2 specimens exist. Declared extinct
          in 2005.

     * Choiseul Crested Pigeon, Microgoura meeki (Choiseul, Solomon
       Islands, early 20th century)
     * Marquesas Fruit Pigeon, Ptilinopus mercierii (Nuku Hiva and Hiva
       Oa, Marquesas, mid-20th century)

          Two subspecies, the little-known P. m. mercierii of Nuku Hiva
          (extinct mid-late 19th century) and P. m. tristrami of Hiva Oa.

     * Negros Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus arcanus (Negros, Philippines, late
       20th century?)

          Known only from one specimen taken at the only documented
          sighting in 1953, the validity of this species has been
          questioned, but no good alternative to distinct species status
          has been proposed. Officially critically endangered, it might
          occur on Panay, but no survey has located it. One possible
          record in 2002 seems not to have been followed up.

     * Mauritius Blue Pigeon, Alectroenas nitidissima (Mauritius,
       Mascarenes, c.1830s)
     * Farquhar Blue Pigeon, Alectroenas sp. (Farquhar Group, Seychelles,
       19th century)

          Only known from early reports; possibly a subspecies of the
          Comoro or Seychelles Blue Pigeon.

     * Rodrigues Grey Pigeon, "Alectroenas" rodericana (Rodrigues,
       Mascarenes, mid-18th century)

          A mysterious bird of unknown affinities, known from a few bones
          and, as it seems, two historical reports.

     * Dodo, Raphus cucullatus (Mauritius, Mascarenes, late 17th century)

          Called Didus ineptus by Linnaeus. A meter-high flightless bird
          found on Mauritius. Its forest habitat was lost when Dutch
          settlers moved to the island and the dodo's nests were destroyed
          by the monkeys, pigs, and cats the Dutch brought with them. The
          last specimen was killed in 1681, only 80 years after the
          arrival of the new predators. See also dodo tree.

     * Rodrigues Solitaire, Pezophaps solitaria (Rodrigues, Mascarenes,
       c.1730)
     * For the "Réunion Solitaire", see Réunion Sacred Ibis.

Psittaciformes

   Parrots.
   Mounted specimen of Conuropsis carolinensis, Museum Wiesbaden, Germany
   Enlarge
   Mounted specimen of Conuropsis carolinensis, Museum Wiesbaden, Germany
     * New Caledonian Lorikeet, Charmosyna diadema (New Caledonia,
       Melanesia, mid-20th century?)

          Officially critically endangered, there have been no reliable
          reports of this bird since the early 20th century. It is,
          however, small and inconspicuous.

     * Norfolk Island Kākā, Nestor productus (Norfolk and Philip Islands,
       SW Pacific, 1851?)
     * Society Parakeet, Cyanoramphus ulietanus (Raiatea, Society Islands,
       late 18th century)
     * Black-fronted Parakeet, Cyanoramphus zealandicus (Tahiti, Society
       Islands, c.1850)
     * Paradise Parrot, Psephotus pulcherrimus (Rockhampton area,
       Australia, late 1920s)
     * The Night Parrot, (Pezoporus occidentalis), officially critically
       endangered, is a mysterious species which might be extinct. It was
       only reliably recoded twice in the late 20th century, the last time
       in 1991. More probably, it still persists in small numbers.
     * The Pacific Eclectus Parrot, Eclectus infectus, known from
       subfossil bones found on Tonga, Vanuatu, and possibly Fiji, may
       have survived until the 18th century: a bird which seems to be a
       male Eclectus parrot was drawn in a report on the Tongan island of
       Vava'u by the Malaspina expedition.
     * Seychelles Parakeet, Psittacula wardi (Seychelles, W Indian Ocean,
       1883)
     * Newton's Parakeet, Psittacula exsul (Rodrigues, Mascarenes, c.1875)
     * Mascarene Parrot, Mascarinus mascarinus (Réunion and possibly
       Mauritius, Mascarenes, 1834?)

          Last known individual was a captive bird which was alive before
          1834.

     * Broad-billed Parrot, Lophopsittacus mauritianus (Mauritius,
       Mascarenes, 1680?)

          May have survived to the late 18th century. A smaller related
          form described as Mauritius Grey Parrot (Lophopsittacus bensoni)
          may be the female of L. mauritianus.

     * Rodrigues Parrot, Necropsittacus rodericanus (Rodrigues,
       Mascarenes, late 18th century)

          The species N. francicus is fictional, N. borbonicus most likely
          so.

     * Glaucous Macaw, Anodorhynchus glaucus (N Argentina, early 20th
       century)

          Officially critically endangered due to persistent rumours of
          wild birds, but probably extinct.

     * Cuban Red Macaw, Ara tricolor (Cuba, West Indies, late 19th
       century)

          A number of related species have been described from the West
          Indies, but are not based on good evidence. Several prehistoric
          forms are now known to have existed in the region, however.

     * Carolina Parakeet, Conuropsis carolinensis (SE North America,
       c.1930?)

          Although the date of the last captive bird's death in the
          Cincinnati Zoo, 1918, is generally given as extinction date,
          there are convincing reports of some wild populations persisting
          until later. 2 subspecies, C. c. carolinensis (east and south of
          the Appalachian range - extinct 1918 or c.1930) and C. c.
          ludovicianus (Louisiana Parakeet, west of the Appalachian range
          - extinct early 1910s).

     * Guadeloupe Parakeet, Aratinga labati (Guadeloupe, West Indies, late
       18th century)

          Only known from descriptions, the former existence of this bird
          is likely for biogeographic reasons and because details as
          described cannot be referred to known species.

     * Sinú Parakeet, Pyrrhura subandina (Colombia, mid-20th century?)

          Recently recognized as a distinct species, this bird has a very
          restricted distribution and was last reliably recorded in 1940.
          It was not found during searches in 2004 and 2006 and seems to
          be extinct; relocation efforts continue but are hampered by the
          threat of armed conflict.

     * Martinique Amazon, Amazona martinica (Martinique, West Indies,
       mid-18th century)
     * Guadeloupe Amazon, Amazona violacea (Guadeloupe, West Indies,
       mid-18th century)

          The extinct amazon parrots were originally described after
          travelers' descriptions. Both are nowadays considered valid
          extinct species closely related to the Imperial Parrot.

Cuculiformes

   Cuckoos.
     * Delalande's Coua, Coua delalandei (Madagascar, late 19th century?)
     * St Helena Cuckoo, Nannococcyx psix (Saint Helena, Atlantic, 16th
       century)

Falconiformes

   Birds of prey.
     * Cuban Kite, Chondrohierax wilsonii (Cuba, West Indies, early
       2000s?)

          Often considered a subspecies of the Hook-billed Kite, it is at
          least critically endangered. While a small remnant probably
          survives in eastern Cuba, it has not been seen for some years;
          recent efforts to find the birds have hitherto drawn a blank but
          continue.

     * Guadalupe Caracara, Polyborus lutosus (Guadelupe, E Pacific, 1900
       or 1903)
     * Réunion Kestrel, Falco duboisi (Réunion, Mascarenes, c.1700)

Strigiformes

   Owls.
     * Réunion Owl, Mascarenotus grucheti (Réunion, Mascarenes, late 17th
       century?)
     * Mauritius Owl, Mascarenotus sauzieri (Mauritus, Mascarenes, c.1850)
     * Rodrigues Owl, Mascarenotus murivorus (Rodrigues, Mascarenes,
       mid-18th century)

          The preceding two species were variously placed in Bubo, Athene,
          "Scops" (=Otus), Strix, and Tyto before their true affinity was
          realized.

     * New Caledonian Boobook, Ninox cf. novaeseelandiae (New Caledonia,
       Melanesia)

          Known only from prehistoric bones, but might still survive.

     * Laughing Owl, Sceloglaux albifacies (New Zealand, 1914?)

          Two subspecies, S. a. albifacies (South Island and Stewart
          Island, extinct 1914?) and S. a. rufifacies (North Island,
          extinct c.1870s?) - circumstantial evidence suggests small
          remnants survived until the early/mid-20th century.

     * The Puerto Rican Barn Owl, Tyto cavatica, known from prehistoric
       remains found in caves of Puerto Rico, West Indies, may still have
       existed in 1912 given reports of the presence of cave-roosting
       owls.

Caprimulgiformes

   Nightjars and allies.
     * Jamaican Parauque, Siphonorhis americana (Jamaica, West Indies,
       late 19th century

          Reports of unidentifiable nightjars in habitat appropriate for
          S. americanus suggest that this cryptic species may still exist.
          Research into this possibility is currently underway; pending
          further information, it is classified as critically endangered,
          possibly extinct.

     * Cuban Parauque, Siphonorhis daiquiri (Cuba, West Indies)

          Described from subfossil bones in 1985. There are persistent
          rumors that this bird, which was never seen alive by scientists,
          may still survive. Compare Puerto Rican Nightjar.

     * Vaurie's Nightjar, Caprimulgus centralasicus

          Only known from a single 1929 specimen from Xinjiang, China. It
          has never been found again, and it is quite possibly invalid as
          it has not yet been compared to the similar subspecies of the
          European Nightjar, C. europaeus plumipes, which occurs at the
          locality where C. centralasicus was found.

Apodiformes

   Swifts and hummingbirds.
     * Coppery Thorntail, Discosura letitiae (Bolivia?)

          Known only from 3 trade specimens of unknown origin. Might still
          exist.

     * Brace's Emerald, Chlorostilbon bracei (New Providence, Bahamas,
       late 19th century)
     * Gould's Emerald, Chlorostilbon elegans (Jamaica or northern
       Bahamas, West Indies, late 19th century)
     * Alfaro's Hummingbird, Saucerottia alfaroana (Costa Rica, c.1900)
     * Bogota Sunangel, Heliangelus zusii (Colombia?)

          A mysterious bird known only from a single specimen of unknown
          origin. Might be a hybrid (although the specimen is very
          distinct) or might still exist.

     * Turquoise-throated Puffleg, Eriocnemis godini (Ecuador, 20th
       century?)

          Officially classified as critically endangered, possibly
          extinct. Known only from 6 pre-1900 specimens, the habitat at
          the only known site where it occurred has been destroyed.
          However, the bird's distribution remains unresolved.

Coraciiformes

   Kingfishers and related birds.
     * Ryukyu Kingfisher, Todiramphus miyakoensis (Miyako-jima, Ryukyu
       Islands, late 19th century)

          This was probably a sub-species of the Micronesian Kingfisher
          Todiramphus cinnamomina. Only seen once by scientists, in 1887;
          the specimen taken is somewhat damaged, making identification by
          other than molecular analysis difficult.

     * Giant Hoopoe, Upupa antaois (Saint Helena, Atlantic, early 16th
       century)

Piciformes

   Woodpeckers and related birds.
     * Caatinga Woodpecker, Celeus obrieni (Western Piauí, Brazil,
       mid-20th century)

          This bird is known from a single specimen taken in 1926 and was
          long believed to be a subspecies of the Rufous-headed
          Woodpecker. As it was confined to caatinga habitat, which has
          been largely destroyed where the bird was once found, it is most
          likely extinct.

     * Imperial Woodpecker, Campephilus imperialis (Mexico, late 20th
       century)

          This 60-centimeter-long woodpecker is officially listed as
          critically endangered, possibly extinct. Occasional unconfirmed
          reports come up, the most recent in late 2005.

     * There is currently a major debate on whether the North American
       Ivory-billed Woodpecker (Campephilus principalis principalis) was
       indeed rediscovered in the White River National Wildlife Refuge of
       Arkansas in 2004. The Cuban Ivory-billed Woodpecker (Campephilus
       principalis bairdii) was last seen in 1987 and is generally
       considered extinct, but there are a few patches of habitat not yet
       surveyed.

Passeriformes

   Perching birds.

   Formicariidae - Antpittas and antthrushes
     * Táchira Antpitta, Grallaria chthonia (Venezuela, late 20th
       century?)

          Officially critically endangered, this species has not been
          recorded since 1956 and although some habitat still exists, it
          was not found in dedicated searches in the 1990s.

   The famous Stephens Island Wren, victim of feral cats
   Enlarge
   The famous Stephens Island Wren, victim of feral cats

   Acanthisittidae - New Zealand "wrens"
     * Stephens Island Wren, Xenicus lyalli (New Zealand, 1895?)

          The species famously (but erroneously) claimed to have been made
          extinct by a single cat named "Tibbles".

     * Bush Wren, Xenicus longipes (New Zealand, 1972)

          3 subspecies: X. l. stokesi - North Island, extinct 1955; X. l.
          longipes - South Island, extinct 1968; X. l. variabilis -
          Stewart Island, extinct 1972.

   Meliphagidae - Honeyeaters and Australian chats
     * Kioea, Chaetoptila angustipluma (Big Island, Hawaiian Islands,
       1860s)
     * Hawai‘i ‘O‘o, Moho nobilis (Big Island, Hawaiian Islands, 1930s)
     * O‘ahu ‘O‘o, Moho apicalis (O‘ahu, Hawaiian Islands, mid-19th
       century)
     * Moloka‘i ‘O‘o, Moho bishopi (Moloka‘i and probably Maui, Hawaiian
       Islands, c.1910 or 1980s)
     * Kaua‘i ‘O‘o, Moho braccatus (Kaua‘i, Hawaiian Islands, 1987)
     * Chatham Island Bellbird, Anthornis melanocephala (Chatham Islands,
       Southwest Pacific, c.1910)

          Unconfirmed records exist from the early-mid 1950s

   Pardalotidae - Pardalotes, scrubwrens, thornbills, and gerygones
     * Lord Howe Gerygone, Gerygone insularis (Lord Howe Island, Southwest
       Pacific, c.1930)

   Pachycephalidae - Whistlers, shrike-thrushes, pitohuis and allies
     * Mangarevan Whistler, ?Pachycephala gambierana (Mangareva, Gambier
       Islands, late 19th century?)

          A mysterious bird of which no specimen exists today. It was
          initially described as a shrike, then classified as an
          Eopsalteria "robin", and may actually be an Acrocephalus
          flycatcher.

   Dicruridae - Monarch flycatchers and allies
     * Maupiti Monarch, Pomarea pomarea (Maupiti, Society Islands,
       mid-19th century)
     * Eiao Monarch, Pomarea fluxa (Eiao, Marquesas, late 1970s)

          Previously considered a subspecies of the Iphis Monarch, this is
          an early offspring of the Marquesan stock.

     * Nuku Hiva Monarch, Pomarea nukuhivae (Nuku Hiva, Marquesas,
       mid-late 20th century)

          Previously considered a subspecies of the Marquesas Monarch,
          this is another early offspring of the Marquesan stock.

     * Ua Pou Monarch, Pomarea mira (Ua Pou, Marquesas, c.1986)

          Previously considered another subspecies of the Marquesas
          Monarch, this was a distinct species most closely related to
          that bird and the Fatuhiva Monarch.

     * Guam Flycatcher, Myiagra freycineti (Guam, Marianas, 1983)

   Corvidae - Crows, ravens, magpies and jays
     * Banggai Crow, Corvus unicolor (Banggai or Peleng Island, Indonesia,
       20th century?)

          Officially critically endangered, it is known only from two
          specimens taken on an unspecified island at some date in the
          late 19th century, probably in 1884 or 1885. Possible sightings
          in 1981 and 1991, but no unequivocal recent records and amount
          of habitat destruction suggest this species is extinct.

   Malaconotidae - Bushshrikes
     * Bulo Burti Boubou, Laniarius liberatus (Somalia, early 1990s?)

          Only found once, in 1988, this bird is officially critically
          endangered, as it may still exist. However, it was never found
          again despite being looked for, and there seems to be much
          habitat degradation. Owing to the political situation in
          Somalia, further research has not been possible.

   Vangidae - Vangas
     * Short-toed Nuthatch Vanga, Hypositta perdita (Madagascar, mid-20th
       century?)

          An enigmatic bird known only from 2 recently fledged juveniles
          collected in 1931, it was not found during a thorough search in
          1996.

   † Turnagridae - Piopio
     * North Island Piopio, Turnagra tanagra (North Island, New Zealand,
       c.1970?)

          Not reliably recoded anymore since about 1900.

     * South Island Piopio, Turnagra capensis (South Island, New Zealand,
       1960s?)

          Two subspecies, T. c. minor from Stephens Island (extinct
          c.1897) and the nominate T. c. capensis from the South Island
          mainland (last specimen taken in 1902, last unconfirmed record
          in 1963)

   Male (front) and female (back) Huia
   Enlarge
   Male (front) and female (back) Huia

   Callaeidae - New Zealand wattlebirds
     * Huia, Heteralocha acutirostris (North Island, New Zealand, early
       20th century)

   Estrildidae - Estrildid finches (waxbills, munias, etc)
     * Black-lored Waxbill, Estrilda nigriloris (D.R. Congo, Africa, late
       20th century?)

          An enigmatic waxbill not seen since 1950; since part of its
          habitat is in Upemba National Park it may survive.

   Parulidae - New World warblers
     * Bachman's Warbler, Vermivora bachmanii (Southern USA, c.1990?)

          Officially critically endangered, possibly extinct

     * Semper's Warbler, Leucopeza semperi (Saint Lucia, Caribbean, 1970s)

   Icteridae - Grackles
     * Slender-billed Grackle, Quiscalus palustris (Mexico, 1910)

   Fringillidae - True finches
     * Tawny-headed Mountain Finch, Leucosticte sillemi (Xinjiang,
       mid-/late 20th century?)

          An enigmatic bird known from just 2 specimens collected in 1929.
          As no threats are known, probably still extant, but the lack of
          recent records is puzzling.

     * Bonin Grosbeak, Chaunoproctus ferreorostris (Chichi-jima, Bonin
       Islands, 1830s)

   Drepanididae - Hawaiian honeycreepers
     * ‘O‘u, Psittirostra psittacea (Hawaiian Islands, c.2000?)

          Officially classified as critically endangered, possibly
          extinct, this was once the most widespread species of Hawaiian
          honeycreeper. It has not been reliably recorded since 1987 or
          1989.

     * Lana‘i Hookbill, Dysmorodrepanis munroi (Lana‘i, Hawaiian Islands,
       1918)
     * The Kaua‘i Palila, Loxioides kikuichi (Kaua‘i, Hawaiian Islands),
       possibly survived to the early 18th century.
     * Lesser Koa Finch, Rhodacanthus flaviceps (Big Island, Hawaiian
       Islands, 1891)
     * Greater Koa Finch, Rhodacanthus palmeri (Big Island, Hawaiian
       Islands, 1896)
     * Kona Grosbeak Finch, Psittirostra kona (Big Island, Hawaiian
       Islands, 1894)
     * Greater ‘Amakihi, Hemignathus sagittirostris (Big Island, Hawaiian
       Islands, 1901)
     * Hawai‘i ‘Akialoa, Akialoa obscura (Big Island, Hawaiian Islands,
       1940)
     * Maui Nui ‘Akialoa, Akialoa lanaiensis (Lana‘i and prehistorically
       probably Maui and Moloka‘i, Hawaiian Islands 1892)
     * O‘ahu ‘Akialoa, Akialoa ellisiana (O‘ahu, Hawaiian Islands, 1940)
     * Kaua‘i ‘Akialoa, Akialoa stejnegeri (Kaua‘i, Hawaiian Islands,
       1969)
     * Nukupu‘u, Hemignathus lucidus (Hawaiian Islands, c.2000?)

          The subspecies from O‘ahu (H. l. lucidus) is extinct since the
          late 19th century, that of Kaua‘i (H. l. hanapepe) most probably
          since the late 1990s and that of Maui (H. l. affinis) has not
          been reliably seen since 1995. It is currently classified as
          critically endangered, possibly extinct.

     * Kakawahie, Paroreomyza flammea (Moloka‘i, Hawaiian Islands, 1963)
     * O‘ahu ‘Alauahio, Paroreomyza maculata (O‘ahu, Hawaiian Islands,
       early 1990s?)

          Officially classified as critically endangered, possibly
          extinct. Last reliable record was in 1985, with an unconfirmed
          sighting in 1990.

     * ‘Ula-‘ai-hawane, Ciridops anna (Big Island, Hawaiian Islands, 1892
       or 1937)
     * Black Mamo, Drepanis funerea (Moloka‘i, Hawaiian Islands, 1907)
     * Hawai‘i Mamo, Drepanis pacifica (Big Island, Hawaiian Islands,
       1898)
     * Po‘o-uli, Melamprosops phaeosoma (Maui, Hawaiian Islands, 2004?)

          The most recent extinction on this list. What was most likely
          the last known bird has died in captivity on 28 November 2004.

   Emberizidae - Buntings and American sparrow
     * Hooded Seedeater, Sporophila melanops (Brazil, 20th century?)

          Officially classified as critically endangered, possibly
          extinct. It is known only from a single male collected in 1823,
          and has variously been considered an aberrant Yellow-bellied
          Seedeater or a hybrid.

   Hirundinidae - Swallows and martins
     * White-eyed River Martin, Pseudochelidon sirintarae (Thailand, late
       1980s?)

          Officially critically endangered, this enigmatic species is only
          known from migrating birds and it was last seen in 1986 at its
          former roost site. Recent unconfirmed repors suggest it may
          occur in Cambodia.

     * Red Sea Swallow, Petrochelidon perdita (Red Sea area, late 20th
       century?)

          Known from a single specimen, this enigmatic swallow probably
          still exists, but the lack of recent records is puzzling.

   Sylviidae - Old World warblers
     * Aldabra Brush Warbler, Nesillas aldabranus (Aldabra, Indian Ocean,
       c.1984)
     * Large-billed Reed Warbler, Acrocephalus orinus (India, 20th
       century?)

          A mysterious bird known only from a 1867 specimen that was long
          considered invalid, but has recently been determined to be a
          very distinct species. It may still exist and simply have been
          overlooked due to the former fact.

     * Chatham Islands Fernbird, Bowdleria rufescens (Chatham Islands, New
       Zealand, c.1900)

          Often placed in genus Megalurus, but this is based on an
          incomplete review of the evidence.

   Cisticolidae - Cisticolas and allies
     * Tana River Cisticola, Cisticola restrictus (Kenya, 1970s?)

          A mysterious bird, found in the Tana River basin in small
          numbers at various dates, but not anymore since 1972. Probably
          invalid, based on aberrant or hybrid specimens.

   Zosteropidae - White-eyes
     * Lord Howe White-eye, Zosterops strenua (Lord Howe Island, Southwest
       Pacific, c.1918)

   Timaliidae - Old World babblers
     * Black-browed Babbler, Malacocincla perspicillata (Borneo?,
       Indonesia, 20th century?)

          Known from a single mid-19th century specimen, this bird may be
          extinct or could still exist. If the specimen label, usually
          considered erroneous in claiming "Java" as the bird's origin, is
          correct, it may have gone extinct earlier.

   Muscicapidae - Old World Flycatchers and chats
     * Rueck's Blue Flycatcher, Cyornis ruckii (Malaysia or Indochina,
       20th century?)

          An enigmatic bird known from 2 or 4 possibly migrant specimens,
          last recorded in 1918. Might exist in NE Indochina and might be
          a subspeices of the Hainan Blue Flycatcher.

   Turdidae - Thrushes and allies
     * Grand Cayman Thrush, Turdus ravidus (Grand Cayman, West Indies,
       late 1940s)
     * Bonin Thrush, Zoothera terrestris (Chichi-jima, Bonin Islands,
       c.1830s)
     * ‘Āmaui, Myadestes woahensis (O‘ahu, Hawaiian Islands, mid-19th
       century)
     * Kāma‘o, Myadestes myadestinus (Kaua‘i, Hawaiian Islands, 1990s)
     * Oloma‘o, Myadestes lanaiensis (Hawaiian Islands, 1980s?)

          Officially critically endangered, possibly extinct because a
          possible location on Moloka‘i remains unsurveyed. Two subspecies
          are known from Lana‘i (M. l. lanaiensis, extinct early 1930s),
          Moloka‘i (M. l. rutha, extinct 1980s?) and a possible third
          subspecies from Maui (extinct before late 19th century).

   Sturnidae - Starlings
     * Kosrae Island Starling, Aplonis corvina (Kosrae, Carolines,
       mid-19th century)
     * Mysterious Starling, Aplonis mavornata (Mauke, Cook Islands,
       mid-19th century)
     * Tasman Starling, Aplonis fusca (Norfolk Island and Lord Howe
       Island, Southwest Pacific, c.1923)

          Two subspecies, A. f. fusca - Norfolk Island Starling (extinct
          c.1923); A. fusca hulliana - Lord Howe Starling (extinct
          c.1919).

     * Pohnpei Starling, Aplonis pelzelni (Pohnpei, Micronesia, c.2000)

          Only once reliable record since 1956, in 1995, leaves the
          species' survival seriously in doubt.

     * Bay Starling, Aplonis ulietensis (Raiatea, Society Islands, between
       1774 and 1850)

          Usually called "Bay Thrush (Turdus ulietensis)"; a completely
          mysterious bird from Raiatea, now only known from a painting and
          some descriptions of a (now lost) specimen. Its taxonomic
          position is thus unresolvable at present, although for
          biogeographic reasons and because of the surviving description,
          it has been suggested to have been a honeyeater. However, with
          the discovery of fossils of the prehistorically extinct starling
          Aplonis diluvialis on neighboring Huahine, it seems likely that
          this bird also belonged into this genus.

     * Bourbon Crested Starling, Fregilupus varius (Réunion, Mascarenes,
       1850s)
     * Rodrigues Starling, Necropsar rodericanus (Rodrigues, Mascarenes,
       late 18th century?)

          The bird variously described as Testudophaga bicolor, Necropsar
          leguati or Orphanopsar leguati which was considered to be
          identical with N. rodericanus (which is only known from fossils)
          was finally resolved to be based on a misidentified partially
          albinistic specimen of the Martinique Trembler (Cinclocerthia
          gutturalis) (Olson et al., Bull. B.O.C. 125:31).

(Probably) Extinct subspecies of birds

   Extinction of subspecies is a subject very dependent on guesswork.
   National and international conservation projects and research
   publications such as redlists usually focus on species as a whole.
   Reliable information on the status of threatened subspecies usually has
   to be assembled piecemeal from published observations such as regional
   checklists. Therefore, the following listing contains a high proportion
   of taxa that may just as well still exist, but are listed here due to
   any combination of absence of recent records, a known threat such as
   habitat destruction, or an observed decline.

Struthioniformes

   The Ostrich and related ratites.
     * Arabian Ostrich, Struthio camelus syriacus (Arabia, 1966) - Ostrich
       subspecies
     * Tasmanian Emu, Dromaius novaehollandiae diemenensis (Tasmania,
       mid-19th century) - Emu subspecies
     * North Island Little Spotted Kiwi, Apteryx owenii iredalei (North
       Island, New Zealand, late 19th century) - Little Spotted Kiwi
       subspecies

Tinamiformes

   Tinamous
     * Pernambuco Solitary Tinamou, Tinamus solitarius pernambucensis (E
       Brazil, c.1970s)

          A subspecies of the Solitary Tinamou which is almost certainly
          invalid.

     * Huila Black Tinamou, Tinamus osgoodi hershkovitzi (Colombia,
       1980s?)

          A Black Tinamou subspecies or possibly a distinct species; not
          seen since 1976 but might persist in Cueva de los Guácharos
          National Park.

Anseriformes

   Ducks, geese and swans.
     * Bering Cackling Goose, Branta hutchinsii asiatica (Komandorskie and
       Kurile Islands, N Pacific, c.1914 or 1929)

          A subspecies of the Cackling Goose (formerly "Lesser Canada
          Geese") which is doubtfully distinct from the Aleutian one.

     * Washington Island Gadwall, Anas strepera couesi (Teraina, Kiribati,
       late 19th century) - Gadwall subspecies. Controversial species, as
       many scientists think that it just might be a immature of the
       Common Gadwall Anas strepera strepera which was drifted to Teraina.
     * Rennell Island Teal, Anas gibberifrons remissa (Rennell, Solomon
       Islands, c.1959)

          A subspecies of the Sunda Teal which disappeared due to
          predation on young birds by the introduced tilapia Oreochromis
          mossambicus.

     * Niceforo's Pintail, Anas georgica niceforoi (Colombia, 1950s) -
       Yellow-billed Pintail subspecies
     * Borrero's Cinnamon Teal, Anas cyanoptera borreroi (Colombia, late
       20th century?)

          A subspecies of the Cinnamon Teal known only from a restricted
          area in the Cordillera Occidental of Colombia. It is either very
          rare or already extinct.

Galliformes

   Quails and relatives.
     * Italian Grey Partridge, Perdix perdix italica (Italy, c.1990)

          A subspecies of the Grey Partridge whose validity has been
          questioned; the last purebred individuals disappeared during the
          late 1980s due to hybridization with introduced birds.

     * Amik Gölü Black Francolin, Francolinus francolinus billypayni (S
       Turkey, possibly Lebanon, 1960s)

          A doubtfully distinct subspecies of the Black Francolin.

     * Sicilian Black Francolin, Francolinus francolinus ssp. (Sicily,
       Mediterranean, c.1869)

          Another doubtfully distinct Black Francolin subspecies.

     * Heath Hen, Tympanuchus cupido cupido, (New England, North America,
       1932)

          A subspecies of the Greater Prairie-Chicken or possibly a
          distinct species.

     * New Mexico Sharp-tailed Grouse, Tympanuchus phasianellus hueyi (New
       Mexico, North America, 1954) - Sharp-tailed Grouse subspecies
     * Moroccan Guineafowl, Numida meleagris sabyi (Morocco, mid-20th
       century or early 1980s)

          A subspecies of the Helmeted Guineafowl. Reportedly still kept
          in captivity in Morocco in late 1990s. Possibly extinct by 1950,
          the 3 1970s records may refer to feral domestic hybrids.

Charadriiformes

   Shorebirds, gulls and auks.
     * North Island Snipe, Coenocorypha aucklandica barrierensis (North
       Island, New Zealand, 1870s) - New Zealand Snipe subspecies
     * South Island Snipe, Coenocorypha aucklandica iredalei (South and
       Stewart Islands, New Zealand, 1964) - New Zealand Snipe subspecies
     * Tawitawi Small Buttonquail, Turnix sylvatica suluensis (Tawitawi,
       Philippines, mid-20th century) - Small Buttonquail subspecies
     * New Caledonia Painted Buttonquail, Turnix varia novaecaledoniae
       (New Caledonia, Melanesia, early 20th century)

          A subspecies of the Painted Buttonquail of somewhat unclear
          status, it is variously considered anything between a hybrid
          between introduced species to a full species. Plentiful
          subfossil bones indicate that it was indeed a good endemic form.

     * Kiritimati Sandpiper, Prosobonia cancellata cancellata (Kiritimati,
       Kiribati, 19th century?)

          The doubtfully distinct nominate subspecies of the Tuamotu
          Sandpiper, sometimes considered a distinct species, but only
          known from a painting.

Gruiformes

   Rails and allies.
     * Goldman's Yellow Rail, Coturnicops noveboracensis goldmani (Mexico,
       late 1960s) - Yellow Rail subspecies
     * Macquarie Island Buff-banded Rail, Gallirallus philippensis
       macquariensis (Macquarie Islands, SW Pacific, 1880s) - Buff-banded
       Rail subspecies
     * Raoul Island Banded Rail, Gallirallus philippensis ssp. (Raoul,
       Kermadec Islands, SW Pacific, late 19th century?)

          Reports of the former occurrence of the species on Raoul seem
          plausible enough, but they may relate to vagrant individuals of
          another Buff-banded Rail subspecies.

     * Peruvian Rail, Rallus semiplumbeus peruvianus (Peru, 20th century?)

          A subspecies of the Bogota Rail which is known from a single
          specimen collected in the 1880s. It may still be extant.

     * Western Australian Lewin's Rail, Lewinia pectoralis cleleandi (SW
       Australia, late 1930s) - Lewin's Rail subspecies
     * Flores Lewin's Rail, Lewinia pectoralis exsul (Flores, Indonesia,
       late 19th century?)

          A Lewin's Rail subspecies known only form 4 specimens. Not seen
          since 1959 despite attempts to find it, it is apparently
          extinct.

     * Assumption White-throated Rail, Dryolimnas cuvieri abbotti
       (Assumption, Astove and Cosmoledo, Aldabra Islands, early 20th
       century) - White-throated Rail subspecies.
     * Jamaican Uniform Crake, Amaurolimnas concolor concolor (Jamaica,
       West Indies, 1890) - Uniform Crake nominate subspecies
     * Intact Rail, Gymnocrex plumbeiventris intactus (Melanesia, 20th
       century?)

          A subspecies of the Bare-eyed Rail which is known from a single
          specimen, c. mid-19th century, from the Solomon Islands or New
          Ireland. The taxon may be extant.

     * Bornean Baillon's Crake, Porzana pusilla mira (Borneo, 20th
       century?)

          A subspecies of Baillon's Crake known from a single 1912
          specimen and not found since; may be extinct, but species is
          hard to find.

     * Iwo Jima White-browed Crake, Porzana cinerea brevipes (Iwo Jima and
       Minami Iōjima, Ogasawara Islands, early 20th century).

          A subspecies of the White-browed Crake that is often considered
          synonymous with the nominate.

     * Moroccan Bustard, Ardeotis arabs lynesi (Morocco, 1990s)

          A subspecies of the Arabian Bustard. Last observed in 1993 at
          Lac Merzouga/Lac Tamezguidat.

     * Luzon Sarus Crane, Grus antigone luzonica (Luzon, Philippines, late
       1960s)

          A subspecies of the Sarus Crane which is not always accepted as
          valid, probably mainly because the specimens have never been
          thoroughly studied since the subspecies' description.

Ciconiiformes

   Herons and related birds.
     * Bonin Nankeen Night Heron, Nycticorax caledonicus crassirostris
       (Nakoudo-jima and Chichi-jima, Ogasawara Islands, c.1890) - Nankeen
       Night Heron subspecies
     * Principe Olive Ibis, Bostrychia olivacea rothschildi (Principe,
       Gulf of Guinea, 1900s) - Olive Ibis subspecies

Pelecaniformes

   Cormorants and related birds.
     * Tasman Booby, Sula dactylatra tasmani fide van Tets et al., 1988
       (Lord Howe and Norfolk Islands, SW Pacific, c.1790?)

          This is often regarded as a distinct species, but at best it is
          a subspecies of the Masked Booby. Probably identical to the
          extant Lord Howe Island population described as S. d. fullagari,
          which would in this case be named S. d. tasmani fide Holdaway &
          Anderson, 2001.

     * Levant Darter, Anhinga rufa chantrei (Middle East, early 1990s?)

          A questionable subspecies of the African Darter (Anhinga
          melanogaster chantrei if all Old World darters are considered
          one species) which ultimately seems to have become a victim of
          war and habitat destruction in Iraq.

Pteroclidiformes

   Sandgrouse.
     * Fayyum Sandgrouse, Pterocles exustus floweri (Egypt, c.1940)

          Chestnut-bellied Sandgrouse subspecies, may have survived until
          early 1980s.

Columbiformes

   Pigeons, doves and dodos.
     * Madeiran Wood Pigeon, Columba palumbus maderensis (Madeira, East
       Atlantic, early 20th century) - Wood Pigeon subspecies
     * Ogasawara Japanese Wood-pigeon, Columba janthina nitens (Ogasawara
       Islands, Northwest Pacific, 1980s) - Japanese Wood-pigeon
       subspecies
     * Lord Howe Metallic Pigeon, Columba vitiensis godmanae (Lord Howe
       Island, Southwest Pacific, 1853)- Metallic Pigeon subspecies
     * Tongan Metallic Pigeon, Columba vitiensis ssp. (Vava'u, Tonga, late
       18th century?)

          This subspecies of the Metallic Pigeon is only known from a
          footnote in John Latham's "General History of Birds", and seems
          to have died out some time before 1800; possibly, the location
          is erroneous and the note really refers to the extant population
          of Fiji.

     * Catanduanes Bleeding-heart, Gallicolumba luzonica rubiventris
       (Catanduanes, Philippines, late 20th century?)

          A subspecies of the Luzon Bleeding-heart known from a single
          specimen collected in 1971. It is either near extinction or
          already extinct.

     * Basilan Bleeding-heart, Gallicolumba crinigera bartletti (Basilan,
       Philippines, mid-20th century?)

          A subspecies of the Mindanao Bleeding-heart, it was last
          reported in 1925 and given the massive habitat destruction is
          likely extinct.

     * Vella Lavella Ground Dove, Gallicolumba jobiensis chalconota (Vella
       Lavella, Makira and Guadalcanal, Solomon Islands, late 20th
       century?)

          A subspecies of the White-bibbed Ground Dove or possibly a
          distinct species. Known from only 4 specimens, there are no
          recent records and the local population report it has
          disappeared.

     * White-headed Polynesian Ground-dove, Gallicolumba erythroptera
       albicollis (Central Tuamotu Islands, 20th century)

          The Central Tuamotu subspecies of the Polynesian Ground-dove,
          often referred to as G. e. pectoralis, disappeared at an
          undetermined date, but might still exist on some unsurveyed
          atolls. The identity of Northern Tuamotu populations, possibly
          still extant, is undetermined.

     * Ebon Purple-capped Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus porphyraceus
       marshallianus (Ebon, Marshall Islands?, late 19th century?)

          Known from a single specimen collected in 1859, it is not
          certain whether this bird actually occurred on Ebon. All that
          can be said is that this subspecies is no longer found anywhere.

     * Mauke Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus rarotongensis "byronensis" (Mauke,
       Cook Islands, mid-/late 19th century)

          A subspecies of the Rarotonga Fruit Dove, known only from the
          description of a now-lost specimen. the prehistorically extinct
          population on Mangaia is likely to belong to another distinct
          subspecies too.

     * Negros Grey-necked Imperial-pigeon, Ducula carola nigrorum (Negros
       and probably Siquijor, late 20th century) - Grey-necked Imperial
       Pigeon subspecies
     * Norfolk Island Kererū, Hemiphaga novaeseelandiae spadicea (Norfolk
       Island, Southwest Pacific, mid-19th century)

          A subspecies of the Kererū or New Zealand Pigeon. Similar birds
          were reported from Lord Howe Island; these seem to represent
          another extinct subspecies but are undescribed to date.

     * Raoul Island Kererū, Hemiphaga novaeseelandiae ssp. nov. (Raoul,
       Kermadec Islands, 19th century)

          Another undescribed subspecies (or possibly species) of the
          Kererū, known from bones and a brief report.

Psittaciformes

   Parrots.
     * Sangir Red and Blue Lory, Eos histrio histrio (Sangir Archipelago,
       Indonesia, c.1997)

          The nominate subspecies of the Red and Blue Lory was hybridized
          out of existence by escaped trade individuals of the subspecies
          talautensis, the last purebred individuals disappearing in the
          1990s or even much earlier.

     * Challenger's Lory, Eos histrio challengeri (Nenusa Islands, Talaud
       Archipelago, early 20th century?)

          A supposed subspecies of the Red and Blue Lory, but probably
          invalid.

     * Macquarie Island Red-crowned Parakeet, Cyanoramphus erythrotis
       erythrotis (Macquarie Islands, SW Pacific, c.1891) - Subantarctic
       Red-crowned Parakeet nominate subspecies
     * Lord Howe Island Red-fronted Parakeet, Cyanoramphus novaezelandiae
       subflavescens (Lord Howe Island, SW Pacific, c.1870) - Red-crowned
       Parakeet subspecies
     * Westerman's Eclectus Parrot, Eclectus roratus westermani
       (Indonesia, 20th century?)

          Known only from 16 captive birds specimens and last recorded in
          1899, this enigmatic subspecies of the Eclectus Parrot is often
          considered an aviary hybrid. However, it may has well have
          occurred on islands at the northern or eastern end of the Banda
          Sea, becoming extinct some time in the 20th century - or might
          even still exist in a little-surveyed location.

     * Réunion Parakeet, Psittacula eques eques (Réunion, Mascarenes,
       mid-18th century)

          Known only from a painting and descriptions; if it is accepted
          as valid, it would become the nominate subspecies of the Echo
          Parakeet, extant on Mauritius, which would then have to be
          called P. eques echo.

     * Siquijor Colasisi, Loriculus philippensis siquijorensis (Siquijor,
       Philippines, 1990s)

          A subspecies of the Colasisi or Philippine Hanging Parrot,
          either very rare or already extinct.

     * Puerto Rican Parakeet, Aratinga chloroptera maugei (Mona and
       possibly Puerto Rico, West Indies, 1890s)

          A weakly differentiated subspecies of the Hispaniolan Parakeet.

     * Sinú Brown-throated Parakeet, Aratinga pertinax griseipecta
       (Colombia, mid-/late 20th century?)

          A subspecies of the Brown-throated Parakeet known from only 2
          specimens collected in 1949 and of unclear taxonomical and
          conservation status.

     * Culebra Island Parrot, Amazona vittata gracilipes (Culebra, West
       Indies, 1900s)

          A weakly differentiated subspecies of the Puerto Rican Parrot
          which is itself highly endangered.

Cuculiformes

   Cuckoos.
     * Greater Crested Coua, Coua cristata maxima (SE Madagascar, late
       20th century)

          Crested Coua subspecies, known only from a single specimen taken
          in 1950

     * Timor Pheasant Coucal, Centropus phasianinus mui (Timor, Indonesia,
       late 20th century?)

          A very distinctive Pheasant Coucal subspecies or possibly a
          distinct species which is mysteriously only known from one
          specimen.

     * Assumption Island Coucal, Centropus toulou assumptionis (Assumption
       Island, Seychelles, c.1920s)

          A Madagascar Coucal subspecies often considered synonymous with
          the Aldabra form insularis, which has recolonized Assumption
          Island at a later date.

     * Cabo San Lucas Groove-billed Ani, Crotophaga sulcirostris pallidula
       (Mexico, c.1940)

          A weakly differentiated and probably invalid subspecies of the
          Groove-billed Ani

     * Bahía Rufous-vented Ground Cuckoo, Neomorphus geoffroyi maximiliani
       (E Brazil, mid-20th century) - Rufous-vented Ground Cuckoo
       subspecies

Falconiformes

   Birds of prey.
     * Cape Verde Kite, Milvus (milvus) fasciicauda (Cape Verde Islands, E
       Atlantic, 2000)

          Considered either a subspecies of the Red Kite, a distinct
          species, or a hybrid between Red and Black Kites, the validity
          of this taxon has recently being questioned on the basis of
          molecular analysis. However, hybridization and a confusing
          molecular phylogeny of Red Kite populations coupled with the
          distinct phenotype of the Cape Verde birds suggest that the
          taxonomic status of this form is far from resolved.

     * Anjouan Island Sparrow Hawk, Accipiter francesii pusillus

          This subspecies of Frances' Goshawk from Ndzouani (Anjouan),
          Comoros, was last seen in 1978; given that few habitat remains,
          it is probably extinct.

     * Car Nicobar Sparrowhawk, Accipiter butleri butleri (Car Nicobar,
       Nicobar Islands, 20th century?)

          The nominate subspecies of the Nicobar Sparrowhawk - which is
          currently listed as Vulnerable - is possibly extinct. It was
          last reliably recorded in 1901 and despite searches, has not
          been sighted after an unconfirmed record in 1977.

     * Korean Sea Eagle, Haliaeetus pelagicus niger (Korea, 1950s) -
       Steller's Sea Eagle subspecies

Strigiformes

   Owls.
     * Sulu Reddish Scops Owl, Otus rufescens burbidgei (Sulu,
       Philippines, mid-20th century)

          A subspecies of the Reddish Scops Owl. Known from a single
          questionable specimen and may not be valid.

     * Virgin Islands Screech Owl, Otus nudipes newtoni

          A subspecies of the Puerto Rican Screech Owl of somewhat
          doubtful validity which occurred on several of the Virgin
          Islands, West Indies. The last reliable records are in 1860; it
          was not found in thorough surveys in 1995.

     * Socorro Elf Owl, Micrathene whitneyi graysoni (Socorro,
       Revillagigedo Islands, c.1970)

          A subspecies of the Elf Owl; the last specimen was taken in
          1932, but there apparently still was a large population in 1958.

     * Antiguan Burrowing Owl, Athene cunicularia amaura (Antigua, St
       Kitts and Nevis, West Indies, c.1905) - Burrowing Owl subspecies
     * Bahaman Burrowing Owl, Athene cunicularia guadeloupensis
       (Guadeloupe and Marie-Galante, West Indies, c.1890) - Burrowing Owl
       subspecies
     * Lord Howe Island Morepork, Ninox novaeseelandiae albaria (Lord Howe
       Island, Southwest Pacific, 1950s) - Southern Boobook subspecies
     * Norfolk Island Morepork, Ninox novaeseelandiae undulata (Norfolk
       Island, Southwest Pacific, 1996)

          Individuals of the nominate subspecies were introduced in a
          last-ditch effort to save the local owl population. There now
          exists a hybrid population of a few dozen birds; the last
          individual of N. n. undulata, a female named Miamiti died in
          1996.

     * Cave-nesting Masked Owl, Tyto novaehollandiae troughtoni (Nullarbor
       Plain, Australia, 1960s)

          Doubtfully distinct from nominate subspecies, but differed
          behaviorally.

     * Buru Masked Owl, Tyto sororcula cayelii (Buru, Indonesia, mid-20th
       century)

          Subspecies of Lesser Masked Owl. Last seen in 1921; the identity
          of a similar bird found on Seram remains to be determined.

     * Peleng Masked Owl, Tyto rosenbergii pelengensis (Peleng, Banggai
       Islands, mid-20th century)

          Subspecies of Sulawesi Owl or separate species. Possibly extant,
          but only specimen known taken in 1938 and no further records.

     * Samar Bay Owl, Phodilus badius riverae (Samar, Philippines,
       mid-20th century)

          Subspecies of Oriental Bay Owl or possibly distinct species.
          Taxonomy doubtful but only specimen lost in 1945 bombing raid so
          validity cannot be verified; no population exists on Samar
          today.

Caprimulgiformes

   Nightjars and allies.
     * New Caledonian White-throated Eared-Nightjar, Eurostopodus
       mystacalis exsul (New Caledonia, Melanesia, mid-20th century)

          This distinct subspecies of the White-throated Eared-Nightjar is
          possibly a separate species. It was found only once; due to its
          cryptic habits, it possibly still exists, but this is now
          considered unlikely.

Apodiformes

   Swifts and hummingbirds.
     * Alejandro Selkirk Firecrown, Sephanoides fernandensis leyboldi
       (Alejandro Selkirk Island, Juan Fernandez Islands, Southeast
       Pacific, 1908) - Juan Fernandez Firecrown subspecies
     * Luzon Whitehead's Swiftlet, Collocalia whiteheadi whiteheadi
       (Luzon, Philippines, 20th century?)

          The nominate subspecies of Whitehead's Swiftlet is only known
          from four specimens collected at Mount Data in 1895 and from the
          lack of further records and the massive habitat destruction, it
          is usually considered extinct. Given the size of the island, it
          might still exist though.

Coraciiformes

   Kingfishers and related birds.
     * Sangihe Dwarf-kingfisher, Ceyx fallax sangirensis (Sangihe,
       Indonesia, 1998?)

          This subspecies of the Sulawesi Kingfisher was last seen in 1997
          but not during a thorough survey one year later; it is either
          close to extinction or already extinct. Sometimes it is said to
          occur on Talaud Islands also, but this is erroneous.

     * Rarotonga Kingfisher, Todiramphus cf. tuta (Rarotonga, Cook
       Islands, mid-1980s?)

          There exist reports of locals that kingfishers - probably a
          subspecies of the Chattering Kingfisher which is found on
          neighboring islands, but possibly vagrants from there - were
          found until around 1979, and there is a last record from 1984.
          Presently, no kingfishers are known to exist on Rarotonga.

     * Mangareva Kingfisher, Todiramphus gambieri gambieri (Mangareva,
       Gambier Islands, late 19th century)

          Only known from a single 1844 specimen, the nominate subspecies
          of the Tuamotu Kingfisher was not found anymore when it was next
          searched for in 1922.

     * Javan Blue-banded Kingfisher, Alcedo euryzona euryzona (Java,
       Indonesia, mid-20th century)

          The nominate subspecies of the Blue-banded Kingfischer; the last
          specimen was taken in 1937 and the last unconfirmed records are
          from the 1950s.

     * Guadalcanal Little Kingfisher, Alcedo pusilla aolae (Guadalcanal,
       Solomon Islands) - Little Kingfisher subspecies
     * Malaita Variable Kingfisher, Ceyx lepidus malaitae (Malaita,
       Solomon Islands) - Variable Kingfisher subspecies
     * Sakarha Pygmy Kingfisher, Ispidina madagascariensis dilutus
       (Southwest Madagascar, late 20th century?)

          This subspecies of the Madagascar Pygmy Kingfisher is only known
          from one specimen taken in 1974 in an area where most habitat
          had already been lost.

     * Ticao Tarictic Hornbill, Penelopides panini ticaensis (Ticao,
       Philippines, 1970s)

          A subspecies of the Tarictic Hornbill of somewhat uncertain
          status - possibly a distinct species, possibly a colour morph -;
          the last confirmed report was in 1971 and it became extinct
          shortly thereafter.

Piciformes

   Woodpeckers and related birds.
     * Guadalupe Flicker, Colaptes cafer rufipileus (Guadalupe, East
       Pacific, c.1910)

          A subspecies of the Red-shafted Flicker (or the Northern
          Flicker, as C. auratus rufipileus), it was last recorded in 1906
          and not found anymore in 1911 and 1922. Recently, vagrant birds
          of a mainland subspecies have begun recolonizing the island as
          the habitat improves after the removal of feral goats.

     * Javan Buff-rumped Woodpecker, Meiglyptes tristis tristis (Java,
       Indonesia, c.1920)

          The nominate subspecies of the Buff-rumped Woodpecker became
          rare during the 19th century due to destruction of habitat. The
          last confirmed record was in 1880, and it obviously became
          extinct in the early 20th century.

     * Northern White-mantled Barbet, Capito hypoleucus hypoleucus
       (Colombia, mid-20th century)

          The nominate subspecies of the White-mantled Barbet has not been
          seen since the late 1940s and its habitat has been almost
          completely destroyed.

     * Botero White-mantled Barbet, Capito hypoleucus carrikeri (Colombia,
       mid-20th century)

          Another subspecies of the White-mantled Barbet, last seen in
          1950.

     * Todd's Jacamar, Brachygalba lugubris phaeonota (Brazil, late 20th
       century?)

          A subspecies of the Brown Jacamar, or possibly a hybrid, colour
          morph or full species. Might survive as it is only known from a
          remote and seldom visited area.

Passeriformes

   Perching birds.

   Tyrannidae - Tyrant flycatchers
     * Bogotá Bearded Tachuri, Polystictus pectoralis bogotensis (C
       Colombia, late 20th century?)

          A Bearded Tachuri subspecies or possibly a distinct species that
          has not been recorded for some time and is probably extinct.

     * Grenadan Euler's Flycatcher - Lathrotriccus euleri flaviventris
       (Grenada, West Indies, early 1950s)

          A subspecies of Euler's Flycatcher, formerly known as Empidonax
          euleri johnstonei.

   Pittidae - Pittas
     * Bougainville Black-faced Pitta, Pitta anerythra pallida
       (Bougainville, Solomon Islands, mid-20th century)

          A subspecies of the Black-faced Pitta. Once common on
          Bougainville, but not recorded since 1938.

     * Choiseul Black-faced Pitta, Pitta anerythra nigrifrons (Choiseul,
       Solomon Islands, late 20th century?)

          Another subspecies of the Black-faced Pitta. Not found anymore
          during recent searches; doubtful records from nearby islands.

   Furnariidae - Ovenbirds
     * Peruvian Scale-throated Earthcreeper, Upucerthia dumetaria peruana
       (Peru, late 20th century?)

          A subspecies of the Scale-throated Earthcreeper, it is only
          known from 2 specimens taken in the early 1950s at Puno, Peru,
          and has never been found since. It might still exist, or have
          become extinct due to habitat destruction in the meantime.

     * Northern Stripe-crowned Spinetail, Cranioleuca pyrrhophia
       rufipennis (N Bolivia, late 20th century?)

          A Stripe-crowned Spinetail subspecies known from a few specimens
          and not recorded since the 1950s; may be endangered or even
          extinct.

   Formicariidae - Antpittas and antthrushes
     * Northern Giant Antpitta, Grallaria gigantea lehmanni (Colombia,
       late 20th century?)

          A Giant Antpitta (or possibly Great Antpitta) subspecies
          apparently not recorded since the 1940s. Might still survive in
          Puracé National Park.

     * Nariño Giant Antpitta, Grallaria gigantea hylodroma (Colombia,
       c.1990?)

          Another Giant Antpitta subspecies, or possibly a distinct
          species, probably last recorded in 1989, but not anymore some
          years later. might still persist in La Planada Nature Reserve,
          but searches were unsuccessful.

   Pardalotidae - Pardalotes, scrubwrens, thornbills, and gerygones
     * Western Rufous Bristlebird, Dasyornis broadbenti littoralis
       (Australia, 20th century) - Rufous Bristlebird subspecies
     * King Island Brown Thornbill, Acanthiza pusilla archibaldi (King
       Island, Australia, early 1970s?)

          A Brown Thornbill subspecies which was last found in 1971, but
          there was an unconfirmed report in 2002 suggesting a small
          number is still extant.

   Cinclosomatidae - Whipbirds and allies
     * Mount Lofty Spotted Quail-thrush, Cinclosoma punctatum anachoreta
       (Australia, mid-1980s)

          A subspecies of the Spotted Quail-thrush, last recorded in 1984.

   Dicruridae - Monarch flycatchers and allies
     * Negros Celestial Monarch, Hypothymis coelestis rabori (Negros and
       possibly Sibuyan, Philippines, late 20th century?)

          A subspecies of the Celestial Monarch, not uncommon on Negros in
          1959, but never recorded afterwards. A single Sibuyan specimen
          from a unspecified locality taken in the 19th century is the
          only record for this island.

     * Hiva Oa Monarch, Pomarea mendozae mendozae (Hiva Oa and Tahuata,
       Marquesas, late 1970s) - Marquesas Monarch nominate subspecies
     * Manu'a Shrikebill, Clytorhynchus vitiensis powelli (Manu'a Islands,
       Samoa, 1990s?)

          Usually treated as a subspecies of the Fiji Shrikebill but
          probably a distinct species, the American Samoan population
          declined due to habitat destruction and may have become extinct
          following the cyclones Ofa and Val.

     * Nendo Shrikebill, Clytorhynchus nigrogularis sanctaecrucis (Nendo,
       Santa Cruz Islands, mid-20th century?)

          A subspecies of the Black-throated Shrikebill or more probably a
          distinct species that was only once found, in 1927. Due to lack
          of research it is not known whether this bird still exists; it
          was not found during the single thorough survey in recent times
          and it can be presumed to be affected by habitat destruction and
          typhoons.

     * Lord Howe Fantail, Rhipidura fuliginosa cervina (Lord Howe Island,
       Southwest Pacific, c.1925) - Grey Fantail subspecies
     * Guam Rufous Fantail, Rhipidura rufifrons uraniae (Guam, Marianas,
       1984) - Rufous Fantail subspecies

   Campephagidae - Cuckoo-shrikes and trillers
     * Cebu Bar-bellied Cuckoo-shrike, Coracina striata cebuensis (Cebu,
       Philippines, early 20th century) - Bar-bellied Cuckoo-shrike
       subspecies
     * Maros Cicadabird, Coracina tenuirostris edithae (Sulawesi, mid-20th
       century)

          A subspecies of the Cicadabird known from a single specimen
          collected in 1931; quite possibly just a vagrant individual.

     * Cebu Blackish Cuckoo-shrike, Coracina coerulescens altera (Cebu,
       Philippines, early 20th century)

          A Blackish Cuckoo-shrike subspecies; possibly extant as the
          birds are rather unmistakable and a 1999 record therefore likely
          to be valid.

     * Marinduque Blackish Cuckoo-shrike, Coracina coerulescens
       deschauenseei (Marinduque, Philippines, late 20th century?)

          Another Blackish Cuckoo-shrike subspecies, described from
          specimens collected in 1971, but apparently not seen since.

     * Norfolk Island Long-tailed Triller, Lalage leucopyga leucopyga
       (Norfolk Island, Southwest Pacific, 1942)

          A subspecies of the Long-tailed Triller, possibly a distinct
          species.

   Oriolidae - Orioles and Figbird
     * Cebu Dark-throated Oriole, Oriolus xanthonotus assimilis (Cebu,
       Philippines, early 20th century) - Dark-throated Oriole subspecies

   Corvidae - Crows, ravens, magpies and jays
     * Pied Raven, Corvus corax varius morpha leucophaeus (Faroe Islands,
       1948)

          A distinct local variety of the Icelandic subspecies of the
          Common Raven.

   Callaeidae - New Zealand wattlebirds
     * South Island Kōkako, Callaeas cinerea cinerea (South Island, New
       Zealand, 1960s?)

          The nominate subspecies of the Kōkako is usually considered
          extinct, as it has not been reliably recorded for decades.
          However, there are recent reports from Fiordland suggesting a
          population still exists.

   Cinclidae - Dippers
     * Cyprus Dipper, Cinclus cinclus olympicus (Cyprus, Northeast
       Mediterranean, 1950s)

          A subspecies of the White-throated Dipper of questionable
          validity.

   Ploceidae - Weavers
     * Ruwet's Masked-Weaver, Ploceus reichardi ruweti (D.R. Congo, late
       20th century?)

          A subspecies of the Tanzania Masked-weaver, formerly considered
          a distinct species. No recent information on its status, and it
          may be a hybrid.

   Estrildidae - Estrildid finches (waxbills, munias, etc)
     * Southern Star Finch, Neochmia ruficauda ruficauda (Australia,
       c.2000)

          A subspecies of the Star Finch; officially critically endangered
          but probably recently extinct. Not known to survive in
          captivity.

   Thraupidae - Tanagers
     * Gonâve Western Chat-tanager, Calyptophilus tertius abbotti (Gonâve,
       West Indies, c. 1980?)

          A Western Chat-tanager subspecies last recorded in 1977 and
          probably extinct.

     * Samaná Eastern Chat-tanager, Calyptophilus frugivorus frugivorus (E
       Hispaniola, West Indies, 1980s?)

          An Eastern Chat-tanager; the last (unconfirmed?) record was in
          1982.

   Icteridae - Grackles
     * Grand Cayman Oriole, Icterus leucopteryx bairdi (Grand Cayman, West
       Indies, mid-20th century)

          A subspecies of the Jamaican Oriole, last reliably recorded in
          1938.

   Fringillidae - True finches
     * San Benito House Finch, Carpodacus mexicanus mcgregori (San Benito,
       East Pacific, c.1940s) - House Finch subspecies

   Drepanididae - Hawaiian honeycreepers
     * Lana‘i 'Alauahio, Paroreomyza montana montana (Lana‘i, Hawaiian
       Islands, 1937)

          A subspecies of the Maui ‘Alauahio (or properly Maui Nui
          ‘Alauahio).

     * Maui Akepa, Loxops coccineus ochraceus (Maui, Hawaiian Islands,
       1988) - Akepa subspecies
     * O‘ahu Akepa, Loxops coccineus wolstenholmei (O‘ahu, Hawaiian
       Islands, 1990s) - Akepa subspecies
     * Laysan ‘Apapane, Himatione sanguinea freethi (Laysan Island,
       Hawaiian Islands, 1923)

          The last individuals of this subspecies of the ‘Apapane,
          possibly a distinct species, disappeared in a sandstorm,
          probably on the night of April 23/ April 24, 1923.

   Emberizidae - Buntings and American sparrows
   Dusky Seaside Sparrow
   Enlarge
   Dusky Seaside Sparrow
     * Saint Kitts Bullfinch, Loxigilla portoricensis grandis (Saint Kitts
       and prehistorically Barbuda, West Indies, 1930) - Puerto Rican
       Bullfinch subspecies
     * Todos Santos Rufous-crowned Sparrow, Aimophila ruficeps sanctorum
       (Islas Todos Santos, E Pacific, 1970s) - Rufous-crowned Sparrow
       subspecies
     * Dusky Seaside Sparrow, Ammodramus maritimus nigrescens (Florida,
       1987) - Seaside Sparrow subspecies
     * Guadalupe Spotted Towhee, Pipilo maculatus consobrinus (Guadalupe
       Island, East Pacific, c.1900) - Spotted Towhee subspecies
     * Darwin's Large Ground Finch, Geospiza magnirostris magnirostris
       (Floreana?, Galapagos Islands, 1957?)

          The subspecies of the Large Ground Finch collected by Charles
          Darwin in 1835; he gave no precise locality. A similar bird was
          found in 1957, but no others have ever been seen.

   Mimidae - Mockingbirds and thrashers
     * Barbados Scaly-breasted Thrasher, Allenia fusca atlantica
       (Barbados, West Indies, c.1990) - Scaly-breasted Thrasher
       subspecies

   Troglodytidae - Wrens
     * San Benedicto Rock Wren, Salpinctes obsoletus exsul (San Benedicto,
       Revillagigedo Islands, 1952)

          A subspecies of the Rock Wren which became extinct around 9 AM,
          August 1, 1952, when its island habitat was devastated by a
          massive volcanic eruption.

     * Guadalupe Bewick's Wren, Thyromanes bewickii brevicauda (Guadalupe,
       East Pacific, 1900s) - Bewick's Wren subspecies
     * San Clemente Bewick's Wren, Thryomanes bewickii leucophrys (San
       Clemente, East Pacific, 1940s) - Bewick's Wren subspecies
     * Daito Winter Wren, Troglodytes troglodytes orii (Daito Islands,
       Northwest Pacific, c.1940)

          A disputed Winter Wren subspecies; as it is known from a single
          specimen that may have been a vagrant individual, it is possibly
          invalid.

     * Guadeloupe House Wren, Troglodytes aedon guadeloupensis
       (Guadeloupe, Caribbean, after 1914)

          A subspecies of the House Wren (or, if that species is split,
          the Southern House Wren, as T. musculus guadeloupensis).

     * Martinique House Wren, Troglodytes aedon martinicensis (Martinique,
       Caribbean, c.1890)

          Another subspecies of the (Southern, as T. musculus
          martinicensis) House Wren.

   Paridae - Tits, chickadees and titmice
     * Daito Varied Tit, Poecile varia orii (Daito Islands, Northwest
       Pacific, c.1940)

          A Varied Tit subspecies, variously placed in genus Sittiparus'
          and Parus also.

   Hirundinidae - Swallows and martins
     * Jamaican Golden Swallow, Tachycineta euchrysea euchrysea (Jamaica,
       West Indies, c.1990?)

          The nominate subspecies of the Golden Swallow, endemic to
          Jamaica. The last major roost-site was destroyed in 1987, and
          the last confirmed sighting was in 1989. May still exist in the
          Cockpit Country, but probably extinct.

   Regulidae - Kinglets
     * Guadalupe Ruby-crowned Kinglet, Regulus calendula obscurus
       (Guadalupe, East Pacific, 20th century?)

          A subspecies of the Ruby-crowned Kinglet that has not been found
          in recent times.

   Pycnonotidae - Bulbuls
     * Sumatra Blue-wattled Bulbul, Pycnonotus nieuwenhuisii inexspectatus
       (Sumatra, Indonesia, late 20th century?)

          A subspecies of the Blue-wattled Bulbul known from a single 1937
          specimen. The entire "species" may be a hybrid.

     * Cebu Streak-breasted Bulbul, Ixos siquijorensis monticola (Cebu,
       Philippines, early 20th century) - Streak-breasted Bulbul
       subspecies

   Sylviidae - Old World warblers
   Eastern Canary Islands Chiffchaff
   Enlarge
   Eastern Canary Islands Chiffchaff
     * Babar Stubtail, Urosphena subulata advena (Babar, Indonesia,
       mid-20th century) - Timor Stubtail subspecies
     * Aguiguan Nightingale Reed Warbler, Acrocephalus luscinia nijoi
       (Aguiguan, Marianas, c.1997)

          A subspecies of the Nightingale Reed Warbler of uncertain
          validity.

     * Astrolabe Nightingale Reed Warbler, Acrocephalus luscinia
       astrolabii (Marianas?, mid-19th century?)

          A valid taxon, probably a subspecies of the Nightingale Reed
          Warbler, known from just 2 specimens found at an unknown
          location in the western Pacific.

     * Pagan Nightingale Reed Warbler, Acrocephalus luscinia yamashinae
       (Pagan, Marianas, 1970s)

          Another doubtful subspecies of the Nightingale Reed Warbler.

     * Laysan Millerbird, Acrocephalus familiaris familiaris (Laysan
       Island, Hawaiian Islands, late 1910s) - Millerbird subspecies
     * Huahine Reed Warbler, Acrocephalus caffer garretti (Huahine,
       Society Islands, 19th century?)

          A poorly known subspecies of the Tahiti Reed Warbler.

     * Raiatea Reed Warbler, Acrocephalus caffer musae (Raiatea, Society
       Islands, 19th century?)

          Another subspecies of the Tahiti Reed Warbler, known only from a
          drawing.

     * Western Turner's Eremomela, Eremomela turneri kalindei (Congo
       Basin, early 1980s)

          The West African subspecies of Turner's Eremomela has not been
          recorded since the end of the 1970s and habitat at the locations
          where it was once found is much reduced or destroyed.

     * Vanua Levu Long-legged Warbler, Trichocichla rufa clunei (Vanua
       Levu, Fiji, late 20th century?)

          A subspecies of the Long-legged Warbler; it was only found once,
          but there was an unconfirmed sighting in 1990.

     * Eastern Canary Islands Chiffchaff, Phylloscopus canariensis exsul
       (Lanzarote and possibly Fuerteventura, Canary Islands, 1986?)

          A subspecies of the Canary Islands Chiffchaff, it became extinct
          in 1986 at latest, but probably much earlier, at some time in
          the first half of the 20th century.

     * Fayyum Warbler, Sylvia melanocephala norissae (Egypt, c.1940) -
       Sardinian Warbler subspecies

   Cisticolidae - Cisticolas and allies
     * Northern White-winged Apalis, Apalis chariessa chariessa (Kenya,
       1960s?)

          The nominate subspecies of the White-winged Apalis remains known
          only from the Tana River, a centre of endemism. It was last
          recorded in 1961.

   Zosteropidae - White-eyes
     * Guam Bridled White-eye, Zosterops conspicillatus conspicillatus
       (Guam, Marianas, 1983) - Bridled White-eye nominate subspecies or
       possibly monotypic species.
     * Seychelles Chestnut-sided White-eye, Zosterops mayottensis
       semiflava (Marianne Island, Seychelles, late 19th century). Extinct
       subspecies of the Chestnut-sided White-eye.

          Sometimes considered as full species

     * Mukojima White-eye, Apalopteron familiare familiare (Mukojima
       Group, Bonin Islands, 1930s) - Bonin White-eye ("Bonin Honeyeater")
       subspecies

   Paradoxornithidae - Parrotbills
     * Amik Gölü Bearded Tit, Panurus biarmicus kosswigi (S Turkey, 1970s)
       - Bearded Tit subspecies

   Timaliidae - Old World babblers
     * Vanderbilt's Babbler, Malacocincla sepiarium vanderbilti (Sumatra,
       Indonesia, late 20th century?)

          An enigmatic subspecies of the Horsfield's Babbler, known from a
          single specimen. Not seen since the 1940s at least.

     * Javan Large Wren-babbler, Napothera macrodactyla lepidopleura
       (Java, Indonesia, mid-20th century?)

          A Large Wren-babbler subspecies that is either very rare or
          already extinct.

     * Burmese Jerdon's Babbler, Chrysomma altirostre altirostre (Myanmar,
       1940s)

          The nominate subspecies of Jerdon's Babbler was last seen in
          1941, but due to the lack of recent fieldwork, it might still
          exist.

   Muscicapidae - Old World Flycatchers and chats
     * Tonkean Henna-tailed Jungle Flycatcher, Rhinomyias colonus
       subsolanus (Sulawesi, Indonesia, late 20th century?)

          A Henna-tailed Jungle Flycatcher subspecies that is known from a
          single specimen; it may not be valid.

     * Chinijo Chat, Saxicola dacotiae murielae (Chinijo Archipelago,
       Canary Islands, early 20th century) - Fuerteventura Chat subspecies

   Turdidae - Thrushes and allies
     * Norfolk Island Thrush, Turdus poliocephalus poliocephalus (Norfolk
       Island, Southwest Pacific, c.1975) - Island Thrush subspecies
     * Maré Island Thrush, Turdus poliocephalus mareensis (Maré,
       Melanesia, early 20th century)

          A subspecies of the Island Thrush, last collected in 1911 or
          1912 and not found anymore in 1939.

     * Lord Howe Island Thrush, Turdus poliocephalus vinitinctus (Lord
       Howe Island, Southwest Pacific, 1920s) - Island Thrush subspecies
     * Lifou Island Thrush, Turdus poliocephalus pritzbueri (Lifou,
       Melanesia, early 20th century)

          Yet another subspecies of the Island Thrush. Similar birds still
          exist on Tanna, New Hebrides, but given the fact that the
          species readily differentiates into subspecies and that the
          distance between Tanna and Lifou is considerable, it is far from
          certain that the Tanna birds belong to this subspecies.

     * Cauca Black-hooded Thrush, Turdus olivater caucae (Colombia, late
       20th century?)

          A subspecies of the Black-hooded Thrush or possibly a distinct
          species. Not recorded for decades and at least highly threatened
          by deforestation.

     * Peleng Red-and-black Thrush, Zoothera mendeni mendeni (Peleng,
       Indonesia, mid-20th century) - Red-and-black Thrush nominate
       subspecies
     * Kibale Black-eared Ground Thrush, Zoothera cameronensis kibalensis
       (SW Uganda, late 20th century?)

          A Black-eared Ground Thrush subspecies known only from 2 1966
          specimens. Rare or possibly already extinct.

     * Choiseul Russet-tailed Thrush, Zoothera heinei choiseuli (Choiseul,
       Solomon Islands, mid-20th century?)

          A subspecies of the Russet-tailed Thrush known from a single
          specimen found in 1924 and probably killed off by introduced
          cats, most likely in the 1940s.

     * St Lucia Forest Thrush, Cichlherminia lherminieri sanctaeluciae (St
       Lucia, West Indies, 1980s)

          A subspecies of the Forest Thrush, last seen in 1980.

     * Pines Solitaire, Myadestes elisabeth retrusus (Isla de la Juventud,
       West Indies, late 1930s?)

          A subspecies of the Cuban Solitaire. Unconfirmed records suggest
          it did still exist in the early 1970s.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extinct_birds"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
