   #copyright

Falkland Islands

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Central & South American
Countries; Countries

   Falkland Islands

   Flag of Falkland Islands Coat of arms of Falkland Islands
   Flag                     Coat of arms
   Motto: Desire the right
   Anthem: God Save the Queen
   Location of Falkland Islands
   Capital Stanley
   51°42′S 57°51′W
   Largest city Stanley
   Official languages English
   Government Overseas territory of the UK
    - Head of state Queen Elizabeth II
    - Governor Alan Huckle
   Independence Overseas territory of the UK
    - Liberation Day 14 June 1982
   Area
    - Total 12,173 km² ( 162nd)
   4,700 sq mi
    - Water (%) 0
   Population
    - July 2005 estimate 3,060 ( 226th)
    - Density 0.25/km² ( 229th)
   0.65/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total $75 million ( 223th)
    - Per capita $25,000 (2002 est.) ( not ranked)
   HDI  (n/a) n/a (n/a) ( n/a)
   Currency Falkland pound^1 ( FKP)
   Time zone ( UTC-4)
    - Summer ( DST) ( UTC-3)
   Internet TLD .fk
   Calling code +500
   ^1Fixed to GBP
   Camp settlement
   Enlarge
   Camp settlement

   The Falkland Islands, also called The Malvinas, are an archipelago in
   the South Atlantic Ocean, located 300 miles (483 kilometres) from the
   coast of South America, 671 miles (1080 km) west of South Georgia and
   the South Sandwich Islands (Shag Rocks), and 584 miles (940 km) north
   of Antarctica (Elephant Island). They consist of two main islands, East
   Falkland and West Falkland, together with about 700 smaller islands.
   Stanley, on East Falkland, is the capital and largest city. The islands
   are a self-governing Overseas Territory of the United Kingdom, but have
   been the subject of a claim to sovereignty by Argentina since the early
   years of Argentina's independence from Spain.

   In 1982 the islands were invaded by Argentina, precipitating the
   two-month-long undeclared Falklands War between Argentina and the
   United Kingdom, which resulted in the defeat and withdrawal of
   Argentine forces. Since the war there has been strong economic growth
   in both fisheries and tourism. The inhabitants of the islands, who are
   of mainly Scottish descent, are British citizens, and support British
   sovereignty.

Name

   The islands are referred to in the English language as "[The] Falkland
   Islands". This name dates from an expedition led by John Strong in
   1690, who named the islands after his patron, Anthony Cary, 5th
   Viscount Falkland. The Spanish name for the islands, "Islas Malvinas",
   is derived from the French name "Îles Malouines", bestowed in 1764 by
   Louis Antoine de Bougainville, after the mariners and fishermen from
   the Breton port of Saint-Malo who became the island's first known human
   settlers.

   The Falkland Islanders, as well as many others, tend to consider as
   offensive the use of the name Malvinas, as for them it has an
   association with Argentina's military invasion of the islands in 1982.
   Some English-language media sources use the ISO designation of
   "Falkland Islands (Malvinas)".

History

   The Falkland Islands have had a complex history since their discovery,
   with France, Britain, Spain and Argentina all claiming possession and
   establishing as well as abandoning settlements on the islands. The
   Spanish government's claim was continued by Argentina after the
   latter's independence in 1816 and the independence war in 1817, until
   1833 when the United Kingdom took by force control of the islands,
   following the destruction of the Argentine settlement at Puerto Soledad
   by the American sloop USS Lexington ( December 28, 1831). Argentina has
   continued to claim sovereignty over the islands, and the dispute was
   used by the military junta dictatorship as an excuse to invade and
   briefly occupy the islands before being defeated in the two-month-long
   undeclared Falklands War in 1982 by a United Kingdom task force which
   returned the islands to British control.

   The islands were uninhabited when they were first discovered by
   European explorers. There is disputed evidence of prior settlement by
   humans, based on the existence of the Falkland Island fox, or Warrah,
   on the islands, as well as a scattering of undated artifacts including
   arrowheads and the remains of a canoe. It is thought this canid was
   brought to the island by humans, although it may have reached the
   islands by itself via a land bridge during the last ice age.

   The first European explorer widely credited with sighting the islands
   is Sebald de Weert, a Dutch sailor, in 1600. Although several English
   and Spanish historians maintain their own explorers discovered the
   islands earlier, some older maps, particularly Dutch ones, used the
   name 'Sebald Islands', after de Weert. However, the islands appear on
   numerous Spanish and other maps beginning in the 1520s.

   In January 1690, English sailor John Strong, captain of the Welfare,
   was heading for Puerto Deseado (in Argentina), but driven off course by
   contrary winds, he reached the Sebald Islands instead and landed at
   Bold Cove. He sailed between the two principal islands and called the
   passage "Falkland Channel" (now Falkland Sound), after Anthony Cary,
   5th Viscount Falkland (1659-1694), who as Commissioner of the Admiralty
   had financed the expedition and who later became First Lord of the
   Admiralty. From this body of water the island group later took its
   collective English name.

   The first settlement on the Falkland Islands, called Port Saint Louis,
   was founded by the French navigator and military commander Louis
   Antoine de Bougainville in 1764 on Berkeley Sound, in present-day Port
   Louis, East Falkland.

   Unaware of the French presence, in January 1765, English captain John
   Byron explored and claimed Saunders Island, at the western end of the
   group, where he named the harbour of Port Egmont, and sailed near other
   islands, which he also claimed for King George III of Great Britain. A
   British settlement was built at Port Egmont in 1766. Also in 1766,
   Spain acquired the French colony, and after assuming effective control
   in 1767, placed the islands under a governor subordinate to Buenos
   Aires. Spain attacked Port Egmont, ending the British presence there in
   1770, but Britain returned in 1771 and remained until 1774. Upon her
   withdrawal in 1774 Britain left behind a plaque asserting her claims,
   and in 1790, Britain officially ceded control of the islands to Spain,
   and renounced any and all colonial ambitions in South America, and its
   adjacent islands, as part of the Nootka Convention. In addition, the
   Nootka Convention provided for equal British, Spanish, and US rights to
   fish the surrounding waters of, as well as land on and erect temporary
   buildings to aid in such fishing operations, in any territory south of
   parts already occupied by Spain - the Falkland Islands being one of
   them since 1770 . From then on Spain ruled the islands unchallenged
   under the name "Islas Malvinas", maintaining a settlement ruled from
   Buenos Aires under the control of the Viceroyalty of the Rio de la
   Plata until 1811. On leaving in 1811, Spain, too, left behind a plaque
   asserting her claims.
   Upland
   Enlarge
   Upland

   When Argentina declared its independence from Spain in 1816, it laid
   claim to the islands according to the uti possidetis principle, as they
   had been under the administrative jurisdiction of the Viceroyalty of
   the Rio de la Plata. Following a proclamation of annexation in 1820,
   actual occupation began in 1826 with the foundation of a settlement and
   a penal colony. The settlement was destroyed by United States warship
   in 1831 after the Argentinian governor of the islands Luis Vernet
   seized U.S. seal hunting ships during a dispute over fishing rights.
   They left behind escaped prisoners and pirates. In November 1832,
   Argentina sent another governor who was killed in a mutiny. In January
   1833, British forces returned, took control, repatriated the remainder
   of the Argentine settlement, and began to repopulate the islands with
   British citizens.
   Roadsign to the capital
   Enlarge
   Roadsign to the capital

   The Royal Navy built a base at Stanley, and the islands became a
   strategic point for navigation around Cape Horn. The World War I naval
   battle, the Battle of Falkland Islands took place in December 1914,
   with a British victory over the Germans. During World War II, Stanley
   served as a Royal Navy station and serviced ships which took part in
   the Battle of the River Plate.

   Sovereignty over the islands became an issue again in the latter half
   of the 20th century. Argentina, which had never renounced its claim to
   the islands, saw the creation of the United Nations as an opportunity
   to present its case before the rest of the world. In 1945, upon signing
   the UN Charter, Argentina stated that it reserved its right to
   sovereignty of the islands, as well as its right to recover them. The
   United Kingdom responded in turn by stating that, as an essential
   precondition for the fulfilment of UN Resolution 1514, regarding the
   de-colonization of all territories still under foreign occupation, the
   Falklanders first had to vote for the British withdrawal at a
   referendum to be held on the issue.
   Stanley
   Enlarge
   Stanley

   Talks between British and Argentine foreign missions took place in the
   1960s, but failed to come to any meaningful conclusion. A major
   sticking point in all the negotiations was the 2,000 inhabitants of
   mainly British descent who preferred that the islands remained British
   territory.

   On April 2, 1982, Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands and other
   British territories in the South Atlantic (South Georgia and the South
   Sandwich Islands), encouraged in part by the United Kingdom's reduction
   in military capacity in the South Atlantic and as a diversion from poor
   economic performance at home. The invasion was condemned by the United
   Nations Security Council, although world reaction ranged from support
   in the Latin American countries (with the exception of Chile), to
   opposition in Europe, the Commonwealth, and eventually the United
   States. The British sent a large expeditionary force to retake the
   islands leading to the Falklands War. After a short but fierce naval
   and air war, the British landed at San Carlos Water on May 21 and a
   land war followed until the Argentinean forces surrendered on June 14.

   Following the war, the British increased their military presence on the
   islands, constructing RAF Mount Pleasant and increasing the military
   garrison. Falkland Islanders were also granted full British
   citizenship. Although the UK and Argentina since resumed diplomatic
   relations in 1989, no further negotiations on sovereignty have taken
   place.

Politics

   Executive authority is vested in the Queen and is exercised by the
   Governor on her behalf. The Governor is also responsible for the
   administration of South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, as
   these islands have no native inhabitants. Defence and Foreign Affairs
   are the responsibility of the United Kingdom. The current Governor is
   Alan Huckle, appointed July 2006.

   Under the constitution, the latest version of which came into force in
   1985, there is an Executive Council and a Legislative Council. The
   Executive Council, which advises the Governor, is also chaired by the
   Governor. It consists of the Chief Executive, Financial Secretary and
   three Legislative Councillors, who are elected by the other Legislative
   Councillors. The Legislative Council consists of the Chief Executive,
   Financial Secretary and the eight Legislative Councillors, of whom five
   are elected from Stanley and three from Camp, for four year terms. It
   is presided over by the Speaker, currently Darwin Lewis Clifton.

   The loss of the war against Britain over control of the islands led to
   the collapse of the Argentine military dictatorship in 1983. Disputes
   over control of the islands continue. In 2001, British Prime Minister
   Tony Blair became the first to visit Argentina since the war. On the
   22nd anniversary of the war, Argentina's President Néstor Kirchner gave
   a speech insisting that the islands would once again be part of
   Argentina. Kirchner, campaigning for president in 2003, regarded the
   islands a top priority. In June 2003 the issue was brought before a
   United Nations committee, and attempts have been made to open talks
   with Britain to resolve the issue of the islands. As far as the
   Falkland Islands Government and people are concerned there is no issue
   to resolve. The Falkland Islanders themselves are almost entirely
   British and maintain their allegiance to the United Kingdom. (See also
   Sovereignty of the Falkland Islands.)

   Falkland Islanders were granted full British citizenship from 1 January
   1983 under the British Nationality (Falkland Islands) Act 1983.

Geography

   Map of the Falkland Islands
   Enlarge
   Map of the Falkland Islands

   The Falkland Islands comprise two main islands, East Falkland and West
   Falkland and about 700 small islands. The total land area is 4,700
   square miles (12 173 km²), approximately the same area as Connecticut
   or Northern Ireland, and a coastline estimated at 800 miles (1288 km).

   Much of the land is part of the two main islands separated by the
   Falkland Sound: East Falkland, home to the capital of Stanley and the
   majority of the population, and West Falkland. Both islands have
   mountain ranges, rising to 2,313 feet (705  m) at Mount Usborne on East
   Falkland. There are also some boggy plains, most notably Lafonia, the
   southern half of East Falkland. Virtually the entire area of the
   islands is used as pasture for sheep.

   Smaller islands surround the main two. They include Barren Island,
   Beaver Island, Bleaker Island, Carcass Island, George Island, Keppel
   Island, Lively Island, New Island, Pebble Island, Saunders Island,
   Sealion Island, Speedwell Island, Staats Island, Weddell Island, West
   Point Island. The Jason Islands lie to the north west of the main
   archipelago, and Beauchene Island some distance to its south. Speedwell
   Island and George Island are split from East Falkland by Engle Passage.

   The islands claim a territorial sea of 12 nautical miles (22 km) and an
   exclusive fishing zone of 200 nautical miles (370 km), which has been a
   source of disagreement with Argentina.

   The Falkland Islands have a cold marine climate with strong westerly
   winds. It is generally cloudy and humid; rain occurs on more than half
   the days in a typical year. Snow is rare, but can occur at almost any
   time of year. Islanders themselves talk about two main areas of the
   islands, namely Stanley and the rest, which they call "the Camp", from
   the Spanish campo ("countryside").

Economy

   Sheep farming was formerly the main source of income for the islands,
   and still plays an important part with high quality wool exports going
   to the UK, but efforts to diversify introduced in 1984 have made
   fishing the largest part of the economy and brought increasing income
   from tourism. The government sale of fishing licences to foreign
   countries has brought in more than £40 million a year in revenues, and
   local fishing boats are also in operation. More than 75% of the fish
   taken are squid, and most exports are to Spain. Tourism has shown rapid
   growth, with more than 30,000 visitors in 2001. The islands have become
   a regular port of call for the growing market of cruise ships.
   Attractions include the scenery and wildlife conservation with
   penguins, seabirds, seals and sealions, and visits to battlefields,
   golf, fishing and wreck diving.

   An agreement with Argentina has set the terms for exploitation of
   offshore resources including large oil reserves, but climatic
   conditions of the southern seas mean that exploitation will be
   difficult task, though economically viable, and the continuing
   sovereignty dispute with Argentina is hampering progress. Defence is
   provided by the UK and British military expenditure makes a significant
   contribution to the economy. The islands are self sufficient except for
   defence, exports account for more than £125 million a year.

   The largest company in the islands used to be the Falkland Islands
   Company (FIC), a publicly quoted company on the London Stock Exchange
   and was responsible for the majority of the economic activity on the
   islands, though its farms were sold in 1991 to the Falkland Islands
   Government. The FIC now operates several retail outlets in Stanley and
   is involved in port services and shipping operation.

   The currency in use is the Falkland Pound, which remains in parity with
   Pounds Sterling--sterling, both notes and coins, circulate
   interchangeably with the local currency. The Falkland Islands also mint
   their own coins, and issue stamps which forms a source of revenue from
   overseas collectors.

Demographics

   Christ Church Cathedral with whale bone arch, Stanley.
   Enlarge
   Christ Church Cathedral with whale bone arch, Stanley.

   The population is 2,967 ( July 2003 estimate), the majority of which
   are of British descent (approximately 70%). Those people from the
   United Kingdom who have obtained Falkland Island status, became what
   are known locally as 'belongers'. However, a few are of Scandinavian
   descent. Some are the descendants of whalers who reached the Islands
   during the last two centuries. Furthermore there is a small minority of
   South American, mainly Chilean origin, and in more recent times many
   people from Saint Helena have also come to work in the Islands. The
   Falkland Islands have been a centre of English language learning for
   South Americans.

   Islanders call themselves "Islanders". Outsiders often call Islanders
   "Kelpers", from the kelp which grows profusely around the islands, but
   the name is no longer used in the Islands.

   The main religion is Christianity. The main denominations are Church of
   England, Roman Catholicism, United Free Church, Evangelist Church,
   Jehovah's Witnesses, Lutheranism, and Seventh-day Adventism. The
   extra-provincial Anglican parish of the Falkland Islands is under the
   direct jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Canterbury. The Falklands
   Islands form an Apostolic Prefecture of the Catholic Church.

Broadcasting & Telecommunicatons

   Broadcasting
     * PAL television, using the UK VHF and UHF allocations is standard.
     * FM stereo broadcasting using the UK allocation is standard.
     * MW broadcasting using 10 khz steps (standard in ITU Zone I).

   Telephony
     * Fibre Optic Communications, not yet present.
     * Telephony, mostly by microwave relay.
     * Telephony, via shortwave ( SSB mode) is used for outlying
       settlements.

Transport

   The Dash-7 of the British Antarctic Survey at Stanley.
   Enlarge
   The Dash-7 of the British Antarctic Survey at Stanley.

   The Falkland Islands has two airports with paved runways. RAF Mount
   Pleasant, 30 miles west of Stanley acts as the main international
   airport, with flights operated by the Royal Air Force to RAF Brize
   Norton in Oxfordshire, England with a refueling stop at RAF Ascension
   Island. RAF flights are on Tri-Stars although it is common for charter
   aircraft to be used if the Tri-Stars are required for operational
   flights. At present (October 2006) the RAF air link is operated by Air
   Atlanta Icelandic, using 747s. Flights are also available to Chile
   operated by LAN. Port Stanley Airport is a smaller airport outside the
   city, and is used for internal flights. Most settlements have grass air
   strips which are served by Islander aircraft of the Falkland Islands
   Government Air Service (FIGAS). The internal flight schedule is decided
   a day in advance according to passenger needs and an announcement made
   on the radio detailing arrival and departure times the night before.
   The British International (BRINTEL) company also operate two Sikorsky
   S61N helicopters for passenger flights between the islands. The British
   Antarctic Survey operates a transcontinental air link between the
   Falkland Islands and the Rothera base airfield servicing also other
   British bases in the British Antarctic Territory.

   The road network has been improved in recent years, however, few paved
   roads exist outside Stanley and the RAF base.

Mines and Ordnance

   Thousands of land mines remain from the 1982 war which are securely and
   clearly fenced off with free maps available from the EOD ( Explosive
   Ordnance Disposal) office in Stanley. Care should still be taken as
   some beaches were mined and there have been concerns the tides could
   have moved some mines. The same applies where mine fields are close to
   rivers. Care should be taken in case mines have been washed out of the
   marked area by flooding. There is also ordnance left over from the war,
   although finds of this type are becoming rarer with the passage of
   time.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Falkland_Islands"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
