   #copyright

Federated States of Micronesia

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; Geography of
Oceania (Australasia)

   Federated States of Micronesia

   Flag of Micronesia Coat of arms of Micronesia
   Flag               Coat of arms
   Motto: Peace Unity Liberty
   Anthem: Patriots of Micronesia
   Location of Micronesia
   Capital
   (and largest city) Palikir
   6°55′N 158°9′E
   Official languages English (nationally), Ulithian, Woleaian, Yapese,
   Pohnpeian, Kosraean, and Chuukese (at a state or local level)
   Government constitutional government ^1
    - President Joseph J. Urusemal
   Independence from the US-administered UN Trusteeship
    - Date 3 November 1986
   Area
    - Total 702 km² ( 188th)
   271 sq mi
    - Water (%) Negligible
   Population
    - July 2006 estimate 108,500 ( 192nd)
    - 2000 census 107,000
    - Density 154/km² ( 66th)
   399/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2002 estimate
    - Total $277 million ^2 ( 215th)
    - Per capita $2,000 (2002 est.) ( 180th)
   HDI  (2003) n/a (unranked) ( n/a)
   Currency United States dollar ( USD)
   Time zone ( UTC+10)
    - Summer ( DST) ( UTCno DST)
   Internet TLD .fm
   Calling code +691
   1.) in free association with the US
   2.) GDP is supplemented by grant aid, averaging perhaps $100 million
   annually (2002 est.)

          The article is about the sovereign state in Oceania; for the
          greater region of similar name, see Micronesia.

   Micronesia, officially the Federated States of Micronesia, is an island
   nation located in the Pacific Ocean, northeast of Papua New Guinea. The
   country is a sovereign state in free association with the United
   States. The Federated States of Micronesia were formerly part of the
   Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, a United Nations Trust
   Territory under US administration. In 1979 they adopted a constitution,
   and in 1986 independence was attained under a Compact of Free
   Association with the United States. Present concerns include
   large-scale unemployment, overfishing, and dependence on U.S. aid.

   The Federated States of Micronesia are located in the region known as
   Micronesia, which consists of hundreds of small islands divided in
   seven territories. The term Micronesia may refer to the Federated
   States or to the region as a whole.

History

   The ancestors of the Micronesians settled over 4,000 years ago. A
   decentralized chieftain-based system eventually evolved into a more
   centralized economic and religious empire centered on Yap.

   Nan Madol, consisting of a series of small artificial islands linked by
   a network of canals, is often called the Venice of the Pacific. It is
   located near the island of Pohnpei and used to be the ceremonial and
   political seat of the Saudeleur dynasty that united Pohnpei's estimated
   25,000 people from about AD 500 until 1500, when the centralized system
   collapsed.

   European explorers - first the Portuguese in search of the Spice
   Islands (Indonesia) and then the Spanish - reached the Carolines in the
   16th century, with the Spanish establishing sovereignty. It was sold to
   Germany in 1899, conquered by Japan in 1914, before being seized by the
   United States in WWII and administered by the US under United Nations
   auspices in 1947 as part of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.

   During World War II, a significant portion of the Japanese fleet was
   based in Truk Lagoon. In February 1944, Operation Hailstone, one of the
   most important naval battles of the war, took place at Truk, in which
   many Japanese support vessels and aircraft were destroyed.

   On May 10, 1979, four of the Trust Territory districts ratified a new
   constitution to become the Federated States of Micronesia. Palau, the
   Marshall Islands, and the Northern Mariana Islands chose not to
   participate. The FSM signed a Compact of Free Association with the
   United States of America, which entered into force on November 3, 1986,
   marking Micronesia's emergence from trusteeship to independence.

Politics

   The Federated States of Micronesia are governed by the 1979
   constitution, which guarantees fundamental human rights and establishes
   a separation of governmental powers. The unicameral Congress has 14
   members elected by popular vote. Four senators - one from each state -
   serve 4-year terms; the remaining 10 senators represent single-member
   districts based on population, and serve 2-year terms. The President
   and vice president are elected by Congress from among the four
   state-based senators to serve 4-year terms in the executive branch.
   Their congressional seats are then filled by special elections. The
   president and vice president are supported by an appointed cabinet.
   There are no formal political parties.

   In international politics, the Federated States of Micronesia are
   traditionally known as keen supporters of the State of Israel, voting
   almost consistently in its favour at the United Nations General
   Assembly.

Administrative divisions

   The four states in the federation are:
     * Chuuk
     * Kosrae
     * Pohnpei
     * Yap

Geography

   Map of the Federated States of Micronesia
   Enlarge
   Map of the Federated States of Micronesia

   The Federated States of Micronesia consists of 607 islands extending
   1,800 miles (2,900 km) across the archipelago of the Caroline Islands
   east of the Philippines. The four constituent island groups are Yap,
   Chuuk (called Truk until January 1990), Pohnpei (called Ponape until
   November 1984), and Kosrae. These four states are each represented by a
   white star on the national flag. The capital is Palikir, on Pohnpei.

   The country has 7 official languages: English, Ulithian, Woleaian,
   Yapese, Pohneipean, Kosraean, and Chukese

   The other languages that are spoken in Micronesia are Pingelapese,
   Ngatikese, Satawalese, Kapingamarangi Language, Nukuoro Language,
   Puluwatese, and Mokilese

Economy

   Economic activity of the Federated States of Micronesia consists
   primarily of subsistence farming and fishing. The islands have few
   mineral deposits worth exploiting, except for high-grade phosphate.
   Long line tuna fishing is also viable with foreign vessels from Taiwan
   and China operated in the 1990's. The potential for a tourist industry
   exists, but the remoteness of the location and a lack of adequate
   facilities hinder development. Financial assistance from the US is the
   primary source of revenue, with the US pledged to spend $1.3 billion in
   the islands in 1986-2001. Geographical isolation and a poorly developed
   infrastructure are major impediments to long-term growth.

   The nation uses the US dollar as their currency.

Demographics

   The indigenous population of the Federated States of Micronesia, which
   is predominantly Micronesian, consists of various ethnolinguistic
   groups. English has become the common language. Population growth
   remains high at more than 3%, ameliorated somewhat by net emigration.

   Pohnpei is notable for the prevalence of the extreme form of colour
   blindness known as maskun.

Culture

   Each of the four States has its own culture and traditions, but there
   are also common cultural and economic bonds that are centuries old. For
   example, cultural similarities like the importance of the traditional
   extended family and clan systems can be found on all the islands.
   A large (approximately 8 feet (2.4 m) in height) example of Yapese
   stone money in the village of Gachpar.
   Enlarge
   A large (approximately 8 feet (2.4 m) in height) example of Yapese
   stone money in the village of Gachpar.

   The island of Yap is notable for its stone money ( Rai stones), large
   disks usually of calcite, up to 12 feet (4  m) in diameter, with a hole
   in the middle. The islanders know who owns which piece, but do not
   necessarily move them when ownership changes. There are five major
   types: Mmbul, Gaw, Ray, Yar, and Reng, this last being only 1 foot
   (0.3 m) in diameter. Their value is based on both size and history,
   many of them having been brought from other islands, as far as New
   Guinea, but most coming in ancient times from Palau. Approximately
   6,500 of them are scattered around the island.
   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federated_States_of_Micronesia"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
