   #copyright

Final Fantasy Adventure

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Computer & Video games

          Final Fantasy Adventure
    Developer(s)   Square Co., Ltd.
    Publisher(s)   Square Co., Ltd.
                   Sunsoft (re-release)
     Designer(s)   Koichi Ishii (director)
                   Kenji Ito (composer)
   Release date(s) ^JPN June 8, 1991
                   ^NA November 1, 1991
                   ^EUR 1993
                   TBA 2006
      Genre(s)     Role-playing game
       Mode(s)     Single player
     Platform(s)   Game Boy, Mobile phone
        Media      2 megabit cartridge

   Final Fantasy Adventure (originally released in Japan as Seiken
   Densetsu: Final Fantasy Gaiden (聖剣伝説 ～ファイナルファンタジー外伝～, Seiken Densetsu:
   Final Fantasy Gaiden^ ?) and later re-released in Europe as Mystic
   Quest) was the first game to be released in the Seiken Densetsu series.
   Released in 1991 on the original Game Boy, its gameplay is roughly
   similar to that of the original Legend of Zelda game, but with the
   addition of role-playing statistical elements.

   The story follows the knight Sumo and the young woman Fuji as they
   attempt to thwart the Dark Lord of Glaive and his sorcerer assistant
   Julius from destroying the Tree of Mana and dooming their world. The
   game was met with generally positive reviews, noting its strong story
   but faulting its shaky dialogue.

Gameplay

   The gameplay is similar to the original Legend of Zelda for the NES;
   the world is viewed from a top-down camera angle it is divided up into
   many different squares that can fit on the screen, and the main
   character can move up, down, left, and right across the screen. The
   player can interact with individuals within towns by gathering
   information and buying or selling items and equipment. A variety of
   enemies can be battled on a field screen to gain experience, GP, or
   items. Within dungeon areas, a limited number of puzzles may be present
   and required to solved in order for the player to advance. The player
   can also save at any location.

   In standard role-playing game fare, the main character possesses
   several statistics including hit points, power, and stamina, which can
   all increase upon gaining an experience level. Magic spells, which
   expend the character's MP, can be used to heal oneself or damage
   enemies. These spells can only be found in certain locations or
   obtained from other characters at specific plot intervals. In addition,
   the protagonist has a power gauge that effects his attack strength –
   the higher the gauge, the stronger his attack will be. The speed at
   which is fills is directly affected by the character's will level. The
   gauge will slowly fill up over time but once the main character
   attacks, the gauge is emptied. When the gauge is completely filled up
   and the main character attacks with a weapon, he will perform a special
   attack. This system is used in many other later Seiken Densetsu titles.

   One additional, non-controllable character can accompany the main
   character at any given time in the story and can perform different
   activities to aid the main character in his quest.

Plot and setting

Setting

Plot

   The world is threatened by a "Dark Lord" who conquests for mana to rule
   supreme over the land. At his side is a mysterious wizard named Julius,
   who has secret motives. A hero named Sumo, who is a gladiator whose
   parents were killed by the Darklord, is imprisoned by him and forced to
   fight daily for the Darklord's personal entertainment. One day, Sumo
   escapes and by chance overhears the Darklord and Julius in their plans
   to seize the power of mana. When they discover his escape, they chase
   and throw him over a waterfall to what they thought was his death.

   Having survived the fall, Sumo then saves a mysterious young woman
   named Fuji from monsters, and attempts to find the magical objects
   needed to defeat the evil massing against the Mana Tree, the world's
   source of mana. After defeating Julius and the Darklord, the Mana Tree
   dies. Fuji sacrifices herself to become the Mana Tree and preserve the
   world. Sumo then becomes her Gemma knight and guardian.

Development history

   The name Seiken Densetsu was trademarked as early as 1987, originally
   intended to be the name for a massive project under the leadership of
   Kazuhiko Aoki and released on the Famicom Disk System. The project was
   scrapped in favour of a game with a similar vein, Final Fantasy. Four
   years later, Squaresoft developed the Game Boy game under the working
   title Gemma Knights, and then revived the trademarked name and released
   the game as Seiken Densetsu: Final Fantasy Gaiden. Squaresoft later
   marketed the game in the United States as Final Fantasy Adventure
   because of the series growing popularity there. It was later released
   in Europe as Mystic Quest.

   Though released as a Final Fantasy gaiden, or spin-off, and having an
   artistic style that was very similar to that of the official Final
   Fantasy series, the game is now considered to be the first game of the
   Seiken Densetsu series, also known as the "Holy Sword Legend", or
   "Mana" series. It was similar with Final Fantasy down to the menu
   screens with the thick, shaded borders; some character designs were
   even recycled from previous Final Fantasy sprites. Also, the game bore
   many similarities to Final Fantasy Mystic Quest, which led to its
   western titles, Final Fantasy Adventure and Mystic Quest (which is
   related to Mystic Quest Legend, the European title of Final Fantasy
   Mystic Quest).

   In 1998, Sunsoft obtained the license for it and re-released it with
   the other Final Fantasy Legend games, only replacing the title screen.
   The game later received a 32-bit remake for the Game Boy Advance called
   Sword of Mana. Finally, revealed during Square Enix's E3 2006 press
   conference, the game is to receive an updated port for mobile phones
   under the title Seiken Densetsu: Final Fantasy Adventure. The game is
   more like the original game due to the limited amount of enhancements
   in comparison to Sword of Mana, which was a fully enhanced remake.

Reception

   Even with its release several years previous, several prominent video
   game websites still praise the game in retro-reviews. IGN reviewed it
   in 2000, giving it a 9.0, or "outstanding," noting its strong story but
   with feeling it had weak dialogue. It was noted for containing many
   puzzles to be unlocked, and being a type of hybrid RPG. Its limited
   colour palette on the Gameboy not withstanding, the game was thought to
   contain "atmosphere and nuance" in its graphics. There is even some
   polling going on in Japan over whether this game should be released on
   the Nintendo DS.

Audio

   The Seiken Densetsu Original Sound Version was released in Japan
   alongside the game. Most of the tracks were composed by Kenji Ito,
   while track 16, "Chocobo Tanjou," is credited to noted Squaresoft
   composer Nobuo Uematsu. Seiken Densetsu: Omoi wa Shirabe ni Nosete (Let
   Thoughts Ride On Knowledge), a set of arranged tracks was also released
   the same year. Both albums were compiled into Final Fantasy Gaiden:
   Seiken Densetsu Sound Collections, originally released in 1995.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Final_Fantasy_Adventure"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
