   #copyright

Final Fantasy (video game)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Computer & Video games

                               Final Fantasy
   Cover box for original NES release in North America
    Developer(s)   Square Co., Ltd.
    Publisher(s)   ^JPN Square Co., Ltd.
                   ^NA Nintendo of America
     Designer(s)   Hironobu Sakaguchi (concept)
                   Yoshitaka Amano (char. design)
                   Nobuo Uematsu ( music)
                   Nasir Gebelli (program)
   Release date(s) ^JPN December 18, 1987
                   ^NA July 12, 1990
      Genre(s)     Role-playing game
       Mode(s)     Single player
     Platform(s)   Nintendo Entertainment System
                   See development history section for remake information.
        Media      2 megabit cartridge

   Final Fantasy (ファイナルファンタジー, Fainaru Fantajī^ ?) is a console
   role-playing game developed and published by Square Co., Ltd. for the
   Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) in 1987, and is the inaugural game
   in Square's flagship Final Fantasy series. Final Fantasy has been
   remade for several different video game consoles and handheld systems.
   The game has frequently been packaged with its sequel, Final Fantasy
   II, in collections such as Final Fantasy I-II, Final Fantasy Origins
   and Final Fantasy I & II: Dawn of Souls.

   The story begins with the appearance of the four youths called the
   "Warriors of Light" who each carry one of their world's elemental
   Crystals which have been darkened by Garland and his four Elemental
   Fiends. Together, they quest to defeat Garland's forces, restore the
   light of the crystals and restore their world.

   Final Fantasy was one of the most influential and successful
   role-playing games on the Nintendo Entertainment System, and played a
   major role in popularizing the genre. Famitsu voted Final Fantasy the
   63rd greatest game of all time on March 3, 2006.

Gameplay

          The following refers to the original Famicom/NES version. For
          changes in subsequent remakes, see the section on Development
          history.

   Gameplay in Final Fantasy is similar to that of many other console
   role-playing games. The player controls a party of four player
   characters, called Light Warriors (or "Warriors of Light" in later
   editions), who explore towns and dungeons as they travel across the
   world map. The goal of the game is to defeat four major enemies called
   Elemental Fiends or Fiends of Chaos. Along the way, the player travels
   to towns where he or she may shop, acquire information, and rest. While
   traveling, the player encounters monsters which must either be combated
   or fled from. Winning battles earns the player experience points, which
   strengthen player characters, and gil, the game's currency.

   The player begins Final Fantasy by creating the Light Warriors. As is
   typical of computer role-playing games of the era, player characters
   are passive participants in the story, with their names and abilities
   relevant only during battle. Characters are determined by
   four-character names, certain numerical attributes, and their class. A
   character's most basic attribute is its level, which is numbered
   between one and fifty. (The maximum is ninety-nine in later editions.)
   A character's level is determined by how much experience it has, and
   higher level characters are more powerful than lower level characters.
   Gaining a level increases the other attributes, such as Hit Points
   (HP). HP represents a character's remaining health, and when a
   character reaches zero HP, they die. Every character has a maximum
   number of HP. Additional attributes govern other aspects of the
   character.

   Each character has a character class, which affects the character's
   attributes and abilities. There are six classes, three of which are
   physically oriented and three of which are magically oriented. During
   the game, the player has the option of completing a quest which changes
   and upgrades each character to a different and more powerful class,
   though with the exception of this upgrade, character classes cannot be
   changed once the game has begun.

   The " Fighter" ("Warrior" in later editions) uses heavy weapons and
   armor, and can be upgraded into a "Knight", who is also able to use
   low-level White Magic spells. Next is the "Black Belt", who fights best
   when empty-handed and armorless, becoming a "Master" later in the game.
   Third is the fast and agile " Thief", who, when upgraded into a
   "Ninja", may use low-level Black Magic spells. In terms of magical
   classes, the " Red Mage" is a decent fighter and can use a mixture of
   White and Black Magic. The Red Mage becomes a "Red Wizard", who can use
   more powerful equipment and spells. The " White Mage" can cast
   defensive and curative spells and becomes a "White Wizard", who can use
   more powerful White Magic. Finally, the " Black Mage" can cast
   offensive spells and becomes a "Black Wizard", who can use more
   powerful Black Magic.

Combat

   Battles in the game are turn-based. At the beginning of each turn, the
   player selects an action for each player character, with the options
   being direct attacks, casting spells, drinking potions, using magical
   items, or running. Once the player has chosen actions for each player
   character, the player characters and monsters begin battling.
   Participants move one at a time in the order determined by their
   "agility" attribute.

   In the original NES version, it was not possible to select a new enemy
   to attack once actions had begun; if the character had chosen to attack
   an enemy who had been defeated earlier in the round, then the attack
   was ineffective, and the character did nothing. This was changed in
   later versions.

   Battles continue until one side either flees or is defeated. If the
   party wins, the characters gain experience and gil. If the party flees,
   they return to the map. If the party dies, the game is over.

Customization

   Equipping the Light Warriors with better weapons and armor makes them
   more powerful. Each Light Warrior has eight inventory slots, with four
   to hold weapons and four to hold armor. Each character class has
   restrictions on what weapons and armor it may use. Additionally, some
   weapons and armor are magical; if used during battle, some of these
   items will cast spells. Other magical artifacts provide protection,
   such as from certain dangerous spells.

   There are six types of weapons: Swords, Daggers, Axes, Hammers, Staves,
   and Nunchaku. The type of a weapon mainly determines its associated
   graphics, but also indicates which classes are more likely able to use
   that weapon. For example, a Black Belt is able to equip nunchaku but
   cannot equip axes. Each weapon has two statistics, an amount of damage
   and a chance to hit bonus, which influence how effective the weapon is.
   Only one weapon can be equipped at a time.

   In addition to weapons, there are six types of armor: Armor (
   Cuirasses), Robes, Helmets, Gauntlets, Shields, and Bracelets. Unlike
   weapons, a piece of armor's type is very important. A character may
   wear up to four different types of armor at once, but only one of each
   type. There are items of armor which have no type, such as rings, which
   a character may wear any amount of. Each armor has two statistics, a
   damage absorption bonus and an evade penalty.

   At shops, the Light Warriors can buy items to help themselves recover
   while they are traveling. Up to 99 of each item may be carried at one
   time. One of the types of items available are "Potions", which heal
   player characters or remove an ailment such as poison or stoning.
   "Tents", "Cabins", and "Houses", which heal the player and offer the
   chance to save the game, are also available, though they can only be
   used on the world map. In addition to restoring hit points, Houses also
   restore the party's magic. Finally, there are special items gained
   during or at the completion of quests.

   Many character classes are able to use magic, which is divided into
   "white" defensive magic and "black" offensive magic. Spells are
   classified by a level between one and eight, with, in most cases,
   higher level spells being more powerful than lower level spells. There
   are four white magic and four black magic spells of each level.
   Characters may learn up to three spells of each level by purchasing
   them at shops in towns. White mages are capable of learning all white
   magic spells, and black mages are capable of learning all black magic
   spells. Other classes have restrictions on the spells they can learn.

   The original NES version of the game allowed each magic-user "charges"
   for each level of spells; spells of a given level could only be cast as
   many times as the user had charges. As a character's level increased,
   more charges were gained. This system closely resembles the
   spell-casting system in Dungeons & Dragons. In later revisions of the
   game, this system was replaced by MP (Magic Points).

Plot and setting

Setting

   Final Fantasy takes place on an unnamed fantasy world with three large
   continents. The elemental powers on this world are determined by the
   state of four glowing crystals ("orbs" in the original North American
   localization), each governing one of the four classical elements:
   earth, fire, water, and wind.

Plot

   Four hundred years prior to the start of the game, a people known as
   the "Lufenians", who used the power of the wind crystal to craft giant
   space stations ("Sky Castles") and airships watched their country
   decline as the wind crystal went dark. Two hundred years later, violent
   storms sunk a massive shrine that served as the centre of an
   ocean-based civilization, and the water crystal went dark. Another two
   hundred years later, the earth and fire crystals also went dark,
   plaguing the earth with raging wildfires, and devastating the
   agricultural town of Melmond as the plains and vegetation decayed. Some
   time later, a sage called "Lukahn" tells of a prophecy that four
   Warriors of Light will come to save the world in a time of darkness.

   The game begins with the appearance of the four youthful Warriors of
   Light, the heroes of the story, who each carry one of the darkened
   Crystals. They arrive at Coneria, a powerful kingdom which has just
   witnessed the kidnapping of its princess, Sara, by a knight named
   Garland. The Warriors of Light travel to the ruined "Temple of Fiends"
   in the northwest corner of Coneria, defeat Garland, and return Princess
   Sara home. The grateful King of Coneria builds a bridge that enables
   the Warriors of Light passage east to the town of "Pravoka". At
   Pravoka, the Warriors of Light liberate the town from a band of
   pirates, and acquire the pirates' ship for their own use. Though having
   the ability to travel across the water, the Warriors of Light remain
   trapped within the "Aldi Sea", in the centre of the southern continent.
   On the south side of the sea is the kingdom of the elves, where the
   prince has been put into a cursed sleep by "Astos". To the west is a
   ruined castle, where a king tells you that Astos stole his crown and
   hid it in the Marsh Cave to the south, though when the Warriors of
   Light retrieve his crown, he reveals himself to be Astos. He has also
   stolen the witch Matoya's Crystal. With her Crystal back, Matoya
   provides an herb to awaken the Elf Prince. The Elf Prince gives the
   Warriors of Light a key capable of unlocking any door. The key unlocks
   a storage room in Coneria Castle which holds TNT. Nerrick, one of the
   Dwarves of Mount Deurgar, destroys a small isthmus using the TNT,
   connecting the sea to the outside world.

   After visiting near-ruined town Melmond, the Warriors of Light go to
   the "Cavern of Earth" and destroy the Earth fiend, Lich, who is
   responsible for the earth's decay. The Warriors of Light then obtain a
   canoe and enter Mt. Gulg ("Gurgu Volcano") and defeat the Fire fiend,
   Kary ("Marilith"). They recover the "Floater" (Levistone) from the Ice
   Cave which allows them to obtain an airship. Using the airship and an
   air-producing fairy artifact known as Oxyale, the Warriors go to the
   Sunken Shrine to defeat the Water fiend, Kraken. They also recover a
   slab with fragments of the Lefeinish language. A linguist named Dr.
   Unne uses the slab to decode the Lefeinish language, which he teaches
   to the Warriors of Light. Following this, the Warriors of Light travel
   to a small and distant town — the last remaining outpost of the
   Lefeinish civilization. The Lefeinish give the Warriors of Light access
   to the Sky Castle that Tiamat, the Wind fiend, has taken over. With the
   four fiends defeated and the crystals restored, the Warriors find that
   their quest is not yet over: the fiends created an archdemon, Chaos,
   using the body of Garland, and sent him two thousand years into the
   past. Following Chaos into the past, the Warriors discover that it was
   Chaos who had sent the four fiends into the future, creating a time
   paradox. The Warriors of Light defeat Chaos, but the time paradox
   causes everyone except the Warriors of Light to forget everything that
   transpired.

Musical score

   Final Fantasy was Nobuo Uematsu's 16th video game score. The score was
   released on CD together with the score of Final Fantasy II.

   A few of the game's tracks became mainstays to the Final Fantasy
   series: the Prelude, the arpeggio played on the title screen; the
   Opening Theme, which is played when the party crosses the bridge early
   in the game and later referred to as the Final Fantasy theme; and the
   Victory Fanfare, which is played after every victorious battle. The
   opening motif of the Battle theme has also been reused a number of
   times in the series.

Development

   Final Fantasy was developed during Square's brush with bankruptcy in
   1987. In a display of gallows humor, producer / director Hironobu
   Sakaguchi declared that his "final" game would be a "fantasy"
   role-playing game, hence the title. Far from being Square's final game,
   however, Final Fantasy proved to be a major success in Japan, not only
   saving Square from bankruptcy, but presenting them with the second most
   popular role-playing game franchise in the country (after Enix's Dragon
   Quest). Following the successful North American localization of Dragon
   Quest (as Dragon Warrior), Nintendo of America translated Final Fantasy
   into English and published it in North America in 1990. The North
   American version of Final Fantasy met with modest success, due partly
   to Nintendo's aggressive marketing tactics. No version of the game was
   marketed in the PAL region until Final Fantasy Origins in 2003.

   Final Fantasy has been remade several times for several different
   platforms. While all of these remakes retain the same basic story and
   battle mechanics, various tweaks have been made in a variety of
   different areas, including graphics, sound, and specific gameplay
   elements.

North American localization

   The 1990 North American localization of Final Fantasy was essentially
   identical to the original Japanese game. But technical limitations, and
   the censorship policies of Nintendo of America, resulted in a few minor
   changes to certain elements. For example, the original game program
   provided only four character spaces for magic spell names, meaning that
   a lot of original Japanese spell names had to be abbreviated to fit
   into the space requirements for the English version. These changes
   include "Flare" being reduced to "NUKE", "Thunder" being reduced to
   "LIT" and "Degeon" being reduced to "ZAP!" Also, there were censorship
   issues, since Nintendo of America policy prohibited games from
   featuring any overt Judeo-Christian imagery or reference to death. As
   such, some content was modified so that, for instance, "HOLY" became
   "FADE", and churches became clinics which no longer featured crosses,
   but had heart symbols instead.

MSX 2

             MSX 2 remake
   MSX 2 box art
    Publisher(s)   Microcabin
   Release date(s) ^JPN December 1989
        Media      3.5" Floppy Disk

   The MSX2 computer standard was roughly analogous, in terms of technical
   capabilities, to the NES, and as a result, the MSX2 version of Final
   Fantasy is probably the closest to the original Famicom version.
   However, while the Famicom was designed to operate exclusively as a
   gaming console, the MSX2 was intended to be used more generally as a
   personal computer. In practice, this meant that the game was subtly
   altered to take advantage of certain features offered by the MSX2 and
   not by the Famicom, and vice versa.

   Due to its release on floppy diskette, the MSX2 version of the game had
   access to almost three times as much storage space as the Famicom
   version (720 KB vs. 256 KB), but suffered from a variety of problems
   not present in Nintendo's cartridge media, including noticeable loading
   times. There were also relatively minor graphical upgrades. In general,
   the MSX2 version sports an ostensibly improved colour palette which
   adds a degree of vibrancy to character and background graphics. In
   addition, the world map seems to have been moved slightly, meaning that
   the placement of monster "areas" on the world map is slightly
   different, and that monsters appear in different places than in the
   Famicom version.

   Further, game data could not be saved onto the original program
   diskette, so it was necessary to provide a blank floppy diskette to
   save one's progress. For some reason, it was possible to store only one
   saved game on any given disk at one time, although it was possible to
   have multiple diskettes for multiple saved games. As an upgrade, the
   MSX2 featured more sound channels than the Famicom, and as such many
   music tracks and sound effects were altered or improved for the port.
   Also, some dungeon music was swapped. Finally, in the Famicom version,
   the strength of a Black Belt would increase with his experience levels,
   meaning that very soon the player would reach a point where a Black
   Belt could do more damage without any weapons than he could with
   weapons. In the MSX2 version, this is not the case: Black Belt strength
   does not increase nearly as quickly, and as such he cannot operate
   effectively as a barehanded fighter. Also, a few (though not all) items
   available at stores have had their costs changed.

WonderSwan Colour

         WonderSwan Colour remake
   WonderSwan Color box art
   Release date(s) ^JPN December 9, 2000
        Media      32 megabit cartridge

   Many more changes were introduced for the WonderSwan Colour (WSC)
   remake of the game. The 8-bit graphics of the original Famicom game
   were completely redrawn for the WSC version, bringing the game roughly
   on-par with 16-bit era graphics (between Final Fantasy V and Final
   Fantasy VI). The colour palette was much larger and battle scenes now
   featured full background images.

   Character sprites, or two-dimensional pre-rendered figures, were also
   redesigned to look more like characters from the Super Famicom Final
   Fantasy games, especially as they upgraded in class. In the Famicom
   version, shops and inns had no interior map: once a character entered
   the building, they were greeted with a menu-based purchase screen. In
   the WSC version this was changed to more closely resemble other games
   in the series, where each building had an interior, along with a shop
   counter where the transaction screen could be accessed. Similarly, the
   battle screen was redesigned, with all textual information moved down
   to a blue window stretched across the bottom of the screen in an
   arrangement similar to that utilized in Final Fantasy II through Final
   Fantasy VII. As a further update, short cutscenes using the internal
   game engine were added to expand the story of the game somewhat. One
   such cutscene involved the construction of the bridge by the army of
   Corneria.

   Also of significance is that the original Famicom version of the game
   did not have the ability to display more than one window of text during
   a conversation, which meant that all conversations with non-player
   characters were strictly limited in length. The WSC version removes
   this restriction. In the original version of the game, any attempt to
   attack a monster that had been killed by a previous character's attack
   would result in an "ineffective" attack. The WSC version introduced an
   option wherein the attack would be redirected to another monster rather
   than fail. Similarly, a "dash" option had been introduced: holding down
   a specific button while walking around in a town or dungeon map would
   cause the character to move around at twice their normal pace. Both of
   these options can be turned on and off via the game's configuration
   screen.

   As in the original version, every magic using character has successive
   "spell levels". Each character has only three available slots per spell
   level, but is given the option of choosing from four spells. Once that
   choice had been made in the original version, there was no way to
   "unlearn" spells to free up a space for the unchosen fourth spell. In
   the WSC version, this has been changed so that it is possible to delete
   spells once purchased. In the original Famicom version, the cartridge
   could only store one set of game data at a time, and every time a new
   save was made, the previous one was overwritten. The WSC version
   provides up to eight distinct slots for saved game data. There is also
   a "quick save" feature introduced which allows the player to save his
   or her progress at any time (except during battles). This will exit the
   game, however, and as soon as the game is resumed, any quick save data
   is lost.

   Another change from the original version involves items; only items
   specifically assigned to a character could be used during battle. In
   the WSC, this has been changed so that there is a party-wide "pool" of
   items which can be accessed at any time by all characters. Certain
   status healing items (such as "Potion" and "Soft") can now be used
   during battle. Further, in the original game not only did each
   character have their own armor and weapon inventory, each was fixed to
   storing only 4 of each category per character. This meant that as
   opposed to the first game, one could now actually equip all 5 different
   armor types, as well as collect every single armor and weapon in the
   game without needing to drop or sell anything. A number of magic spells
   that didn't work properly in the original were also now "fixed" to work
   as originally intended. The status ailment "silence" no longer prevents
   items from being used. In addition to remixing the soundtrack, composer
   Nobuo Uematsu has composed several new tracks, including a new "boss
   battle" theme. Because many of the above changes make the game simpler
   than before, the hit points of certain monsters, and almost all boss
   monsters, have been substantially increased (doubled, in some cases) in
   order to better balance the gameplay.

PlayStation

            PlayStation remake
   PlayStation box art
   Release date(s) ^JPN October 31, 2002
        Media      CD-ROM

   Released both individually (in Japan only) and alongside its sequel,
   Final Fantasy II in a collection entitled Final Fantasy Origins (or
   Final Fantasy I+II Premium Collection in Japan), the PlayStation port
   of Final Fantasy was based on WonderSwan Colour version. Most of the
   changes instituted in that version of the game remain in this version.
   However, there are a few differences. Although the graphics are
   basically the same as in the WSC version, the higher screen resolution
   of the PlayStation means that most have been improved to some degree,
   with more detail. Tsuyoshi Sekito also remixed the soundtrack to Final
   Fantasy IX quality to utilize the audio capabilities of the Sony
   PlayStation and also composed a few new tracks like the ones used in
   the opening movies.

   In the Japanese language version, the script has been changed to
   include kanji. The English language translation, too, has been
   completely rewritten, and is, in most cases, much closer to the
   Japanese than the original English NES version was. Character and magic
   name lengths have been increased from four to six characters, as well.
   Saved game data takes up one block on the PlayStation memory card,
   which means that up to fifteen games can be saved onto each memory
   card, a major improvement. The "quick save" feature of the WSC version
   has been excised, but in its place a "memo save" feature has been
   introduced where game data can be temporarily saved to the
   PlayStation's RAM. This data remains until the system is turned off, or
   its power supply is otherwise interrupted. There are also full motion
   video cutscenes and omake. The game is now bookended by two
   full-motion, prerendered video cutscenes. An " omake" (or bonus)
   section has also been made available. It includes a bestiary, an art
   gallery, and an item collection that are unlocked as the player
   progresses through the game. Also, new "easy mode" has been introduced
   wherein shop prices are lower, experience levels are gained more
   quickly, and stats increase more rapidly. This mode is optional and is
   chosen at the start of the game.

Final Fantasy I & II: Dawn of Souls

   Final Fantasy I & II: Dawn of Souls
   Dawn of Souls box art
    Publisher(s)   ^JPN Square Enix
                   ^NA / ^EU Nintendo
   Release date(s) ^JPN July 29, 2004
                   ^NA November 29, 2004
                   ^EU December 3, 2004
      Rating(s)    ESRB: E (Everyone)
                   USK: Free for all
                   OFLC: G8+
                   PEGI: 3+
        Media      128 megabit cartridge

   Another fairly extensive list of changes accompanies the Game Boy
   Advance release of Final Fantasy as part of Final Fantasy I & II: Dawn
   of Souls.

   The difficulty level of the Game Boy Advance version most closely
   resembles the "easy mode" of the Final Fantasy Origins. Unlike that
   version, however, there is no option to switch back to the original
   difficulty level. Similarly, the redirection of "ineffective" hits,
   which had been optional since it was introduced in the WSC version, is
   now mandatory. Graphics are more or less identical to the WSC version,
   although the GBA has a slightly higher screen resolution than the WSC,
   and certain sequences (such as flying around on the airship) look
   better on the GBA than on the WSC.

   The "spell level"-based magic system is dropped from this version in
   favour of magic point-based system used in more recent Final Fantasy
   games. Although spells are still classified at certain levels for some
   purposes (characters can still only be equipped with three of the four
   available spells of any given level, for instance), every spell is now
   assigned a point value. When cast, that value is subtracted from a
   total number of magic points that apply to all spells known by a
   character. Many new items have been introduced. Healing items are now
   much easier to procure, and less expensive, as well. The party starts
   the game with 500 gil instead of 400 gil as in previous versions.

   The omake artwork gallery and item collection present in the
   PlayStation version have been omitted, but the bestiary gallery remains
   and operates more or less exactly as it did previously. Certain classes
   have been modified: the Thief and Monk have become more powerful,
   whereas the Red Mage has become less so. Stat growth has been altered,
   and Intelligence now affects the strength of weapon-based magic spells.
   The game can now be saved at any time, anywhere (again, except during
   battles). There are three available save game slots, however there is
   no way of clearing or deleting their contents. Because the changes
   introduced in this version make the game less challenging, many
   monsters and boss monsters have had their hit points increased once
   again. Four new optional dungeons have been introduced, one
   corresponding to each Fiend, and becoming available after that Fiend is
   defeated. These dungeons are especially challenging and feature items
   and monsters not found anywhere else in the game. At the end of each
   dungeon there are a variety of boss monsters from Final Fantasy III
   through Final Fantasy VI. Finally, during character creation, the
   player can choose to have the game randomly assign a name to each
   character. These names are all taken from other Final Fantasy games and
   include KluYa (referenced in Final Fantasy IV) Desh ( Final Fantasy
   III), Giott ( Final Fantasy IV), Kelga ( Final Fantasy V) and Daryl (
   Final Fantasy VI), among others. Each character has ten random names to
   choose from.

Mobile phones

   In 2004, Square Enix released a version of Final Fantasy for two
   Japanese mobile phone networks. A version for NTT DoCoMo FOMA 900i
   series phones was launched on 29 February 2004 under the title Final
   Fantasy i. A subsequent version for the CDMA 1X WIN-compatible W21x
   series was released on 19 August 2004 as Final Fantasy EZ. Graphically,
   the games are superior to the original 8-bit game, but not as advanced
   as many of the more recent console and handheld ports. Square Enix
   plans to release this version of the game for North American mobile
   phones sometime in 2006.

Reception and legacy

   Final Fantasy, along with the original Dragon Quest, proved to be one
   of the most influential early console role-playing games, and played a
   major role in legitimizing and popularizing the genre. Final Fantasy's
   storyline, which dealt with elaborate myths and time travel had a
   deeper and more engaging story than Dragon Quest.

   Bahamut, the Dragon King, who would become a recurring character in the
   Final Fantasy series, first appeared in Final Fantasy.

   Many modern critics point out that the game is poorly paced by
   contemporary standards, and involves much more time wandering in search
   of random battle encounters to raise their experience levels and money
   than it does exploring and solving puzzles. In fact, some reviewers
   refer to the level-building and exploration portions of the game as the
   most enduringly fun ones. In March 2006, Final Fantasy appeared in the
   Famitsu magazine's Top 100 games list, where readers voted it the 63rd
   best game of all time. Two of its modern sequels, Final Fantasy X and
   Final Fantasy VII, were voted the top two positions on the list
   respectively.

   The version of Final Fantasy in the Final Fantasy Origins compilation
   was generally well received, though it lacks many of the innovations
   found in later Final Fantasy games such as Final Fantasy IV, and some
   commented that the additional content like improved graphics did not
   significantly improve the overall game experience.

   The theme song that plays when the player characters first cross the
   bridge from Cornelia is a recurring song throughout the entire series.
   It has been found in Final Fantasy III when the party leaves their home
   town and in Final Fantasy IV when Cecil and Kain begin their journey.
   It is featured in the ending theme songs of Final Fantasy V and Final
   Fantasy VI as the last three minutes of the 18+ minute piece, part of
   the ending theme in Final Fantasy VII, and in the very end of Final
   Fantasy VII: Advent Children as the movement immediately preceding the
   song Calling. It is included in the three-movement ending credits theme
   in Final Fantasy VIII and is found in the song "Skies of Alexandria"
   from Final Fantasy IX. It has recently been in the intro music for
   Final Fantasy XII.

   Final Fantasy was also the basis for an episode of a video game-themed
   cartoon series Captain N: The Game Master entitled The Fractured
   Fantasy of Captain N. 8-Bit Theatre, a sprite-based webcomic parodying
   the game, has become very popular in the gaming community.
   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Final_Fantasy_%28video_game%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
