   #copyright

Fine art

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Art

   Fine art refers to arts that are "concerned and designates a limited
   number of visual art forms, including painting, sculpture, architecture
   and printmaking. Schools, institutes, and other organizations still use
   the term to indicate a traditional perspective on the visual arts,
   often implying an association with classic or academic art.

   The word "fine" does not so much denote the quality of the artwork in
   question, but the purity of the discipline. This definition tends to
   exclude visual art forms that could be considered craftwork or applied
   art, such as textiles. The more recent term visual arts is widely
   considered to be a more inclusive and descriptive phrase for today's
   variety of current art practices, and for the multitude of mediums in
   which high art is now more widely recognized to occur. Ultimately, the
   term fine in 'fine art' comes from the concept of Final Cause, or
   purpose, or end, in the philosophy of Aristotle. The Final Cause of
   fine art is the art object itself; it is not a means to another end
   except perhaps to please those who behold it.

   An alternative, if flippant, reference to "fine art," is capital "A"
   art, or, art with a capital "A."

   The term is still often used outside of the arts to denote when someone
   has perfected an activity to a very high level of skill. For example,
   one might metaphorically say that "Pelé took football to the level of a
   fine art."

   That fine art is seen as being distinct from applied arts is largely
   the result of an issue raised in Britain by the conflict between the
   followers of the Arts and Crafts Movement, including William Morris,
   and the early modernists, including Virginia Woolf and the Bloomsbury
   Group. The former sought to bring socialist principles to bear on the
   arts by including the more commonplace crafts of the masses within the
   realm of the arts, while the modernists sought to keep artistic
   endeavour exclusive, esoteric, and elitist.

   Confusion often occurs when people mistakenly refer to the Fine Arts
   but mean the Performing Arts (Music, Dance, Drama, etc). However, there
   is some disagreement here, as, for example, at York University, Fine
   Arts is a faculty that includes the "traditional" fine arts, design,
   and the "Performing Arts".

   An academic course of study in fine art may include a Master of Fine
   Arts degree.

Types of fine art

     * Drawing
     * Film
     * Fine art photography
     * Intermedia (interdisciplinary, traditionally referred to as Fine
       Art Media)
     * Literature

     * Painting
     * Printmaking
     * Sculpture
     * Textiles

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fine_art"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
