   #copyright

Flag of Hong Kong

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: General Geography

   The flag of the HKSAR Flag ratio: 2:3
   Enlarge
   The flag of the HKSAR
   The FIAV Code shows flag usage. The top row of dots represent use on
   land for civil, state and military respectively, the bottom row
   represents use at sea. Flag ratio: 2:3
   The HKSAR and the PRC flags brandishing at the patio of the Legislative
   Council. It is a common routine to fly the regional flag left to the
   national flag in the open air.
   Enlarge
   The HKSAR and the PRC flags brandishing at the patio of the Legislative
   Council. It is a common routine to fly the regional flag left to the
   national flag in the open air.

   The Regional flag of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the
   People's Republic of China ( Traditional Chinese: 中華人民共和國香港特別行政區區旗;
   Simplified Chinese: 中华人民共和国香港特别行政区区旗) features a stylised, white,
   five-petal Bauhinia blakeana in the centre of a red field. The red
   colour on this flag coincides with the flag of the People's Republic of
   China.

   The flag of Hong Kong was adopted on 16 February 1990, and received
   formal approval from the Preparatory Committee on 10 August 1996. The
   flag was first officially hoisted on 1 July 1997, in a historical
   ceremony marking the transfer of sovereignty from the United Kingdom to
   the PRC. The precise use of the flag is regulated through laws passed
   by the 58th executive meeting of the State Council held in Beijing.

   The former colonial flag was used from 27 July 1959, to 30 June 1997,
   when Hong Kong was under British rule. It was a blue Union Jack ensign
   with the Hong Kong coat of arms on a white disk centred on the outer
   half of the flag. The 1876 design featured a colonial badge, showing a
   "local scene" instead of the Hong Kong coat of arms.

Design

Symbolism

   Symbol of the Urban Council from its inception in the 1960s until its
   abolishment in 1999.
   Enlarge
   Symbol of the Urban Council from its inception in the 1960s until its
   abolishment in 1999.

   The design of the flag carries cultural, political and regional
   meanings. The colour itself is significant: red is always the festive
   colour for the Chinese people, and one might remember that the People's
   Liberation Army was once called the Chinese Red Army. Thus, the colour
   conveys a sense of celebration and nationalism. Moreover, the red is
   identical to that used in the PRC flag, which implies the close linkage
   re-established between post-colonial Hong Kong and its mother country.
   The juxtaposition of red and white on the flag symbolises the one
   country two systems political principle applied to the region, with the
   stylised Bauhinia blakeana harmonising this dichotomy.

   The bauhinia had been used as the official symbol of the now-defunct
   Urban Council since 1965 (depicted to the right). One may observe the
   design elements that have been incorporated into the Hong Kong flag.

Construction

   When the flag is manufactured, the front and the back of the flag look
   identical to each other ( mirror image). The Hong Kong government has
   specified specific sizes, colours, and manufacturing parameters for the
   flag to be made in.

   The background of the rectangular flag is red. It is also intended to
   be the same colour as that used for the PRC. The ratio of its length to
   breadth is 1.5. In its centre is a five petal stylised white bauhinia.
   The circle which circumscribes the bauhinia has a diameter 0.6 times
   the entire height of the flag. The petals are uniformly spread around
   the centre point of the flag, and radiate outwards in a clockwise
   direction. Each petal bears a red 5-pointed red star with a red trace,
   suggestive of a flower stamen. The red trace makes each petal look as
   if it is being divided in half. The heading that is used to allow a
   flag to be slid or raised onto a pole is white.

   Construction sheet for the regional flag. A prerequisite for the
   manufacture of non-standard flag sizes stipulates that all proportions
   in the original sanctioned flag are preserved.
   Construction sheet for the regional flag. A prerequisite for the
   manufacture of non-standard flag sizes stipulates that all proportions
   in the original sanctioned flag are preserved.

Size specifications

   The HKSAR and the PRC desktop flags, both with the dimension of 15 × 10
   in centimetre.
   Enlarge
   The HKSAR and the PRC desktop flags, both with the dimension of 15 × 10
   in centimetre.

   This table lists all the official sizes for the flag. Sizes deviating
   from this list are considered non-standard.
              Size             Length and width in cm
   1                           288 × 192
   2                           240 × 160
   3                           192 × 128
   4                           144 × 96
   5                           96 × 64
   Car flag                    30 × 20
   Flag for signing ceremonies 21 × 14
   Desktop flag                15 × 10

Colour specifications

   The following are the approximate colours of the Hong Kong flag in
   different colour models. It is sorted into the HTML RGB web colours (
   hexadecimal notation); the CMYK equivalent; dye colours; HSL equivalent
   and the Pantone equivalent number.

        Colour  HTML     CMYK    Textile colour     HSL      Pantone
        Red    #FF0000 0-87-99-0 Chinese red    0°,100%,50%  186
        White  #FFFFFF 0-0-0-0   White          0°,100%,100%

Manufacturing process

   If a flag is not being produced according to Hong Kong Basic Law, the
   Secretary of Justice has the ability to petition to the District Court
   for an injunction to prohibit the person and or company from
   manufacturing the flag. The District Court can also ask for the
   forfeiture of the flag and other materials used in the process of
   producing the flags. If the District Court agrees that the flags are
   found to be not in compliance, the District Court can issue the
   injunction and order that the flag and the materials that were used to
   make the flag to be seized by the Government.

History

Historical flags

   Poster for promoting radio exercise during the Japanese Occupation. The
   second Hongkong Bank building on the left is flying the Japanese flag,
   the de facto national flag.
   Enlarge
   Poster for promoting radio exercise during the Japanese Occupation. The
   second Hongkong Bank building on the left is flying the Japanese flag,
   the de facto national flag.

   The flag of colonial Hong Kong underwent several changes in the last
   one and a half centuries. However, the history behind the changes is
   incomplete as some information regarding the authorities who
   commissioned the changes were not documented properly during that
   period.

   In 1843, the Seal of Colony was instituted. The design was based on a
   local waterfront scene (see the 1876 flag below): three local merchants
   with their commercial goods can be found on the foreground, a
   square-rigged ship and a junk occupy the middle ground, while the
   background consists of some conical hills and cloud. In 1868 a Hong
   Kong flag was produced, with a badge based on the "local scene", but
   was rejected by Governor Richard Graves Macdonell.

   In 1870, a "White crown over HK" layout was proposed by the Colonial
   Secretary. The letters "HK" were omitted and the crown became
   full-colour three years later. It is unclear what the badge was like
   during that period of time, but it was unlikely to be the "local
   scene". It should be a crown of some sort, which may, or may not, have
   had the letters "HK" below it. In 1879, the Seal badge was readopted
   with the Admiralty's approval.

   On 17 November 1923, Governor Reginald Edward Stubbs replied to a
   question regarding white circles on colonial Blue Ensigns, the issue of
   concern being "the dark green of the Peak would be against the blue of
   the Ensign". The Colonial Office decided that the "dark green" writing
   at the border of the badge should consist of a series of tonal
   gradations from light blue, to light brown, and finally white. On 12
   May 1924, Stubbs penned that the badge in the Flag Book had ...for some
   years past differed from the flag....Flag, that was even less
   attractive than that in the Flag Book, would be changed to correspond
   to it.

   During the Japanese occupation of Hong Kong, the Japanese were harsh on
   the locals. They abolished many aspects of Chinese and British culture
   in Hong Kong, and forcefully instituted Japanese lifestyles in the
   region. The identity of Hong Kong was suppressed, and consequently all
   British and Chinese flags were abolished during this period; propaganda
   posters were distributed where the Japanese flag was canonised as Hong
   Kong's national flag.

   In 1955 the idea of the Seal badge was revived. This occurred some
   years after World War II. The new badge was similar to the 1876 badge,
   but had a slightly lower eye-line, and a more realistic mountain on the
   left-hand side. The mountain, and the ship and junk, were made more
   prominent and embossed. A Coat of Arms for Hong Kong was granted on 21
   January 1959 by College of Arms in London.

   From 1959 onwards, Arms on white circular ground were implemented on
   Union Jack and Blue Ensign, likewise on unauthorised Red Ensigns.

   Flag of Hong Kong (1870–1873)

   Flag of Hong Kong (1910–1941; 1945–1959)

   Flag of Hong Kong (1959–1997)

   Flag of Hong Kong (1959–1997) [unauthorised Red Ensign]

   Flag of the Governor of Hong Kong (1959–1997)

Current design

   A tourist boat, with a HKSAR flag hanging on it, running on the
   Victoria Harbour on a misty day.
   Enlarge
   A tourist boat, with a HKSAR flag hanging on it, running on the
   Victoria Harbour on a misty day.

   Before the transfer of Hong Kong's sovereignty, a contest was held
   among Hong Kong people to help choose a flag for the newly created
   special administrative region. More than 7,000 designs were submitted
   for the contest; and a panel of political figures were nominated as
   judges. However, as the winning entries were rejected by the PRC, the
   famous architect Tao Ho was at last put in charge for the task.
   The original version of the SAR flag. It was changed to make it easier
   to draw.
   Enlarge
   The original version of the SAR flag. It was changed to make it easier
   to draw.

   Ho was originally chosen to be one of the panel judges to pick Hong
   Kong's new flag. The Shanghai-born artist recalled that some of the
   designs had been rather funny - some even had a political twist to
   them: "One had a hammer and sickle on one side and a dollar sign on the
   other." Six designs were chosen as finalists by the judges, but were
   all later rejected. Ho and two others were then asked by the PRC to
   submit new proposals.

   Looking for inspiration, Ho wandered into a garden and picked up a
   bauhinia flower. He observed the symmetry of the five petals, and how
   their winding pattern conveyed a dynamic feeling. At last he
   incorporated this sense of energy into the flag to represent Hong Kong.

Proper flag protocol

   Policemen in black uniform marching towards the poles near the Golden
   Bauhinia Square, with their hands holding both the regional and
   national flags. A flag-raising ceremony is held there every day at 8:00
   a.m.
   Enlarge
   Policemen in black uniform marching towards the poles near the Golden
   Bauhinia Square, with their hands holding both the regional and
   national flags. A flag-raising ceremony is held there every day at 8:00
   a.m.

   The national and regional flags are flown daily from the Chief
   Executive's official residence, the Government House, the Hong Kong
   International Airport and at all border crossings and points of entry
   into Hong Kong. At major government offices and buildings, such as the
   Office of the Chief Executive, the Executive Council, the Court of
   Final Appeal, the Legislative Council, and the Hong Kong Economic and
   Trade Offices overseas, the national and the regional flags are
   displayed during days when these offices are working. Other government
   offices and buildings, such as hospitals, schools, departmental
   headquarters, sports grounds and cultural venues can fly the national
   and regional flags on certain occasions, such as the National Day (1
   October), the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Establishment Day
   (1 July), and the New Year's Day. The national and regional flags
   should be raised at sunrise (around 8:00 a.m.) and lowered around
   sunset (around 6:00 p.m.).

Respect for the flag

   The Hong Kong Basic Law stipulates that the flag is the official symbol
   and ensign of the HKSAR. The Basic Law also stated that the residents
   of Hong Kong and various organisations respect and cherish the regional
   flag. The use and display of the regional flag is governed by the
   Regional Flag and Regional Emblem Ordinance. This ordinance spells out
   specifications of the flag as well as appropriate and inappropriate
   uses of the flag. Examples of inappropriate handling of the flag
   include displaying the flag upside down, letting the flag touch either
   the ground or water, dipped into any substance, or flown in times of
   bad weather. This is in contrast to flags of regimental colours,
   organisational or institutional flags which may be dipped to show
   honour to a person or object. Other inappropriate uses include using
   the flag:
    1. As a tablecloth
    2. As a drapery on a platform
    3. As covering for a statue, plaque, cornerstone, or similar object
    4. As part of a costume, clothing or a uniform
    5. In commercial advertising.

   Furthermore, certain actions such as writing on the flag or using the
   flag to hold objects may be considered flag desecration. An exception
   is the use of flower petals when unfurling the flag.

Handling of the flag

   Correct display of the flag.

   There are a number of traditional rules of respect that should be
   observed when handling or displaying the flag. When the flag is used
   outdoors, the flag should always be hoisted at sunrise and lowered at
   sunset. However, weather conditions can make the use of a flag outdoors
   impossible. The flag may also be flown on a public building at night
   under special circumstances, such as the flag having lights pointed at
   it.

   The flag should never be drawn, displayed or flown upside down.
   Tradition also states that when draped vertically, the flag should be
   rotated at a 90 degree angle and reversed. This is done because the top
   right (viewer's left) is the honour position of the flag. It is also
   considered disrespectful to display the flag that has been damaged,
   such as fraying of the edges (called the fly) or the colours of the
   flag are fading. Equipment that is used to fly flags, such as flag
   poles and halyards (ropes that are used to hoist the flag), should also
   be maintained on a regular basis.

Correct display

   The Hong Kong SAR Flag displayed outside the Hong Kong Economic and
   Trade Office, London.
   Enlarge
   The Hong Kong SAR Flag displayed outside the Hong Kong Economic and
   Trade Office, London.

   When two flags displayed on a wall horizontally behind a podium, their
   hoists should point towards each other with the saffron stripes at the
   uppermost. If the flag is displayed on a short flagpole, the flagpole
   is mounted at an 45 degree angle so the flag can be flown and there is
   nothing below touching the flag. If a national flag and a regional flag
   are displayed on crossed staffs, the hoists must be towards each other
   and the flags must be fully spread out. The flag should never be used
   as a table cloth to cover tables, cover podiums or be draped from
   railings.

With the National Flag

   Enlarge

   Whenever the National Flag (i.e. flag of the PRC) is flown together
   with the Regional Flag, the National Flag shall be flown in a prominent
   position. For example, the PRC flag would be flown above and placed to
   the centre of the HKSAR flag.

   In addition, the following rules apply:
    1. The PRC flag is larger than the HKSAR flag
    2. The PRC flag is raised first when both flags are raised
    3. The PRC flag is always flown on the right of the HKSAR flag.
    4. The PRC flag is found to the right of the speaker while the HKSAR
       flag is on the left
    5. The PRC flag is placed to the viewer's right when outside,
       determined by a person standing in front of the building and
       looking towards the front entrance of the building.

   However, for sporting event like Olympic medal ceremonies, since there
   is a chance that Hong Kong athletes win the gold medal while Mainland
   athletes win the silver or bronze, which with make the flag of China
   lower, or to the left of the Hong Kong flag, the rules do not apply.

With national flags of other countries

   The Regional Flag on display with the National Flag, as well as flags
   of other nations and private corporations outside Central Plaza, Wan
   Chai.
   Enlarge
   The Regional Flag on display with the National Flag, as well as flags
   of other nations and private corporations outside Central Plaza, Wan
   Chai.

   When the Regional Flag is displayed outdoors with other national flags,
   the Regional Flag must be flying at the far right (viewer's left) of
   the national flags on separate poles. Then, the national flags are
   arranged alphabetically according to their names in English. All the
   flags can be at the same sizes, but they cannot be larger than the Hong
   Kong flag.

   The Regional Flag is allowed to be flown at the beginning and end of
   the row or included alphabetically in the middle of the row. In case
   when flags are flown in a closed circle, the Regional Flag should be
   flown from a significant point. The other flags should be raised in a
   clockwise manner until it comes back to the Regional Flag. The Regional
   Flag is the first to be raised and the last to be lowered.

   When the flag is displayed on crossed poles, the pole using the
   Regional Flag should be in front and the flag is placed to the right
   (observers' left). However, if the flag of the United Nations is
   displayed, the Regional Flag can be flown from either side of the UN
   flag. Generally, the flag is displayed at the farther-most right (i.e.
   farther-most left of an observer facing the flags).

With non-national flags

   When the flag is displayed with corporate flags or advertising banners,
   the Regional Flag should be placed either in the middle of the flags.
   When doing so, the flagpole containing the Regional Flag must be in
   front of the other flag poles. However, if the flags are flown from the
   same pole, the Regional Flag must be flown on top of the others. If the
   flags are being used in a parade, the Regional Flag must be at front
   and centre of the marching group or to the marching right if other
   flags are in the marching group.

Showing the flag indoors

   Whenever the flag is displayed indoors at public meetings or
   gatherings, the flag should be placed to the right of the speaker or
   podium (observers' left), which is the position of honour. However, if
   the flag is not placed next to the speaker, the flag will be placed to
   the audience's far right.

   When displaying the flag, the flag must include a saffron stripe on
   top. If hung vertically on the wall behind the podium, the saffron
   stripe should be to the left of the onlookers facing the flag with the
   hoist cord at the top.

Parades and ceremonies

   Parade procession and relative placement of the flag

   When using the flag in a procession or parade, it should be either to
   the right of the other flags or alone at front and centre. The flag can
   be a displayed at the unveiling of a statue, monument, or plaque, but
   the flag is not supposed to be used to cover the objected that is being
   unveiled.

   During either the flag hoisting or lowering ceremony or when the flag
   is passing in a parade or in a review, everyone who is present must
   stand at attention and face the flag. Those who are wearing a military
   uniform will also present their salutes at this time. The same rules
   apply when the flag is in a moving column. A dignitary can salute the
   flag either with or without a head cover. The national anthem should be
   played following the raising and saluting of the flags.

Half mast

   The Regional Flag must be lowered to half staff (i.e. half mast) as a
   token of mourning when the following persons pass away:
     * President of the People's Republic of China
     * Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's
       Congress
     * Premier of the State Council and Chairman of the Central Military
       Commission
     * Chairman of the National Committee of the Chinese People's
       Political Consultative Conference
     * Persons who have made outstanding contributions to the People's
       Republic of China as the Central People's Government advises the
       Chief Executive.
     * Persons who have made outstanding contributions to world peace or
       the cause of human progress as the Central People's Government
       advises the Chief Executive.
     * Persons whom the Chief Executive considers have made outstanding
       contributions to the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region or for
       whom he considers it appropriate to do so.

   The Regional Flag may also be flown at half staff when the Central
   People's Government advises the Chief Executive to do so, or when the
   Chief Executive considers it appropriate to do so, on occurrences of
   unfortunate events causing especially serious casualties occur or
   serious natural calamities have caused heavy casualties.

Damaged flag

   A Regional Flag that is either damaged, defaced, faded or substandard
   must not be displayed or used.

Disposal

   When no longer in a fit condition to be used, a flag should be disposed
   of in a dignified manner, preferably by burning.

Desecration

   It is a criminal offence in Hong Kong to desecrate the Regional Flag
   under the Regional Flag and Regional Emblem Ordinance (Cap 2602) s 7.
   For the protection of the regional flag and regional emblem, section 7
   states: A person who desecrates the regional flag or regional emblem by
   publicly and wilfully burning, mutilating, scrawling on, defiling or
   trampling on it commits an offence and is liable:
     * on conviction on indictment to a fine at level 5 and to
       imprisonment for 3 years; and
     * on summary conviction to a fine at level 3 and to imprisonment for
       1 year.

   Leung Kwok-hung ("Long Hair"), a prominent political activist in Hong
   Kong, was penalised for writing on the HKSAR flag in 2001; an action
   which resulted in a fine of 3 000  HKD being levied on Leung. Leung
   claimed that, however, he just wanted to write down his wishes upon
   Hong Kong on the flag. ^

Trivia

   During the opening ceremony of the 2004 Olympic Games in Athens,
   Greece, the Hong Kong team of athletes were hoisting a mirror image
   version of the flag, where the tips of the petals were pointing in the
   wrong direction. This was quickly corrected for the closing ceremony
   despite embarrassment caused.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flag_of_Hong_Kong"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
