   #copyright

Flag of the Republic of China

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: General Geography

   National flag. Flag ratio: 2:3The flag of the Republic of China is red
   with a dark blue canton bearing a white sun with 12 triangular rays.
   This flag was adopted as the flag of the ROC Navy from 1912 to 1917.
   The Kuomintang (KMT) then adopted the flag as the national flag of the
   Nanjing government following Yuan Shi-kai's demise, with the Navy flag
   replaced by the canton, identical to the KMT flag.
   Enlarge
   FIAV 51 National flag. Flag ratio: 2:3
   The flag of the Republic of China is red with a dark blue canton
   bearing a white sun with 12 triangular rays. This flag was adopted as
   the flag of the ROC Navy from 1912 to 1917. The Kuomintang (KMT) then
   adopted the flag as the national flag of the Nanjing government
   following Yuan Shi-kai's demise, with the Navy flag replaced by the
   canton, identical to the KMT flag.
   Civil ensign. Flag ratio: 2:3
   Enlarge
   Civil ensign. Flag ratio: 2:3

   The National Flag of the Republic of China ( Traditional Chinese:
   中華民國國旗; pinyin: Zhōnghuá Mínguó guóqí) is a well-known symbol of the
   Republic of China (ROC), which since 1949 has been based on the island
   of Taiwan. It is commonly referred to in Chinese as Blue Sky, White
   Sun, and a Wholly Red Earth ( Traditional Chinese: 青天、白日、滿地紅; pinyin:
   qīng tiān, bái rì, mǎn dì hóng) to reflect its attributes. This design
   was first used in China by the Kuomintang (KMT) in 1917 and made the
   official flag of the ROC in 1928.

   The current use of the flag is considered by some to be controversial
   due to the dispute over the political status of Taiwan. Within Taiwan,
   the flag is widely used as a national flag though there is controversy
   over its appropriateness. It is actively embraced as a symbol by
   Chinese reunification supporters as a historical link with mainland
   China, while a number of Taiwan independence supporters shun the flag
   for mainly the same reasons. Its use has been opposed by the People's
   Republic of China (PRC) because it suggests the continued existence of
   the ROC, which the PRC regards as defunct and to have been succeeded by
   the PRC in the Chinese Civil War. However, since the early 2000s, the
   PRC has had a more favorable view toward the flag, as it began to see
   the use of the flag in Taiwan as symbolizing a connection between
   Taiwan and mainland China, and news media in the PRC have often
   criticized supporters of Taiwanese independence for attempting to
   replace the flag.

   Though the flag of the Republic of China is commonly known in English
   as the flag of Taiwan (as the ROC is often referred to as "Taiwan"),
   this term is not commonly used in Chinese as some of the current
   symbolism and controversy can only be understood if one realizes that
   it is not officially the "flag of Taiwan" but of a Republic that only
   assumed the administration of Taiwan in 1945 and moved its government
   there in 1949. This distinction is very important in Taiwanese
   politics.

History

   The "Blue Sky with a White Sun" flag was designed by Lu Hao-tung in
   1895 and is used to this day as the flag of Kuomintang (KMT).
   Enlarge
   The " Blue Sky with a White Sun" flag was designed by Lu Hao-tung in
   1895 and is used to this day as the flag of Kuomintang (KMT).

   The canton (upper corner on the hoist side) originated from the " Blue
   Sky with a White Sun" flag (青天白日旗, qīng tiān bái rì qí) designed by Lu
   Hao-tung, a martyr of the Republican revolution. He presented his
   design to represent the revolutionary army at the inauguration of the
   Society for Regenerating China, an anti-Qing society in Hong Kong, on
   February 21, 1895. This design was later adopted as the KMT party flag
   and the Coat of Arms of the Republic of China. The "red earth" portion
   was added by Sun Yat-sen in winter of 1906, bringing the flag to its
   modern form. Although the ROC national flag is based on the KMT party
   flag, the star in the KMT is somewhat different in that the party flag
   has shorter points. This is a detail which is very little known even
   among residents of Taiwan.
   The three original flags of the ROC; from left to right: the 18-Star
   Flag adopted for the Army, the Five Races Under One Union flag for the
   National flag, and the Blue Sky, White Sun, and a Wholly Red Earth Flag
   for the Navy. The caption reads: "Long Live the Republic" (共和萬歲, gònghé
   wànsuì).
   Enlarge
   The three original flags of the ROC; from left to right: the 18-Star
   Flag adopted for the Army, the Five Races Under One Union flag for the
   National flag, and the Blue Sky, White Sun, and a Wholly Red Earth Flag
   for the Navy. The caption reads: "Long Live the Republic" (共和萬歲, gònghé
   wànsuì).

   During the Wuchang Uprising in 1911 that heralded the Republic, the
   various revolutionary armies had different flags. Lu Hao-tung's "Blue
   Sky with a White Sun" flag was used in the provinces of Guangdong,
   Guangxi, Yunnan, and Guizhou. In Wuhan, a flag with 18 yellow stars was
   used to represent the 18 administrative divisions at the time. In
   Shanghai and northern China, a "Five-Colored Flag" (五色旗, wǔ sè qí) (
   Five Races Under One Union flag) was used of five horizontal stripes
   representing the five major nationalities of China: the Han (red), the
   Manchu (yellow), the Mongol (blue), the Hui (white), and the Tibetan
   (black).

   When the government of the Republic of China was established on January
   1, 1912, the "Five-Colored Flag" was selected by the provisional Senate
   as the national flag. The "18-Star Flag" was adopted by the army and
   the modern flag was adopted as a naval ensign. Sun Yat-sen, however,
   did not consider the five-colored flag appropriate, reasoning that
   horizontal order implied a hierarchy or class like that which existed
   during dynastic times.
   The Five Races Under One Union flag was used as a national flag from
   the inception of the Republic in 1912 until the demise of the warlord
   government in 1928.
   Enlarge
   The Five Races Under One Union flag was used as a national flag from
   the inception of the Republic in 1912 until the demise of the warlord
   government in 1928.

   After President Yuan Shikai assumed dictatorial powers in 1913 by
   dissolving the National Assembly and outlawing the KMT, Sun Yat-sen
   established a government-in-exile in Tokyo and employed the modern flag
   as the national ROC flag. He continued using this design when the KMT
   established a rival government in Guangzhou in 1917. The modern flag
   was made the official national flag on December 17, 1928 after the
   successful Northern Expedition that toppled the Beijing government,
   though the Five-Colored Flag still continued to be used by locals in an
   unofficial capacity. One reason for this discrepancy in use was
   lingering regional biases held by officials and citizens of northern
   China, who favored the Five-Colored Flag, against southerners such as
   the Cantonese Sun Yat-sen.

   During World War II, the invading Japanese established a variety of
   puppet governments using several flag designs. The "Reform Government"
   established in March 1938 in Nanjing to consolidate the various puppet
   governments employed the Five-Colored Flag. When Wang Jingwei was
   slated to take over the Japanese-installed government in Nanjing in
   1940, he demanded to use the modern flag as a means to challenge the
   authority of the Nationalist government in Chongqing under Chiang
   Kai-shek and position himself as the rightful successor to Sun Yat-sen.
   However, he added a triangular yellow pennant on top with the slogan
   "Peace, Anti-Communism, National Construction" (和平反共建國, Hépíng fǎn'gòng
   jiàn guó). As a compromise with the Japanese (who did not want to use
   the pennant at all) this was used outdoors only and entirely
   discontinued in 1943 leaving two rival governments with the same flag,
   each claiming to be the legitimate Nationalist government of China.

   The flag was specified in Article Six of the 1947 Constitution, but was
   banned in mainland China after the Communist victory in 1949, save in
   historical venues such as the President's Palace in Nanjing.

   On October 23, 1954, the National Emblem and National Flag of the
   Republic of China Act (中華民國國徽國旗法, Zhōnghuá Mínguó guóhuī guóqífǎ) was
   promulgated by the Legislative Yuan to specify the size, measure,
   ratio, production, and management of the flag. The details of the flag
   specified in this legal document are taught in the mandatory Scout
   classes held in Taiwanese junior high schools.

Symbolism

   Sun Yat-sen, who developed the Three Principles of the People.
   Enlarge
   Sun Yat-sen, who developed the Three Principles of the People.

   In the "Blue Sky with a White Sun" flag of Lu Hao-tung, the twelve rays
   of the white Sun symbolize the twelve months and the twelve traditional
   Chinese hours (時辰, shíchén), each of which corresponds to two modern
   hours (小時, xiǎoshí, literally: "little shí"). Sun Yat-sen added the
   "Red Earth" to the flag to signify the blood of the revolutionaries who
   sacrificed themselves in order to overthrow the Qing Dynasty and create
   the ROC. Together, the three colors of flag correspond to the Three
   Principles of the People:
     * White represents the people's livelihood;
     * Blue represents democracy; and
     * Red represents nationalism.

   The blue-and-white canton of the ROC flag is used as the party flag of
   the KMT. The flag has developed a great deal of additional symbolism
   due to the unique and controversial political status of Taiwan. At one
   level, the flag represents a clear symbol that Taiwan is not governed
   by the same government as Mainland China, as this flag is different
   from the flag of the People's Republic of China (PRC).

   At the same time, because it was formerly used as the flag over all of
   China, the flag has become a symbol of continuity with the ideals of
   the Chinese nationalism and Chinese reunification movements, and has
   become a symbol of a connection both historical and current with
   mainland China. In addition, the flag is derived from the seal of the
   KMT, and the colour of the field of the flag is associated with the KMT
   party colors.

   Some Chinese see the flag as an expression of Chinese nationalism and
   pride combined with simultaneous disapproval for the current communist
   regime. Additionally, the flag may symbolise identification with, and
   admiration for the political thoughts of Sun Yat-sen, and his Three
   Principles of the People.

   One irony is that given the association of the flag with Chinese
   nationalism in opposition to Taiwan independence, the ROC flag has
   found an unexpected ally in the People's Republic of China. The PRC has
   criticized Taiwan independence groups for wishing to change or abolish
   the ROC flag, and has implied that legal steps to do so would bring a
   strongly negative reaction from the PRC.

   However, the presence of the ROC flag in Taiwan also distinguishes the
   fact that Taiwan and ROC territorial islands elsewhere fall under
   jursidiction of a government separate from that of mainland China, the
   People's Republic of China. The hoisting of the ROC flag is even
   advocated by the most extreme Taiwanese independence supporters, such
   as Taiwan Solidarity Union members when emphasizing the separate and
   independently governed systems and territories of the Republic of China
   (Taiwan) and the People's Republic of China on the mainland.

Uses

   Chieh Shou Hall in the Presidential Building contains the flag and
   portrait of Sun Yat-sen which presidents face to take the oath office.
   Enlarge
   Chieh Shou Hall in the Presidential Building contains the flag and
   portrait of Sun Yat-sen which presidents face to take the oath office.

   In the early years of the Republic, under the KMT's political tutelage,
   the flag shared the same prominence as the KMT party flag. A common
   wall display consisted of the KMT flag perched on the left and the ROC
   flag perched on the right, each tilted at an angle with a portrait of
   Father of the Nation Sun Yat-sen displayed in the centre. For the
   summits held between the KMT and Communist Party during the Chinese
   Civil War, the ROC flag was displayed at an equal position to the flag
   of the Chinese Soviet Republic (Jiangxi Soviet). Later, the flag law
   specified a horizontal display of the flag with the portrait of Sun
   Yat-sen a portion of the red field at the centre position. This display
   can be found in numerous government offices in Taiwan and is that which
   the President and Vice President face to take the oath of office.

   The flag has an ubiquitous presence in Taiwan. The hoisting and
   lowering of the flag are ceremoniously accompanied by the National
   Banner Song while those present stand at attention to give a standard
   salute with the right hand, held flat, to the right eyebrow.
   Schoolchildren have traditionally been required to attend morning
   rallies where the flag is raised after a rendition of the " National
   Anthem of the Republic of China." Before the 1980s when martial law was
   lifted in Taiwan, it was required that all vehicles be halted when
   passing by a flag ceremony.
   The Chinese Taipei Olympic Committee flag is used in place of the flag
   of the Republic of China at the Olympic Games, and more recently in the
   World Baseball Classic.
   Enlarge
   The Chinese Taipei Olympic Committee flag is used in place of the flag
   of the Republic of China at the Olympic Games, and more recently in the
   World Baseball Classic.

   The ROC flag is not commonly seen at international gatherings in which
   the PRC participates due to pressure from the PRC over the political
   status of Taiwan and resulting minimal political influence of the ROC
   in such circles. Instead, the ROC is usually represented under a
   pseudonym (usually " Chinese Taipei") and flies a flag specifically
   designed for the organization. The design of the flag is the ROC logo
   centered on a white background. This is to avoid contradicting the
   PRC's position that the ROC is a defunct entity and that the ROC on
   Taiwan is illegitimate. The ban also effectively applies to
   spectators—during a Table Tennis final match at the 1996 Atlanta
   Olympics, police arrested a Taiwanese student for waving the ROC flag.

   However, the symbolism of the flag began to shift in the early 21st
   century as there was a warming of relations between the pan-Blue
   coalition in Taiwan and the Communist Party of China on mainland China.
   The flag of the Republic of China has begun to symbolize the existence
   of a past and possibly future unified China, and as such the government
   of the PRC has made it clear that for Taiwan to change the flag would
   be a major provocation in favour of Taiwan independence. The ambiguity
   surrounding the flag was made apparent during the trip of Kuomintang
   Chairman Lien Chan to mainland China in April 2005, during which the
   flag was very prominently displayed at ceremonies honoring Sun Yat-Sen
   at which both KMT party officials and government officials from the PRC
   were in attendance.
   Pan-Blue supporters wave the ROC flag at a rally during the 2004
   presidential election.
   Enlarge
   Pan-Blue supporters wave the ROC flag at a rally during the 2004
   presidential election.

   The use of the flag in Taiwan reflects the controversy behind its
   symbolism. Although moderate supporters of Taiwan independence, such as
   President Chen Shui-bian, will display and salute the flag on formal
   official state occasions, it is never seen at political rallies of the
   Democratic Progressive Party. This is not only because of its
   association with mainland China but also because the flag contains
   design elements of the KMT party flag. By contrast, the ROC flag is
   always extremely prominent at political rallies of the pan-Blue
   coalition. This difference extends to the colors seen at the rallies.
   Rallies of the pan-Blue coalition give prominence to the colors of the
   ROC flag, with very large amounts of blue and smaller amounts of red.
   Rallies of independence-leaning parties are filled with green, with no
   blue or red at all.

   More strident supporters of Taiwan independence, including former
   president Lee Teng-hui, have called for the abandonment of the flag,
   and there are a number of alternate designs for a specifically
   Taiwanese flag. However, the prospects for this are not high given that
   changing the flag requires a constitutional amendment; that the current
   flag has a huge amount of support among pan-Blue supporters and
   grudging acceptance among moderate independence supporters; and because
   changing the flag might cause political tension with the PRC. During
   the 2004 ROC legislative elections, it was briefly suggested that if
   the pan-green coalition won the elections that it would force the KMT
   to change the party emblem to be different from the flag. This proposal
   generated a few days of controversy and was then quickly forgotten.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flag_of_the_Republic_of_China"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
