   #copyright

Flag of South Africa

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: General Geography

   Flag ratio: 2:3
   Enlarge
   Flag ratio: 2:3

   The current design of the National Flag of the Republic of South Africa
   was adopted on 27 April 1994, the end of apartheid prompting the
   widespread conviction that a new national flag must include the
   cultures of all South Africans.

   None of the flag designs submitted by the public was supported by the
   committee charged to select the final design. An interim flag was
   designed by State Herald Frederick G. Brownell for the 27 April
   elections, the nation's first fully inclusive elections, and for Nelson
   Mandela's May 10 inauguration. The flag was so well received that the
   interim version was made the final, national flag in the South African
   Constitution. Given the troubled historical context, it is remarkable
   that a consensual replacement for the former national flags was found.
   The new flag is seen as an enduring symbol of the modern South African
   state.

   A heraldic description of the flag would be something like "per pall
   fesswise gules, sable and azure, a fesswise pall vert fimbriated
   argent, Or and argent". In plain English, this means two equal width
   horizontal bands of red (top) and blue separated by a central green
   band which splits into a horizontal Y, the arms of which end at the
   corners of the hoist side (and follow the flag's diagonals). The Y
   embraces a black isosceles triangle from which the arms are separated
   by narrow yellow bands; the red and blue bands are separated from the
   green band and its arms by narrow white stripes. The stripes at the fly
   end are in the 5:1:3:1:5 ratio. The South African flag is the only
   six-coloured national flag in the world without a seal or brocade.

Design

   When the new flag was designed, it was specifically stated that the
   colours had no official meaning or symbolism, other than their choice
   from their use in the past. However, according to Brownell, the flag's
   designer, the red symbolises the blood shed in the country's various
   conflicts and wars.

   In recent times certain unofficial explanations have been suggested for
   the meaning of the flag's colours. In one optimistic explanation, the
   pall (Y) is stated to symbolise the convergence as one unified nation,
   the blue represents the sky and the two oceans that surround the
   country, the green symbolises the farms and natural environment that
   are an essential part of South Africa, the yellow stands for the
   natural resources of South Africa, particularly gold, the black
   represents black South Africans, doubling as a symbol of belonging with
   the rest of Africa, and the white represents white South Africans,
   doubling as a symbol of peace. In one rather pessimistic explanation,
   the yellow represents an electric fence.

   Despite the official denial of symbolism, three of the colours – black,
   green and yellow – are found in the flag of the African National
   Congress. The other three – red, white and blue – are used in the flag
   of the Netherlands and the flag of the United Kingdom; these colours
   were also found in the old flag of South Africa, although with orange
   instead of red. The orange represented the orange, white and blue flag
   of the Dutch House of the Prince of Orange. The flag could thus be
   interpreted as a display of unity between the two South African
   traditions. Red, yellow and green are also the Pan-African colours. It
   is also said that the colours represent the two major political parties
   of South Africa: the African National Congress (ANC) and the Democratic
   Alliance (DA), although the DA did not exist when the flag was first
   designed.

   An early explanation was that green, black and yellow are colours
   commonly found in African flags, and that red, white and blue are
   colours commonly found in European flags, thus symbolising a union of
   African and European cultures. The notion that the flag is a merge of
   the ANC's colours and the previous South African national flag might
   have had its origins in the fact that certain earlier versions of the
   flag sold in South Africa had an orange band instead of a red one.

Colour

   Colour        Textile colour         Pantone equivalent
   Green  CKS 42 c Spectrum green       3415 c
   Black  CKS 401 c Blue black
   White  CKS 701 c National flag white
   Gold   CKS 724 c Gold yellow         1235 c
   Red    CKS 750 c Chilli red          179 c
   Blue   CKS 762 c National flag blue  Reflex blue c

History

   The Red Ensign was South Africa's de facto national flag 1910-1928.
   Enlarge
   The Red Ensign was South Africa's de facto national flag 1910-1928.

   After the Anglo-Boer War from 1899 to 1902 and the formation of the
   Union of South Africa in 1910, the British Union Flag became the
   national flag of South Africa. As was the case throughout the British
   Empire, the Red and Blue Ensign with the Union coat of arms were
   granted by British Admiralty warrants in 1910 for use at sea.

   These ensigns were not intended to be used as the Union's national
   flag, although they were used by some people as such, especially the
   Red Ensign. It was only after the first post-Union Afrikaner government
   took office in 1925 that a bill was introduced in Parliament to make
   provisions for a national flag for the Union; this action immediately
   prompted three years of near civil war, as the British thought that the
   Boers wanted to remove their cherished imperial symbols. Natal Province
   even threatened to secede from the Union.
   South Africa's national flag, "Prinsevlag", 1928-1994. Ratio: 2:3
   Enlarge
   South Africa's national flag, "Prinsevlag", 1928-1994. Ratio: 2:3

   Finally, a compromise was reached that resulted in the adoption of a
   separate flag for the Union in late 1927, and the design was first
   hoisted on 31 May 1928. The design was based on the so-called Van
   Riebeeck flag or Prinsevlag ("Prince's flag" in Afrikaans) which was
   originally the Dutch flag, and consisted of orange, white, and blue
   horizontal stripes. A version of this flag was used as the flag of the
   Dutch East India Company at the Cape (with the VOC logo in the centre)
   from 1652 until 1795. The South African addition to the design was
   three smaller flags centred in the white stripe. The smaller flags were
   the Union Flag towards the hoist, the Orange Free State Vierkleur
   hanging vertically and the Transvaal Vierkleur towards the fly.

   The choice of the Prinsevlag as the basis upon which to design the
   South African flag had more to do with compromise than Afrikaner
   political desires, as the Prinsevlag was believed to be the first flag
   hoisted on South African soil and was politically neutral as it was no
   longer the national flag of any nation. A further element of this
   compromise was that the Union Flag would continue to fly alongside the
   new South African national flag over official buildings. Thus, South
   Africa was the only country in the world to have two official national
   flags. This state of duality continued until 1957 when the Union Flag
   lost its official status as per an Act of Parliament; the Red Ensign
   had lost its status as South Africa's merchant flag in 1951.

   Following a referendum, the country became a republic on 31 May 1961,
   but the design of the flag remained unchanged. However, there was
   intense pressure to change the flag, particularly from Afrikaners who
   resented the fact that the Union Flag was a part of the flag.

   The former Prime Minister and architect of apartheid, Hendrik Frensch
   Verwoerd, had a dream to hoist a "clean" flag over South Africa in the
   1960s. The proposed design comprised three vertical stripes of the same
   colour of the Prinsevlag with a leaping Springbok Antelope over a
   wreath of six proteas in the centre. H.C. Blatt, then assistant
   secretary in the Department of the Prime Minister, designed the flag.
   Verwoerd's successor, John Vorster, raised the flag issue at a news
   conference on 30 March 1971 and said that in light of the impending
   10th anniversary Republic Day celebrations, he preferred to "keep the
   affair in the background". This he said was done because he did not
   want the flag question to degenerate into a political football, as
   happened in the 1920s over the Union Flag, and that the matter would be
   considered again when circumstances would be "more normal". He also
   went on to say that "I only want to warn, and express hope, that no
   person should drag politics in any form into this matter, because the
   flag must, at all times, be raised above party politics in South
   Africa".

   Despite the flag's origins predating the National Party's ascension to
   power, the presence of the three little flags in the middle was
   internationally perceived as being an implied endorsement of apartheid.
   In this light it is possible to theorise that the end of apartheid may
   not have beckoned a change in national flag if a more neutral one had
   indeed been selected in the 1960s, or perhaps even if the three
   subflags had been merely exorcised before the Prinsevlag became the
   inadvertent symbol of apartheid it did.

   Today the 1928 - 1994 flag is considered by many to be offensive if
   displayed in public.

Current design

   The new South African flag being flown on top of Mount Everest for the
   first time on 25 May 1996
   Enlarge
   The new South African flag being flown on top of Mount Everest for the
   first time on 25 May 1996

   The present design of the South African national flag was first flown
   on 27 April 1994, the same day as South Africa's first multiracial
   election in four decades. However, the flag was first commissioned as
   an interim flag only, and was decided upon at the very last minute,
   barely making it onto the nation's flagpoles in time for the election.

   The choice of a new flag was part of the negotiation process set in
   motion when Nelson Mandela was released from prison in 1990. When a
   nationwide public competition was held in 1993, the National Symbols
   Commission received more than 7,000 designs. Six designs were drawn up
   and presented to the public and the Negotiating Council, but none
   elicited enthusiastic support. A number of design studios were
   contacted to submit further proposals, but they were again without
   success. Parliament went into recess at the end of 1993 without a
   suitable candidate for the new national flag.

   In February 1994, Cyril Ramaphosa and Roelf Meyer, chief negotiators of
   the African National Congress and the National Party government of the
   day respectively, were given the task of resolving the flag issue. A
   final design was adopted on 15 March 1994, derived from a design
   developed by Frederick G. Brownell who had also designed the Namibian
   national flag. The proclamation of the new national flag was only
   published on 20 April 1994, a mere seven days before the flag was to be
   inaugurated, sparking a frantic last-minute flurry for flag
   manufacturers. As stated in South Africa's post-apartheid interim
   constitution, the flag was to be introduced on an interim probationary
   period of five years, after which there would be discussion about
   whether or not to change the national flag in the final draft of the
   constitution. However, the flag was very well received and was included
   in the final draft without much debate.

Proper display of the flag

Respect for the flag

   South African law says that the flag must at all times be treated with
   " dignity and respect". Regulations Regarding the Flying of the
   National Flag, published just before the flag was adopted in 1994,
   indicates the rules for the display of the flag. Official regulation
   states that the flag must never touch the ground or floor, be used as a
   table cloth or draped in front of a platform, cover a statue, plaque,
   cornerstone etc. at unveiling or similar ceremonies, start or finish
   any competition, race or similar event, be manufactured or used as
   underclothes, bath and floor mats or any similar demeaning application,
   or be used for any commercial advertising in a manner that will distort
   or show disrespect to the flag.

   To manufacture or reproduce the flag in any manner requires permission
   from the President of South Africa.

   Despite these rules, the new flag has pretty much become 'public
   property', and it would seem that many South Africans are unaware of
   that rules of respect that had applied to the previous flag also
   applies to the current flag. The current flag is regularly seen painted
   on faces during sports events, and 'cut into pieces' for clothing and
   other uses.

Traditional rules for handling the flag

   There are a number of traditional rules of respect that should be
   observed when handling or displaying the flag. Officially observed
   traditions state that the flag should always be hoisted at the start of
   the working day and lowered again before or at sunset. It is not to
   remain flying at night unless suitably illuminated. In South Africa,
   this rule still applies to government-designated flag stations, while
   through common usage the flag can be displayed 24 hours a day outside
   of official stations. The flag should also be hoisted briskly and
   lowered ceremoniously. Furthermore, whenever a person sees an official
   flag hoisting or lowering ceremony in progress, he or she should come
   to a halt and stand respectfully to attention for the duration. If a
   hat is worn, it should be removed, and the right hand should be placed
   over the heart in salute. Persons in uniform should salute in the
   manner prescribed by their service. The flag should never be depicted,
   displayed or flown upside down. Flying a flag upside down is the
   traditional sign of distress. When displayed horizontally, the black
   triangle should be to your left and the red band uppermost.

   Tradition also states that when draped vertically, a flag should not
   merely be rotated through 90 degrees, but also reversed. In the case of
   the South African flag, the black triangle must be uppermost and the
   red band on the left. One "reads" a flag like the pages of a book, from
   top to bottom and from left to right, and after rotation the results
   should be the same. It is also insulting to display the flag in a
   frayed or dirty state. The same rule applies to the flagpoles and
   halyards used to hoist the flag – they should always be in a proper
   state of maintenance. The flag may never be defaced by placing slogans
   or any writing or design directly on the field of the flag.

Correct display of the flag

   The rules regarding the correct methods to display the flag state that
   when two flags are fully spread out horizontally on a wall behind a
   podium, their hoists should be towards each other with the red stripes
   uppermost, and if the flag is displayed on a short flagpole, this
   should be mounted at an angle to the wall with the flag draped
   tastefully from it. If two national flags are displayed on crossed
   staffs, the hoists must be towards each other and the flags must be
   fully spread out. The flag should never be used as a cloth to cover
   tables, lecterns or podiums, or be draped from railings.

Showing the flag with other country's flags

   When the National Flag is flown outdoors in company with the national
   flags of other countries, there are several rules that govern the ways
   in which the flag must be flown; specifically, that it must always
   occupy the position of honour. This means it must be the flag furthest
   to the right (observers' left) of all the flags on display, with the
   flags of other countries being arranged alphabetically, and that all
   the flags should be approximately the same size, with no flags being
   larger than the South African flag. Each country's flag should be on a
   separate pole, with no national flag being flown on top of another from
   the same pole. The South African flag must always be hoisted first and
   lowered last, and if the South African flag is displayed on crossed
   poles, the South African flag's pole should be in front and the flag to
   the right (observers' left) of the other flag.

Showing the flag with non-national flags

   When the flag is displayed with other flags that are not national flags
   – such as corporate flags and advertising banners – the rules state
   that if the flags are on separate staffs, the flag of South Africa
   should be in the middle, or the furthest left from the viewpoint of the
   onlookers, or at least one flag's breadth higher than the other flags
   in the group, or its flagpole must be in front of the other poles in
   the group; but if they are on the same staff, it must be the uppermost
   flag. If the flag is carried in procession with other flags, it must be
   at the head of the marching procession; or if carried with a row of
   flags in line abreast, it must be carried to the marching right of the
   procession.

Showing the flag indoors

   Whenever the flag is displayed indoors in halls at public meetings or
   gatherings of any kind, it should always be on the right (observers'
   left), as this is the position of authority. So when the flag is
   displayed next to a speaker in a hall or other meeting place, it must
   be placed on the speaker's right hand; when displayed elsewhere in the
   hall, it should be to the right of the audience.

   The flag should be displayed completely spread out with the red stripe
   on top. If hung vertically on the wall behind the podium, the red
   stripe should be to the left of the onlookers facing the flag with the
   hoist cord at the top.

Parades and ceremonies

   The flag, when carried in a procession or parade or with another flag
   or flags, should be on the marching right or alone in front in the
   centre. The flag may form a distinctive feature of the unveiling of a
   statue, monument, or plaque, but should never be used as the covering
   for the object. As a mark of respect to the flag, it should never be
   dipped to a person or thing. Regimental colours, organisational or
   institutional flags may be dipped as a mark of honour.

   During a ceremony where the flag is hoisted or lowered, or when the
   flag is passing in a parade, all persons present, except for those in
   uniform, should face the flag while standing at attention with the
   right hand over the heart. Hats should be removed and held in the right
   hand at the left shoulder with the hand over the heart. Those present
   in uniform should salute. The same rules apply when the national anthem
   is played.

Half mast

   The flag should be flown at half mast as a sign of mourning only on
   instructions from the president, who will also give a date ending the
   mourning period. When the flag is to be flown at half mast, it must
   first be raised to the top of the mast and then slowly lowered to half
   mast. Before being lowered at sunset or at the appropriate time, the
   flag is first raised to the top of the pole and then lowered. Only the
   South African flag is flown half mast; all other flags remain at normal
   height.

Disposal

   When no longer in a fit condition to be used, a flag should be disposed
   of in a dignified manner, preferably by burning.

Heraldic description

   An addendum to the Transitional Executive Council agenda (April 1994)
   described the flag in heraldic terms as follows:

   The National flag shall be rectangular in the proportion of two in the
   width to three to the length; per pall from the hoist, the upper band
   red (chilli) and lower band blue, with a black triangle at the hoist;
   over the partition lines a green pall one fifth the width of the flag,
   fimbriated white against the red and blue, and gold against the black
   triangle at the hoist, and the width of the pall and its fimbriations
   is one third the width of the flag.

   Schedule One of the Constitution of South Africa (1996) replaced the
   heraldic definition and described the flag in plain English as follows:

   The national flag is rectangular; it is one and a half times longer
   than it is wide.
    1. It is black, gold, green, white, chilli red and blue.
    2. It has a green Y-shaped band that is one fifth as wide as the flag.
       The centre lines of the band start in the top and bottom corners
       next to the flag post, converge in the centre of the flag, and
       continue horizontally to the middle of the free edge.
    3. The green band is edged, above and below in white, and towards the
       flag post end, in gold. Each edging is one fifteenth as wide as the
       flag.
    4. The triangle next to the flag post is black.
    5. The upper horizontal band is chilli red and the lower horizontal
       band is blue. These bands are each one third as wide as the flag.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flag_of_South_Africa"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
