   #copyright

Florence Nightingale

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: British History
1750-1900; Human Scientists

   Florence Nightingale
   Born 12 May 1820
        Florence, Italy
   Died 13 August 1910
        London, England

   Florence Nightingale, OM, RRC ( 12 May 1820 – 13 August 1910), who came
   to be known as The Lady with the Lamp, was a pioneer of modern nursing,
   and a noted statistician.

Early life

   Florence Nightingale was born into a rich, well-connected British
   family at the Villa Colombaia, Florence, Italy, and was named after the
   city of her birth.

   Her parents were William Edward Nightingale (1794–1875) and Frances
   Fanny Nightingale née Smith (1789–1880). William Nightingale was born
   William Edward Shore. His mother Mary née Evans was the niece of one
   Peter Nightingale, under the terms of whose will William Shore not only
   inherited his estate Lea Hurst in Derbyshire, but also assumed the name
   and arms of Nightingale. Fanny's father (Florence's maternal
   grandfather) was the abolitionist William Smith.

   Inspired by what she took as a divine calling, experienced first in
   1837 at Embley Park and later throughout her life, Nightingale
   committed herself to nursing. This demonstrated a passion on her part,
   and also a rebellion against the expected role for a woman of her
   status which was to become a wife and mother. In those days, nursing
   was a career with a poor reputation, filled mostly by poorer women,
   "hangers-on" who followed the armies. In fact nurses were equally
   likely to function as cooks. Nightingale announced her decision to
   enter nursing in 1845 evoking intense anger and distress from her
   family particularly her mother.

   She cared for poor and indigent people. In December 1844, in response
   to a pauper's death in a workhouse infirmary in London that became a
   public scandal, she became the leading advocate for improved medical
   care in the infirmaries and immediately engaged the support of Charles
   Villiers, then president of the Poor Law Board. This led to her active
   role in the reform of the Poor Laws, extending far beyond the provision
   of medical care.

   In 1846 she visited Kaiserswerth, Germany, and learned more of its
   pioneering hospital established by Theodor Fliedner and managed by an
   order of Lutheran deaconesses. She was profoundly impressed by the
   quality of care and by the commitment and practices of the deaconesses.

   Nightingale was courted by politician and poet Richard Monckton Milnes,
   1st Baron Houghton but she rejected him, convinced that marriage would
   interfere with her ability to follow her calling to nursing. When in
   Rome in 1847, recovering from a mental breakdown precipitated by a
   continuing crisis of her relationship with Milnes, she met Sidney
   Herbert, a brilliant politician who had been Secretary at War
   (1845–1846), a position he would hold again during the Crimean War.
   Herbert was already married, but he and Nightingale were immediately
   attracted to each other and they became lifelong close friends. Herbert
   was instrumental in facilitating her pioneering work in Crimea and in
   the field of nursing, and she became a key advisor to him in his
   political career. In 1851 she rejected Milnes' marriage proposal
   against her mother's wishes.

   Nightingale also had strong and intimate relations with Benjamin
   Jowett, particularly about the time that she was considering leaving
   money in her will to establish a Chair in Applied Statistics at the
   University of Oxford.

   Nightingale's career in nursing began in 1851, when she received four
   months training in Germany as a deaconess of Kaiserswerth. She
   undertook the training over strenuous family objections concerning the
   risks and social implications of such activity, and the Roman Catholic
   foundations of the hospital. While at Kaiserswerth she reported having
   her most important and intense experience of her divine calling.

   On August 12, 1853, Nightingale took a post of superintendent at the
   Institute for the Care of Sick Gentlewomen in Upper Harley Street,
   London, a position she held until October 1854. Her father had given
   her an annual income of £500 (roughly US$50,000/£25,000 in present
   terms), which allowed her to live comfortably and to pursue her career.
   James Joseph Sylvester was her mentor.

Crimean War

   Florence Nightingale's most famous contribution came during the Crimean
   War, which became her central focus when reports began to filter back
   to Britain about the horrific conditions for the wounded. On October
   21, 1854, she and a staff of 38 women volunteer nurses, trained by
   Nightingale and including her aunt Mai Smith, were sent (under the
   authorization of Sidney Herbert) to Turkey, some 545 km across the
   Black Sea from Balaklava in the Crimea, where the main British camp was
   based.

   Nightingale arrived early in November 1854 in Scutari (modern-day
   Üsküdar in Istanbul). She and her nurses found wounded soldiers being
   badly cared for by overworked medical staff in the face of official
   indifference. Medicines were in short supply, hygiene was being
   neglected, and mass infections were common, many of them fatal. There
   was no equipment to process food for the patients.

   Nightingale and her compatriots began by thoroughly cleaning the
   hospital and equipment and reorganizing patient care. However, during
   her time at Scutari, the death rate did not drop; on the contrary, it
   began to rise. The death count would be highest of all other hospitals
   in the region. During her first winter at Scutari, 4077 soldiers died
   there. Ten times more soldiers died from illnesses such as typhus,
   typhoid, cholera and dysentery than from battle wounds. Conditions at
   the hospital were so fatal to the patients because of overcrowding and
   the hospital's defective sewers and lack of ventilation. A sanitary
   commission had to be sent out by the British government to Scutari in
   March 1855, almost six months after Florence Nightingale had arrived,
   which flushed out the sewers and improved ventilation. Death rates were
   sharply reduced.

   Nightingale continued believing the death rates were due to poor
   nutrition and supplies and overworking of the soldiers. It was not
   until after she returned to Britain and began collecting evidence
   before the Royal Commission on the Health of the Army, that she came to
   believe that most of the soldiers at the hospital were killed by poor
   living conditions. This experience would influence her later career,
   when she advocated sanitary living conditions as of great importance.
   Consequently, she reduced deaths in the Army during peacetime and
   turned attention to the sanitary design of hospitals.

Return home

   Florence Nightingale returned to Britain a heroine on August 7, 1857,
   and, according to the BBC, was arguably the most famous Victorian after
   Queen Victoria herself. Nightingale moved from her family home in
   Middle Claydon, Buckinghamshire, to the Burlington Hotel in Piccadilly.
   However, she was stricken by a fever, probably due to a chronic form of
   Brucellosis ("Crimean fever") that she contracted during the Crimean
   war, possibly combined with chronic fatigue syndrome. She barred her
   mother and sister from her room and rarely left it.

   In response to an invitation from Queen Victoria – and despite the
   limitations of confinement to her room – Nightingale played the central
   role in the establishment of the Royal Commission on the Health of the
   Army, of which Sidney Herbert became chairman. As a woman, Nightingale
   could not be appointed to the Royal Commission, but she wrote the
   Commission's 1,000-plus page report that included detailed statistical
   reports, and she was instrumental in the implementation of its
   recommendations. The report of the Royal Commission led to a major
   overhaul of army military care, and to the establishment of an Army
   Medical School and of a comprehensive system of army medical records.

Later career

   While she was still in Turkey, on November 29, 1855, a public meeting
   to give recognition to Florence Nightingale for her work in the war led
   to the establishment of the Nightingale Fund for the training of
   nurses. There was an outpouring of generous donations. Sidney Herbert
   served as the honorary secretary of the fund, and the Duke of Cambridge
   was chairman. Nightingale was also considered a pioneer in the concept
   of medical tourism as well based on her letters from 1856 in which she
   would write to spas in Turkey detailing the health conditions, physical
   descriptions, dietary information, and other vitally important details
   of patients whom she directed there (which was significantly less
   expensive than Switzerland). She was obviously directing patients of
   meagre means to affordable treatment.

   By 1859 Nightingale had £45,000 at her disposal from the Nightingale
   Fund to set up the Nightingale Training School at St. Thomas' Hospital
   on July 9, 1860. (It is now called the Florence Nightingale School of
   Nursing and Midwifery and is part of King's College London.) The first
   trained Nightingale nurses began work on May 16 at the Liverpool
   Workhouse Infirmary. She also campaigned and raised funds for the Royal
   Buckinghamshire Hospital in Aylesbury, near her family home.

   Nightingale wrote Notes on Nursing, which was published in 1860, a slim
   136 page book that served as the cornerstone of the curriculum at the
   Nightingale School and other nursing schools established. Notes on
   Nursing also sold well to the general reading public and is considered
   a classic introduction to nursing. Nightingale would spend the rest of
   her life promoting the establishment and development of the nursing
   profession and organizing it into its modern form.

   Nightingale's work served as an inspiration for nurses in the American
   Civil War. The Union government approached her for advice in organizing
   field medicine. Although her ideas met official resistance, they
   inspired the volunteer body of United States Sanitary Commission.

   In 1869 Nightingale and Elizabeth Blackwell opened the Women's Medical
   College.

   By 1882 Nightingale nurses had a growing and influential presence in
   the embryonic nursing profession. Some had become matrons at several
   leading hospitals, including, in London, St Mary's Hospital,
   Westminster Hospital, St Marylebone Workhouse Infirmary and the
   Hospital for Incurables at Putney; and throughout Britain, e.g. Royal
   Victoria Hospital, Netley; Edinburgh Royal Infirmary; Cumberland
   Infirmary; Liverpool Royal Infirmary as well as at Sydney Hospital, in
   New South Wales, Australia.

   In 1883 Nightingale was awarded the Royal Red Cross by Queen Victoria.
   In 1907 she became the first woman to be awarded the Order of Merit. In
   1908 she was given the Honorary Freedom of the City of London.

   By 1896, Florence Nightingale was bedridden. She may have had what is
   now known as chronic fatigue syndrome and her birthday is now
   celebrated as the International CFS Awareness Day. During her bedridden
   years, she also made pioneering work in the field of hospital planning,
   and her work propagated quickly across England and the world.

   She died on August 13, 1910. The offer of burial in Westminster Abbey
   was declined by her relatives, and she is buried in the graveyard at
   St. Margaret Church in East Wellow, Hampshire

Contributions to statistics

   Florence Nightingale had exhibited a gift for mathematics from an early
   age and excelled in the subject under the tutorship of her father. She
   had a special interest in statistics, a field in which her father, a
   pioneer in the nascent field of epidemiology, was an expert. She made
   extensive use of statistical analysis in the compilation, analysis and
   presentation of statistics on medical care and public health.
   "Diagram of the causes of mortality in the army in the East" by
   Florence Nightingale.
   "Diagram of the causes of mortality in the army in the East" by
   Florence Nightingale.

   Nightingale was a pioneer in the visual presentation of information.
   Among other things she used the pie chart, which had first been
   developed by William Playfair in 1801. After the Crimean War,
   Nightingale used the polar area chart, equivalent to a modern circular
   histogram or rose diagram, to illustrate seasonal sources of patient
   mortality in the military field hospital she managed. Nightingale
   called a compilation of such diagrams a "coxcomb", but later that term
   has frequently been used for the individual diagrams. She made
   extensive use of coxcombs to present reports on the nature and
   magnitude of the conditions of medical care in the Crimean War to
   Members of Parliament and civil servants who would have been unlikely
   to read or understand traditional statistical reports.

   In her later life Nightingale made a comprehensive statistical study of
   sanitation in Indian rural life and was the leading figure in the
   introduction of improved medical care and public health service in
   India.

   In 1858 Nightingale was elected the first female member of the Royal
   Statistical Society and she later became an honorary member of the
   American Statistical Association.

Contributions to Literature and the Women's Movement

   While better known for her contributions in the medical and
   mathematical fields, Nightingale is also an important link in the study
   of English feminism. During 1850 and 1852, she was struggling with her
   self-definition and the expectations of an upper-class marriage from
   her family. As she sorted out her thoughts, she wrote Suggestions for
   Thought to Searchers after Religious Truth. The three-volume book has
   never been printed in its entirety, but a section, called Cassandra,
   was published by Ray Strachey in 1928. Strachey included it in The
   Cause, a history of the women's movement. Apparently, the writing
   served the original purpose of sorting out thoughts; Nightingale left
   soon after to train at the Institute for deaconesses at Kaiserwerth.

   Cassandra protests the over-feminization of women into near
   helplessness, such as Nightingale saw in her mother and older sister's
   lethargic lifestyle, despite their education. She rejected their life
   of thoughtless comfort for the world of social service. The work also
   reflects her fear of her ideas being ineffective, as were Cassandra's.
   Cassandra is a virgin-priestess of Apollo who receives a
   divinely-inspired prophecy, but her prophetic warnings go unheeded.
   Elaine Showalter called Nightingale's writing "a major text of English
   feminism, a link between Wollstonecraft and Woolf."

Legacy and memory

   A young Florence Nightingale
   A young Florence Nightingale

   Florence Nightingale's lasting contribution has been her role in
   founding the modern nursing profession. She set a shining example for
   nurses everywhere of compassion, commitment to patient care, and
   diligent and thoughtful hospital administration.

   In many ways she was extremely "modern" in her attitude to health
   management, especially in her attitude to outcomes and statistical
   measurement.

   The work of the Nightingale School of Nursing continues today. There is
   a Florence Nightingale Museum in London and another museum devoted to
   her at her family home, Claydon House. The Nightingale building in the
   School of Nursing and Midwifery at the University of Southampton is
   named after her. International Nurses Day is celebrated on her birthday
   each year.

   Several churches in the Anglican Communion commemorate Nightingale with
   a feast day on their liturgical calendars. So does the Evangelical
   Lutheran Church in America, which commemorates her as a renewer of
   society with Clara Maass on August 13.

   The airline KLM has named one of their MD-11s in her memory.

   Three hospitals in Istanbul are named after Nightingale: F. N.
   Hastanesi in Şişli (the biggest private hospital in Turkey),
   Metropolitan F.N. Hastanesi in Gayrettepe, and Avrupa F.N. Hastanesi in
   Mecidiyeköy, all belonging to the Turkish Cardiology Foundation
   Florence.

   During the Vietnam War, Nightingale inspired many US Army nurses,
   sparking a renewal of interest in her life and work. Her admirers
   include Country Joe of Country Joe and the Fish, who has assembled an
   extensive website in her honour.

   The Agostino Gemelli Medical Centre in Rome, the first university-based
   hospital in Italy and one of its most respected medical centers,
   honored Nightingale's contribution to the nursing profession by giving
   the name "Bedside Florence" to a wireless computer system it has
   developed to assist nursing .

   Nightingale Corona, on the surface of Venus is named after her.

   There are many foundations named after Florence Nightingale. Most are
   nursing foundations, but there is also Nightingale Research Foundation
   in Canada, dedicated to the study and treatment of chronic fatigue
   syndrome which Nightingale is believed to have had.

   There is a psychological effect known as the " Florence Nightingale
   Effect" whereby nurses and doctors fall in love with their patients.

   The United States Air Force maintains a fleet of 20 McDonnell Douglas
   C-9A "Nightingale" aeromedical evacuation aircraft.

Trivia

     * When she first arrived in Turkey, Nightingale would travel on
       horseback to make inspections. She then transferred to a mule cart
       and was reported to have escaped serious injury when the cart was
       toppled in an accident. Following this episode, she used a solid
       Russian-built carriage, with a waterproof hood and curtains.
     * The carriage was returned to England after the war and subsequently
       given to the Nightingale training school for nurses, which she
       founded at St Thomas's Hospital. The carriage was damaged when the
       hospital was bombed in the Blitz. It was later restored and
       transferred to the Army Museum in Aldershot.
     * Florence Nightingale's voice was saved for posterity in a
       phonograph recording from 1890.
     * Florence Nightingale proved that the patients in London hospitals
       died at a rate of 90% while those sick that did not go to hospital
       died at a rate of 60%.
     * Florence's older sister Parthenope was also named after the place
       of her birth. Parthenope was a Greek settlement that is now part of
       the city of Naples.
     * She always wore a bracelet made out of her family's hair.
     * In the Seinfeld episode The Junior Mint George gets Nightingale
       mixed up with Clara Barton by calling her "Clara Nightingale".
     * in the census of England and Wales:- residence 1841 East Wellow
       Hampshire and in 1851 and 1861 Burlington Hotel, Westminster St
       James Middlesex and 1881, 1891 and 1901 St George Hanover Square,
       London
     * Death certificate indexed as Deaths Sep 1910 NIGHTINGALE Florence -
       age 90 registrar St.Geo.H.Sq

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Florence_Nightingale"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
