   #copyright

Floris and Blancheflour

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: General Literature

   Floris and Blancheflour is the name of a popular romantic story that
   was told in the Middle Ages in many different vernacular languages and
   versions. It first appears in Europe around 1160 in "aristocratic"
   French. Roughly between the period 1200 and 1350 it was one of the most
   popular of all the romantic plots.

The story of Floris and Blancheflour

   The following synopsis is from the original Old French "aristocratic"
   version (Floire et Blancheflor) of the late 12th century.

   The Middle English version of the poem derives from an Old French
   "aristocratic" version but differs somewhat in details. The opening
   section concerning how the two are born is missing from the English
   versions. Originally it dates to around 1250 and was called Floris and
   Blanchefleur.

Aristocratic French version

   Fenix, King of Al-Andalus ( Muslim Spain), on one of his ventures into
   Galicia in northwestern Spain attacks a band of Christian pilgrims en
   route on the Way of St James to the famous medieval pilgrimage shrine
   of Santiago de Compostela. Among the pilgrims are a French knight and
   his recently-widowed daughter, who has chosen to dedicate the rest of
   her life to the sanctuary. The knight is killed, and his daughter is
   taken prisoner to Naples, where she is made lady-in-waiting to Fenix's
   wife. Both women are pregnant, and the children are born on the same
   day, Palm Sunday: Floris to the Muslim Queen, and Blanchefleur to her
   lady-in-waiting.

   Floris ("belonging to the flower") and Blanchefleur ("white flower")
   are raised together at the court and grow close. King Fenix fears his
   son may desire to marry the "pagan" girl and decides that she must be
   killed. However, he cannot bring himself to do the act and instead
   sends Floris away to school, then sells Blanchefleur to merchants
   traveling on the way to Cairo (called Babylon in the story), where she
   is then sold to the emir. Fenix constructs an elaborate tomb for
   Blanchefleur and tells Floris she has died. Floris's reaction is so
   severe y\that Fenix tells him the truth. Distraught but encouraged she
   is still alive, Floris sets out to find her.

   Floris eventually arrives outside Cairo where he meets the bridge
   warden named Daire who tells him about the emir's tower of maidens.
   Each year the emir selects a new bride from his tower and kills his old
   wife. Rumour has it that Blanchefleur is soon to be his next chosen
   bride. To gain access to the tower, Daire advises Floris to play chess
   with the tower watchman, returning all winnings to him until the
   watchman is forced to return the favour by allowing him entrance to the
   tower. Floris outplays the watchmen at chess, and according to plan,
   Floris is smuggled in to the tower in a basket of flowers, but is
   mistakenly placed in the room of Blanchefleur's friend Claris. Claris
   arranges a reunion between the two, but they are discovered two weeks
   later by the emir.

   The emir holds off killing them on the spot until he holds a council of
   advisers. So impressed are the advisers at the willingness of the young
   lovers to die for one another that they persuade the emir to spare
   their lives. Floris is then knighted, he and Blanchefleur are married,
   and Claris marries the emir (who promises Claris she will be his last
   and only wife, forever). Soon after, news of Fenix's death reaches
   Cairo and Floris and Blanchefleur depart for home where they inherit
   the kingdom, embrace Christianity, and convert the subjects as well.

High Middle English version

   The poem tells of the troubles of the two eponymous lovers.
   Blancheflour ("white flower") is a Christian princess abducted by
   Saracens and raised with the pagan prince Flores ("belonging to the
   flower"). The two fall in love and separate. Blancheflour gives Flores
   a ring that will reflect her state, so that it will tarnish if she is
   in danger.

   Blancheflour is in a different caliphate from Flores, and there she is
   accused falsely and sent as a slave to a Tower of Maidens. The Emir has
   within his garden a "Tree of Love" that determines a new wife for him
   every year. Its flower will fall on the destined maiden from the harem,
   and yet he can also magically manipulate the tree to cast its flower
   upon a favorite. He has decided to make it fall on Blancheflour, for
   she is the loveliest virgin in the harem. Flores, knowing that
   Blancheflour is about to be taken by the Emir for wife, comes to rescue
   her from her peril. The reunited lovers are found in bed (though they
   were chastely together) by the Emir the next morning. When he hears
   their whole tale of chaste love and long promises to one another, he
   demands proof of her virginity by having her put her hands in a water
   that will stain if she has been with a man. She is proven pure, he
   pardons both lovers, and all is well.

Analysis

   The story contains elements of both older heroic sagas and romance.
   Unlike the usually bloody and martial Romances earlier in the period
   (e.g. Havelok the Dane), this Romance is, indeed, romantic. The older
   original "aristocratic" version does not contain knightly combat but
   the "popular" French version that would come later does contain some
   elements. The story contains themes of conflict between paganism and
   Christianity. Additionally, unlike other Romances, each section of the
   story is dependent strictly upon the previous section, so this poem has
   a linear plot. The poem also emphasizes the power of romantic love
   (rather than courtly love or divine favour) over force of arms to
   preserve life and ensure a good end.

   The Middle English version of the poem derives from an Old French
   "aristocratic" version (Floire et Blancheflor) of the tale. The story
   has analogs in Indian literature, particularly the Jatakas of the early
   fifth century. Many of the details, such as the Tower of Maidens (i.e.
   harem), eunuch guards, and the odalisques derive from material carried
   to the west via The Arabian Nights. The tale could be originally
   French, or possibly of Oriental origins, or a synthesis of motifs.

   Boccaccio tells a version of the same tale in his "Filocolo" in the
   Decameron. The tale has been a popular subject for later retellings,
   and it was treated by Swedish poet Oskar Levertin in the romantic
   ballad " Flores och Blanzeflor" in the collection Legender och visor
   (Legends and Songs) in 1891.

Vernacular versions

   Not a complete list.
     * Old French Floire et Blancheflor, ca. 1160 .. a "popular" French
       version appears around 1200.
     * Rhenish Floyris, ca. 1170
     * Konrad Fleck's Middle High German Florie und Blansheflur, ca. 1220
     * Middle Low German Flos unde Blankeflos, after 1300
     * High Middle English Floris and Blancheflour, before 1250
     * Diederic van Assenede Middle Netherlandish Floris ende Blancefloer
       ca. 1260
     * Italian, after 1300
     * Old Norwegian Flóres saga ok Blankiflúr, around 1300

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Floris_and_Blancheflour"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
