   #copyright

French Polynesia

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; Geography of
Oceania (Australasia)

   Polynésie française
   Pōrīnetia Farāni

   Flag of French Polynesia Coat of arms of French Polynesia
   Flag                     Coat of arms
   Motto: "Tahiti Nui Mare'are'a"
   Anthem: ’Ia ora na ’o Tahiti nui
   Location of French Polynesia
   Capital
   (and largest city) Papeete
   Official languages French
   Government Dependency
    - President Jacques Chirac
   overseas dependency
    - Bastille Day 14 July (1789)
   Area
    - Total 4,167 km² ( 173rd)
   1,609 sq mi
    - Water (%) 12
   Population
    - July 2006 estimate 260,338 ( 181st)
    - 2002 census 245,405
    - Density 64/km² ( 130th)
   166/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2003 estimate
    - Total $4.58 billion ( not ranked)
    - Per capita $17,500 (2003 est.) ( not ranked)
   HDI  (n/a) n/a (n/a) ( n/a)
   Currency CFP franc ( XPF)
   Time zone ( UTC-10)
   Internet TLD .pf
   Calling code +689

   French Polynesia (French: Polynésie française, Tahitian: Pōrīnetia
   Farāni) is a French "overseas collectivity" (French: collectivité
   d'outre-mer, or COM) with the particular designation of "overseas
   country" (French: pays d'outre-mer, or POM) in the southern Pacific
   Ocean. It is made up of several groups of Polynesian islands, the most
   famous island being Tahiti in the Society Islands group, which is also
   the most populous island, and the seat of the capital of the territory
   ( Papeete). Although not an integral part of its territory, Clipperton
   Island is administered from French Polynesia.

Politics

   Politics of French Polynesia takes place in a framework of a
   parliamentary representative democratic French overseas collectivity,
   whereby the President of French Polynesia is the head of government,
   and of a pluriform multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by
   the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and
   the Assembly of French Polynesia. Between 1946 and 2003, French
   Polynesia had the status of an overseas territory.(French: territoire
   d'outre-mer, or TOM). In 2003 it became an overseas collectivity
   (French: collectivité d'outre-mer, or COM). Its statutory law of 27
   February 2004 gives it the particular designation of "overseas country"
   to underline the large autonomy of the territory.

Administration

   Between 1946 and 2003, French Polynesia had the status of an overseas
   territory (French: territoire d'outre-mer, or TOM). In 2003 it became
   an overseas collectivity (French: collectivité d'outre-mer, or COM).
   Its statutory law of 27 February 2004 gives it the particular
   designation of "overseas country" to underline the large autonomy of
   the territory.

Administrative divisions

   French Polynesia has five administrative subdivisions (French:
   subdivisions administratives):
     * Windward Islands (French: (les) Îles du Vent or officially la
       subdivision administrative des Îles du Vent) (the two subdivisions
       administratives Windward Islands and Leeward Islands are part of
       the Society Islands)
     * Leeward Islands (French: (les) Îles Sous-le-Vent or officially la
       subdivision administrative des Îles Sous-le-Vent) (the two
       subdivisions administratives Windward Islands and Leeward Islands
       are part of the Society Islands)
     * Marquesas Islands (French: (les) (Îles) Marquises or officially la
       subdivision administrative des (Îles) Marquises)
     * Austral Islands (French: (les) (Îles) Australes or officially la
       subdivision administrative des (Îles) Australes) (including the
       Bass Islands)
     * Tuamotu-Gambier (French: (les) (Îles) Tuamotu-Gambier or officially
       la subdivision administrative des (Îles) Tuamotu-Gambier) (the
       Tuamotus and the Gambier Islands)

Geography

   Map of French Polynesia, from the library of UTX.
   Enlarge
   Map of French Polynesia, from the library of UTX.

   The islands of French Polynesia have a total land area of 4,167 square
   kilometres (1,622  sq. mi) scattered over 2,500,000 square kilometres
   (965,255 sq. mi) of ocean.

   It is made up of several groups of islands, the largest and most
   populated of which is Tahiti.

   The island groups are:
     * Austral Islands
     * Bass Islands often considered part of the Austral Islands
     * Gambier Islands often considered part of the Tuamotu Archipelago
     * Marquesas Islands
     * Society Islands (including Tahiti)
     * Tuamotu Archipelago

   Aside from Tahiti, important atolls and islands, and island groups in
   French Polynesia include Ahe, Bora Bora, Hiva `Oa, Huahine, Maiao,
   Maupiti, Mehetia, Moorea, Nuku Hiva, Raiatea, Tahaa, Tetiaroa, Tubuai,
   and Tupai.

Economy

   French Polynesia has a moderately developed economy, which is dependent
   on imported goods, tourism, and the financial assistance of mainland
   France. Tourist facilities are well developed and are available on the
   major islands.Also, as the noni fruit from these islands is discovered
   for its medicinal uses, people have been able to find jobs related to
   this agricultural industry.

   The legal tender of French Polynesia is the CFP franc; merchants have
   been reported to accept other currencies very readily, but many
   tourists have been disappointed and inconvenienced through assuming
   they can use U.S. dollars and other foreign currencies.

   Agriculture: coconuts, vanilla, vegetables, fruits.

   Natural resources: timber, fish, cobalt.

   The major export of French Polynesia is their famous black Tahitian
   pearls.

Demographics

   Total population at the 2002 census was 245,405 inhabitants, 83% of
   whom are Polynesian, 12% white, and 5% East Asian (mainly Chinese). In
   2002, 69% of the population of French Polynesia lived in the island of
   Tahiti alone. The urban area of Papeete, the capital city, has 127,635
   inhabitants (2002 census).

   French is the official language of French Polynesia.*
     * <Loi organique n° 96-312 du 12 avril 1996portant statut d'autonomie
       de la Polynésie française> Article 115-1) Le français est la langue
       officielle, la langue tahitienne et les autres langues
       polynésiennes peuvent être utilisées.

Transport

   While most major roads are paved and well-maintained, many secondary
   roads are not. Traffic is brisk and all types of vehicles and
   pedestrians jockey for space on narrow streets. Crosswalks are marked
   and the law requires that motor vehicles stop for pedestrians; however,
   this is not always done. Tourists should exercise caution when driving,
   particularly at night.

Education

   Education is also provided by France. French Polynesia has a
   University, the Université de la Polynésie Française (UPF, "University
   of French Polynesia"), located in Faa'a, Tahiti. It is a small
   university of around 2,000 students. Luise Peltzer, former minister of
   culture of French Polynesia has been elected president of the
   University for five years. There are about sixty researchers at the
   university, including physicists Pascal Ortega (lightning studies) and
   Alessio Guarino ( nonlinear physics). In the Human Sciences department,
   sociologist Laura Schuft deserves mention for her study on the
   integration of mainland French workers in Tahiti.

Famous people of French Polynesia

     * Marco Namouro, writer (1889-1968)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_Polynesia"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
