   #copyright

Fugu

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Insects, Reptiles and
Fish

                   iFugu
         Scientific classification

   Kingdom:   Animalia
   Phylum:    Chordata
   Subphylum: Vertebrata
   Class:     Actinopterygii
   Order:     Tetraodontiformes
   Family:    Tetraodontidae
   Genus:     Takifugu
              Abe, 1949

                                   Species

   See species table below

   Takifugu is a genus of pufferfish, often better known by the Japanese
   name Fugu ( Japanese: 河豚, literally "river pig"). There are 25 species
   belonging to the genus Takifugu, which can be found worldwide from
   about 45° latitude north to 45° latitude south, mostly in salt water,
   but sometimes also in fresh water or brackish water. Their diet
   consists mostly of algae, mollusks, invertebrates and sometimes
   crustaceans. The fish defend themselves by inflating their bodies to
   several times normal size and by poisoning their predators. These
   defenses allow the fish to actively explore their environment without
   much fear of being attacked.

   The fish is highly toxic, but despite this — or perhaps because of it —
   it is considered a delicacy in Japan. The fish contains lethal amounts
   of the poison tetrodotoxin in the internal organs, especially the liver
   and the ovaries, but also in the skin and the testicles. Therefore,
   only specially licensed chefs can prepare and sell fugu to the public,
   and the consumption of the liver and ovaries is forbidden. But because
   small amounts of the poison give a special desired sensation on the
   tongue, these parts are considered the most delicious by some gourmets.
   Every year a number of people die because they underestimate the amount
   of poison in the consumed fish parts.

   The poison paralyzes the muscles while the victim stays fully
   conscious, and eventually dies from asphyxiation. There is currently no
   antidote, and the standard medical approach is to try to support the
   respiratory and circulatory system until the effect of the poison wears
   off. The fish is also featured prominently in Japanese art and culture.

The fish

   There are 25 species belonging to the genus Takifugu (formerly known as
   Fugu, with the exception of one remaining Fugu species). Takifugu can
   be found worldwide from about 45° latitude north to 45° latitude south,
   mostly in salt water near coral reefs or the shore, but some species
   also live in fresh water or brackish water. Their diet consists mostly
   of algae, mollusks, invertebrates and sometimes crustaceans. All fishes
   in the tetradon family have strong teeth that may grow too long if the
   fish cannot consume abrasive food. Fugu can bite if provoked. Not all
   species are studied in detail, but the most researched takifugu is
   Takifugu rubripes, due to the commercial consumption and breeding of
   the fish. Takifugu rubripes, for example, breeds from March to May and
   lays eggs attached to rocks at a depth of around 20m. Fugu can also
   change color over time, and they get a darker or lighter color. This
   helps them to camouflage. A very dark colour may be a sign of stress or
   illness.

   The pear-shaped Takifugu, like all pufferfish, are not fast swimmers as
   they mainly use their pectoral fins for propulsion, but they are very
   manoeuvrable and able to hover, swim backwards, and change direction
   much more quickly than most other types of fish. As a result, they are
   rarely found in open water and prefer to stay relatively close to the
   sea bed where they can explore complex environments such as oyster
   beds, seagrass meadows, and rocky reefs. Nevertheless, these fish are
   very curious and active, and in some cases even aggressive against
   other fugu or other fish. In the event of danger, the fish inflates
   itself by filling its extremely elastic stomach with water (or air when
   outside of the water) until the fish is almost spherical (hence the
   name blowfish or pufferfish).

   Previously, it was unknown how pufferfish inflation took place.
   Recently, however, Dr. Peter Wainwright completed his analysis on the
   series of muscle actions which allow a pufferfish to inflate. First,
   the pufferfish fills its mouth with water. Then, it seals its mouth
   using a special valve at the bottom of the mouth. This valve flaps
   upward and covers the entire mouth of the fish. Next, a branchiostegal
   ray (a modified gill arch) pushes the water down the esophagus into the
   stomach. The extremely elastic stomach then expands. Depending on the
   species the fugu can achieve an almost perfect spherical shape.

   The fish's main defense, however, is the neurotoxin contained in its
   internal organs, mainly the ovaries and the liver, to a lesser extent
   in the intestines and the skin, and only minute amounts in the muscles
   and blood. This makes the fugu a lethal meal for most predators,
   including the occasional human.

   The toxin is called tetrodotoxin, or more precisely anhydrotetrodotoxin
   4-epitetrodotoxin and is about 1200 times deadlier than cyanide. This
   poison can also be found in other animals such as the Blue-Ringed
   Octopus, Cone Snails, and even some newts. The pufferfish does not
   create the poison itself; rather it is generated by the bacteria
   Pseudomonas within the fish. The fish obtains the bacteria by eating
   food containing these bacteria. Pufferfish that are born and grown in
   captivity do not produce tetrodotoxin until they receive some of the
   poison-producing bacteria, often by eating tissues from a
   toxin-producing fish. Also, some fish are more poisonous than others.
   Each fish has enough poison to kill around 30 adult humans.

   Apparently due to some unknown selection pressure, intronic and
   extragenic sequences have been drastically reduced within this family.
   As a result, they have the smallest-known genomes yet found amongst the
   vertebrate animals, while containing a genetic repertoire very similar
   to other fishes and thus comparable to vertebrates generally. Since
   these genomes are relatively compact it is relatively fast and
   inexpensive to compile their complete sequences, as has been done for
   two species (Takifugu rubripes and Tetraodon nigroviridis).

Consumption

   Takifugu rubripes for sale to master fugu chefs at the Tsukiji fish
   market in Tokyo — after the highly toxic liver has been removed.
   Enlarge
   Takifugu rubripes for sale to master fugu chefs at the Tsukiji fish
   market in Tokyo — after the highly toxic liver has been removed.

   Fugu has been consumed in Japan for a long time, although its historic
   origins is unclear. Bones of fugu have been found in several shell
   mounds called kaizuka in jomon period that date back more than 2,300
   years. The Tokugawa shogunate ( 1603- 1868) prohibited the consumption
   of fugu in Edo and its area of influence, yet it became common again as
   the power of the shogunate weakened. In Western regions of Japan, where
   the influence of the Government was weaker and fugu was easier to
   obtain, various cooking methods were developed to safely eat these
   fish. During the Meiji Era ( 1867- 1912) fugu was again banned in many
   areas of Japan. Fugu is also the only delicacy officially forbidden to
   the Emperor of Japan, for his own safety.

   A rakugo, or humorous short story, tells about three men that prepared
   a fugu stew, but were not sure about how safe it was. To test the stew,
   they gave some to a beggar. When they checked on the beggar later, he
   was still healthy, so they ate the stew. Afterwards they met the beggar
   again and were delighted to see that he was still in good health,
   reassuring the men. After that encounter, the beggar, who had in fact
   saved the stew, knew that the stew was safe and he could eat it. The
   three men had been fooled by the wise beggar.

   The most prestigious edible species is the torafugu or Tiger Blowfish
   (T. rubripes), which is also the most poisonous. Other species are also
   eaten, as for example T. pardalis, T. vermicularis, and T. porphyreus.
   The table at the end of the article shows which species contain body
   parts that can be consumed according to the Japanese Ministry of Health
   and Welfare. Other genera that can be consumed according to them
   include the puffers Lagocephalus and Sphoeroides, and the related
   porcupinefish of the genus Diodon.

   The high demand of fugu has led to overfishing. Strict fishing
   regulations are now in place to protect the fugu population from being
   depleted. Most fugu nowadays is harvested in the spring during the
   spawning season, and then farmed in floating cages in the Pacific
   Ocean. The largest wholesale market for fugu in Japan is in
   Shimonoseki.

   Fugu prices rise in the fall and peak in winter, which is the best time
   to eat fugu, as they fatten to survive the cold. The fugu is shipped to
   the restaurant alive and stored in the restaurant in a large tank,
   usually prominently displayed. As fugu are aggressive and have sharp
   teeth, in captivity the mouths of fugu are often sewn shut to avoid the
   fish injuring each other. Prepared fugu is also often available in
   grocery stores which must display official documents which license them
   to distribute fresh fugu.

   Since 1958, only specially licensed chefs can prepare and sell fugu to
   the public. The fugu apprentice needs a two- or three-year
   apprenticeship before being allowed to take an official test. The test
   consists of a written test, a fish identification test, and a practical
   test of preparing fugu and then eating it. Only 30% of the applicants
   pass the test. This, of course, does not mean that 70% die from
   poisoning; rather, they made a small mistake in the long and
   complicated procedure of preparing the dish. Due to this rigorous
   examination process, it is generally safe to eat the sliced fugu sold
   in restaurants or markets.

   Furthermore, most fugu sold nowadays comes from fish with only a small
   amount of toxin. Selling or serving the most toxic liver is illegal in
   Japan, but this "forbidden fruit" is still sometimes eaten by amateur
   cooks, often with fatal results. After several homeless people died
   from eating fugu organs that had been discarded into an insecure
   trashcan, restaurants in Japan are required to store the poisonous
   inner organs in specially locked barrels that are later burned as
   hazardous waste.

   A dish of fugu can cost easily ¥5000 (ca. US$50) but it can be found
   for as little as ¥2000 yen (ca. US$20), and a full course fugu meal can
   cost between ¥10,000 and ¥20,000 (ca. US$100 to US$200) or more. Due to
   the expense of fugu, the fish is sliced very carefully to obtain the
   largest possible amount of meat without the poison. A special knife
   called fugu hiki is traditionally used to slice fugu and it is usually
   stored carefully in a separate location from other knives.

   While fugu connoisseurs love the taste and the texture of the fugu,
   many people actually find it rather bland and tasteless. Some
   professional chefs prepare the fish so that there is a minute amount of
   poison in the meat, giving a prickling feeling and numbness on the
   tongue and the lips. The most popular dish is fugu sashimi, also called
   Fugu sashi or tessa, sliced so thin that the pattern of the plate can
   be seen through the meat. These plates are often decorated so that the
   removal of the slices will be aesthetically pleasing as well. The fins
   of the fish are also fried and served in hot sake, a dish called Fugu
   Hire-zake.

   Vegetables and fugu can also be simmered as Fugu-chiri, also called
   techiri, in which case the very light taste of the fish is hard to
   detect among the taste of the vegetables and the dip. Fugu can also be
   eaten deep fried as Fugu Kara-age. The more poisonous testicles of the
   fugu can also be eaten; they contain a milky liquid and taste slightly
   salty. This is also considered to be an aphrodisiac. If the spikes in
   the skin are pulled out, the skin can also be eaten as part of a salad
   called yubiki.

   In several remote locations, complex pickling processes have been
   devised which allow the poisonous parts of the fugu to be eaten. While
   the exact methods are kept secret, they involve long and heavy
   saturations in sake and salt for over three years.

Fugu poisoning

   Tetrodotoxin is a very potent neurotoxin and shuts down electrical
   signaling in nerves by binding to the pores of sodium channel proteins
   in nerve cell membranes. The tetrodotoxin is very stable and not
   affected by the heat of cooking. It does not cross the blood–brain
   barrier, leaving the victim fully conscious while paralyzing the
   remainder of the body. In animal studies with mice, 8 μg tetrodotoxin
   per kg body weight killed 50% of the mice. The pufferfish itself has
   immunity to the poison due to a mutation in the protein sequence of the
   sodium channel pump on the cell membranes.

   If an ingested dose of the fugu's poison is lethal, as more and more
   muscles are paralyzed, symptoms may include dizziness, exhaustion,
   headache, nausea or difficulty breathing. For 50% to 80% of the
   victims, death follows within four to 24 hours. The victim remains
   fully conscious throughout most of the ordeal, but cannot speak or move
   due to paralysis, and soon also cannot breathe and subsequently
   asphyxiates. If the victim survives the first 24 hours, he or she
   usually recovers completely.

   There is no known antidote, and treatment consists of emptying the
   stomach, feeding the victim activated charcoal to bind the toxin and
   taking standard life-support measures to keep the victim alive until
   the effect of the poison has worn off. Japanese toxicologists in
   several medical research centers are currently working on developing an
   antidote to tetrodotoxin.

   As mentioned above, commercially available fugu in supermarkets or
   restaurants is very safe and, while not unheard of, poisoning from
   these products is very rare. Most deaths from fugu occur when untrained
   people catch and prepare the fish, accidentally poisoning themselves.
   In some cases they even eat the highly poisonous liver on purpose as a
   delicacy. As not all fishes are equally poisonous, this may not always
   lead to death, but sometimes give little more than the desired numbness
   on the lips and tongue while eating and shortly thereafter. However, in
   many cases this numbness of the lips is only the first step of a lethal
   fugu poisoning.

   Some sources claim that about 100 people die each year from fugu
   poisoning, while others sources say only 10 to 20 per year, and still
   others state only 1 person dies each year from fugu. This reported
   variation may be the result of different sequences of years being
   studied, as for example in 1958, the first year the preparation of fugu
   required a special license in Japan, 176 people died of fugu poisoning.
   According to the Fugu Research Institute, 50% of the victims were
   poisoned by eating the liver, 43% from eating the ovaries and 7% from
   eating the skin. One of the most famous victims was the famous Kabuki
   actor and "living national treasure" Bandō Mitsugorō VIII, who
   requested four servings of fugu liver and died after eating in 1975.
   The fugu chef of the restaurant could not refuse the request from such
   a prestigious artist. Subsequently, the chef lost his license for
   breaking the law.

   There are some reports of completely paralyzed but fully conscious
   victims that were believed to be dead, and woke up a few days later or
   just before being cremated. In some parts of Japan a fugu victim is put
   next to his coffin for three days to verify the death. If the body does
   not decompose, it is not yet dead.

   The pufferfish is also reported to be one of the main ingredients used
   in voodoo to turn people into zombies. According to ethnobotanist Wade
   Davis, the pufferfish is the key ingredient in the first step of
   creating a zombie, where the tetrodotoxin creates a 'death-like' state.
   In the second step, hallucinogens are used to hold the person in a
   will-less zombie state. There was considerable skepticism to Davis's
   claims; he was widely accused of fraud, and there has been no final
   statement as to the veracity of his findings.

   Scientists at Nagasaki University have reportedly succeeded in breeding
   a non-toxic variety of torafugu by restricting the fish's diet. With
   over 4800 fish raised and found to be non-toxic, they are fairly
   certain that the fish's diet and digestive process are what actually
   produce the toxins that make it deadly. The non-toxic version is said
   to taste the same, but be completely safe for consumption.

Social aspects

   Fugu and Yellowtail by Hiroshige (1832)
   Enlarge
   Fugu and Yellowtail by Hiroshige ( 1832)

   The popularity of fugu in Japan is an interesting phenomenon. Fugu is a
   very expensive fish, has some potentially lethal side effects, and is
   by most people considered to have a very weak taste (although many
   Japanese gourmets would disagree). The combination of these factors
   would normally give humans a low preference for its consumption.
   However, it seems one of the attractions of the low-flavored fish is
   the risk of potential death, regardless of how low that actual
   likelihood stands in a commercial restaurant. It can be assumed that
   the fish would be much less popular if it were not so poisonous.

   The Japanese poet Yosa Buson ( 1716– 1783) expressed some of this
   feeling in a famous haiku:

          I cannot see her tonight.
          I have to give her up
          So I will eat fugu.

   In the Kansai region the slang name teppo, (鉄砲) meaning rifle or gun is
   used for the fish. This is a play of words on the verb ataru (当たる),
   which can mean either to be poisoned or to be shot. In Yamaguchi
   Prefecture, the pronunciation fuku is common instead of fugu. The
   former means good fortune whereas the latter is a homonym for disabled.
   The Tsukiji fish market fugu association holds a service each year at
   the height of the fugu season, releasing hundreds of caught fugu into
   the (rather polluted) Sumida River. A similar ceremony is also held at
   another large market in Shimonoseki.

   Perhaps the most well-known fugu story in America was when the
   fictional character Homer Simpson of the TV show The Simpsons ate fugu
   served by an amateur chef. Due to the chef's lack of fugu-preparation
   knowledge, Homer was given 24 hours to live (before his "heart would
   explode"), during which he vowed to do all the things he always meant
   to do but never got around to. However, most of the time was spent
   either asleep, with his senile father, or in jail. He did survive the
   24 hours in the end, to the joy of his family and friends. See " One
   Fish, Two Fish, Blowfish, Blue Fish".

   An episode of Columbo also involved fugu poisoning, this time, a
   murder. The perpetrator injected fugu poison through the cork into a
   bottle of wine. The CSI: NY episode "Grand Master" included a novel
   fugu poisoning murder. Another television show, Nip/Tuck features an
   episode where a character tries fugu as a way to show his son that he
   is a "Real man".

   In Japanese television, Chairman Kaga, the eccentric and flamboyant
   host of the cooking show Iron Chef, died of fugu poisoning after the
   regular run of the series ended. The Chairman was killed off partly
   because the actor portraying him, Kaga Takeshi, had prior commitments
   that prevented him from reprising his role in an Iron Chef special.

   Lanterns can be made from the bodies of preserved fugu. These are
   occasionally seen outside of fugu restaurants, as children's toys, as
   folk art or as souvenirs for tourists. Fugu skin may also be made into
   everyday objects like wallets or waterproof boxes.

   There is a fugu museum in Osaka.

   In Germany the fugu was used by the early Green Party for a political
   joke on their Social Democrat counterparts in the first Red-Green
   coalition in the state of Hesse in 1985. During a night session to
   finalize the coalition agreement the Greens suddenly demanded that
   Hesse join the (fictional) " Shanghai Fugu Agreement" which was
   accepted by their tired counterparts and officially endorsed as Hesse
   government politics. The aim of the fictional agreement was explained
   to be the saving of consumers' lives by easing restrictions on working
   permits for fugu chefs internationally. The prank took years to be
   discovered.

Availability

   Most Japanese cities have one or more fugu restaurants. They may be
   clustered together, as past regulations had placed limits on where the
   stores may be opened, and also the location of restaurants made it
   easier to have fugu delivered fresh. A famous restaurant specializing
   in fugu is Takefuku, a restaurant in the Ginza district in Tokyo.
   Zuboraya is another popular chain in Osaka.

   Few restaurants in the United States serve fugu. As of 2003, only
   seventeen restaurants were licensed to do so; twelve in New York , and
   one in Seattle. The fugu is first cleaned of the most toxic parts in
   Japan, and then is freeze-flown to the USA under licence, in
   purpose-built, clear, plastic containers. The fugu chefs for the US
   restaurants are trained under the same rigourous specifications as in
   Japan.

Takifugu species table

   CAPTION: Species of the Genus Takifugu

   Species Author Common Name Distribution Max. Size Comments
   Takifugu alboplumbeus Richardson, 1845 Komon-damashi (Japan) West
   Pacific 23cm Poisonous, Salt Water
   Takifugu basilevskianus? Basilewsky Darkgreen Puffer, Sansaifugu
   (Japan) ? ? Poisonous
   Takifugu bimaculatus Richardson, 1845 Futatsuboshi-fugu (Japan)
   Northwest Pacific 30cm Poisonous
   Takifugu chinensis^* Abe, 1949 Eyespot Puffer, Karasu (Japan) Northwest
   Pacific 55cm Poisonous
   Takifugu coronoidus^* Ni & Li, 1992 暈環多紀魨 (China) Northwest Pacific ?
   Not poisonous
   Takifugu chrysops^* Hilgendorf, 1879 Red-eyed Puffer, Akamefugu (Japan)
   Northwest Pacific 20cm Poisonous
   Takifugu exascurus Jordan & Snyder, 1901 Mushifugu (Japan) Northwest
   Pacific 15cm Poisonous
   Takifugu flavidus Li, Wang & Wang, 1975 Towny Puffer, Sansaifugu
   (Japan), Hwang-jom-pok (Korea), Jú húng dong fang tún (China) Northwest
   Pacific 35cm Poisonous
   Takifugu niphobles^* Jordan & Snyder, 1901 Grass Puffer, Starry puffer,
   Kusafugu (Japan), Cá Nóc sao (Viet Nam) Northwest Pacific 15cm
   Poisonous
   Takifugu oblongus Bloch, 1786) Oblong blow fish, Lattice blaasop
   (India), Bebo (India) Buntal (Malaysia), Pita-pita (Indonesia),
   Ruitjies-blaasop (South Africa) West Pacific 40cm Not Poisonous
   Takifugu obscurus^* Abe, 1949 Obscure Puffer, Mefugu (Japan) Western
   Pacific 40cm Poisonous
   Takifugu ocellatus Linnaeus, 1758 Ocellated Puffer Asia ? Not Poisonous
   Fugu orbimaculatus Kuang, Li & Liang, 1984 圓斑多紀魨 (China) Asia ? Not
   Poisonous
   Takifugu pardalis^* Temminck＆Schlegel, 1850 Panther puffer, Higanfugu
   (Japan), Chol-pok (Korea), Bào wén dong fang tún (China) Northwest
   Pacific 30cm Poisonous
   Takifugu poecilonotus^* Temminck & Schlegel, 1850 Fine Patterned
   Puffer, Komonfugu (Japan), Huin-jom-pok (Korea), Ban dian dong fang tún
   (China) Northwest Pacific 20cm Poisonous
   Takifugu porphyreus^* Temminck & Schlegel, 1850 Purple Puffer,
   Namera-fugu (Japan), Mafugu (Japan), Kom-pok (Korea), Zi sè dong fang
   tún) (China) Northwest Pacific 52cm Poisonous
   Takifugu pseudommus Chu, 1935 Nameradafugu (Japan), Nameradamashi
   (Japan) Northwest Pacific 35cm Poisonous
   Takifugu radiatus Abe, 1947 Nashifugu (Japan) Northwest Pacific 20cm
   Poisonous
   Takifugu reticularis Tien, Chen & Wang, 1975 Reticulate Puffer,
   Amime-fugu (Japan) Northwest Pacific 29cm Poisonous
   Takifugu rubripes^* Temminck & Schlegel, 1850 Torafugu (Japan), Tiger
   Puffer, Hóng qí dong fang tún (China), Cha-ju-pok (Korea) Northwest
   Pacific 70cm Poisonous, Used in Chinese Medicine, Genome sequenced
   completely
   Takifugu snyderi^* Abe, 1988 Shosai-fugu (Japan) Western Pacific 30cm
   Poisonous
   Takifugu stictonotus^* Temminck & Schlegel, 1850 Spotback, Spottyback
   Puffer, Gomafugu (Japan) Northwest Pacific 35cm Poisonous
   Takifugu vermicularis Temminck＆Schlegel, 1850 Pear Puffer, Shosaifugu
   (Japan),, Nashifugu (Japan), Kuk-mae-ri-bok (Korea), Chóng wén dong
   fang tún (China) Northwest Pacific 30cm Poisonous
   Takifugu xanthopterus^* Temminck & Schlegel, 1850 Yellowfin puffer,
   Shimafugu (Japan), Kka-ch'i-pok (Korea), Tiáo wén dong fang tún (China)
   Northwest Pacific 50cm Poisonous

   ^* Fish that have edible body parts according to the Japanese Ministry
   of Health and Welfare

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fugu"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
