   #copyright

Full moon

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Space (Astronomy)

   The Galileo spacecraft took this composite image on 7 December 1992 on
   its way to explore the Jupiter system in 1995-97. The color is
   'enhanced' in the sense that the CCD camera is sensitive to near
   infrared wavelengths of light beyond human vision.
   Enlarge
   The Galileo spacecraft took this composite image on 7 December 1992 on
   its way to explore the Jupiter system in 1995-97. The colour is
   'enhanced' in the sense that the CCD camera is sensitive to near
   infrared wavelengths of light beyond human vision.

   The Full Moon is the lunar phase that occurs when the Moon lies on the
   opposite side of Earth from the Sun. The Moon as seen from the surface
   of Earth is fully illuminated by the Sun at this time, presenting a
   "full" round disk to viewers on Earth. As always, only half the total
   surface of the Moon is illuminated.

Eclipses

   A Full Moon is the only time when a lunar eclipse is possible; at that
   time the Moon may move through the shadow cast by Earth. However,
   because of the tilt or inclination of the Moon's orbit around Earth
   relative to Earth's orbit around the Sun, the Moon usually passes to
   the north or south of Earth's shadow at Full Moon, so a lunar eclipse
   does not occur at every Full Moon.

   Full Moons are generally a poor time to conduct astronomical
   observations, since the bright reflected sunlight from the Moon
   overwhelms the dimmer light from stars.

Numbers and formulae

   Although on average it takes only 27.322 days ( sidereal month) for the
   Moon to complete one orbit around Earth, it requires about two more
   days than that to again catch up with the Sun. On average, the number
   of days between Full Moons is about 29.5306 days. The actual number of
   days may differ from the average number by more than a half day. From
   one Full Moon to the next, the number of days in one lunation can vary
   between 29.272 and 29.833 days.

   The age and apparent size of the Full Moon vary in a cycle of just
   under 14 synodic months, which is called the Full moon cycle.

   The combined date and time of Full Moon number N, using a fictitious
   moon that moves at a strictly mean rate is approximately:

          D = 20.362954 + 29.5305888531 × N + 102.19 × 10^-12 × N^ 2

     * D is the number of days (and fractions) since 1 January 2000
       00:00:00 UTC,
     * N is a count of Full Moons, starting with zero for the first Full
       Moon that falls in the year 2000.

   The true Full Moon may differ from this by up to about 14.5 hours, due
   to the normal anomaly in the Moon's Keplerian orbit, and due to the
   periodic perturbations on that Keplerian orbit by the Sun, by the
   equatorial bulge of Earth, and by the planets.

   See the New Moon page for a detailed explanation of the formula.

Folklore

   Southeast Asian and Western folklore long ago established the Full Moon
   as the time for werewolves and vampires to awaken, or appear most
   often. As suggested in the film Wolf (1994; Jack Nicholson, Michelle
   Pfeiffer, James Spader; Directed by Mike Nichols) the creators of these
   myths explained away violence occurring during the middle of each
   month, when in fact the moon simply adds more light to the evening sky.
   This allows criminals to act more freely. It also helped assuage the
   guilt of the masses for not doing more to stop violent crime, and freed
   people to vilify brutality, while fantasizing and apologizing for it.

   Full Moons are traditionally associated with temporal insomnia,
   insanity (hence the terms lunacy and lunatic) and various magical
   phenomena such as lycanthropy.

   Psychologists have found that there is no strong evidence for effects
   on behaviour around Full Moon . They find that studies are not
   consistent, with some showing a positive effect, while others will show
   a negative effect. In one instance, the December 23, 2000 issue of the
   British Medical Journal published two studies on dog bite admission to
   hospitals in England and Australia. The study of the Bradford Royal
   Infirmary found that dog bites were twice as common at Full Moon, while
   the study of public hospitals in Australia found they were less likely
   at Full Moon. Psychologists point out that there is a difference
   between correlation and causation. The mere fact that two events happen
   at the same time doesn't mean that there is a cause and effect
   relationship between the two.

   Many neopagans hold a monthly ritual called an Esbat at each Full Moon,
   while some people practicing traditional Chinese religions prepare
   their ritual offerings to their ancestors and deities on every Full
   Moon and New Moon.

Calendars

   The Hindu Calendars, Hebrew calendar, Islamic calendar, Tibetan
   calendar Neopagan calendar, Celtic calendar, and the traditional
   Chinese calendar are all based on the phases of the Moon. None of these
   calendars, however, begin their months with the Full Moon.

   In the Chinese calendar, Jewish Calendar and some Hindu calendars, the
   Full Moon is always the middle of a month. The Mid-Autumn Festival
   falls on the Full Moon of the eighth month. The Lantern Festival falls
   on the first Full Moon of the year.

Full Moon names

   Folklore assigns a special name to each Full Moon, although the rule
   for determining which name will be assigned to which Moon has changed
   over time (see article at blue moon).

   Modern practice is to assign the traditional names based on the
   Gregorian calendar month in which the Full Moon falls. This frequently
   results in the same name as the older method would, and is far more
   convenient in practice. The older method of assigning names is based on
   seasons and quarters of the year.

   CAPTION: Full Moon Names

   Month English Names Native American Names Other Names Used Hindu Names
   January Old Moon Wolf Moon Moon After Yule, Ice Moon Paush Purnima
   February Wolf Moon Snow Moon Hunger Moon, Storm Moon Magh Purnima
   March Lenten Moon Worm Moon Crow Moon, Crust Moon, Sugar Moon, Sap
   Moon, Chaste Moon Holi
   April Egg Moon Pink Moon Sprouting Grass Moon, Fish Moon, Seed Moon,
   Waking Moon Hanuman Jayanti
   May Milk Moon Flower Moon Corn Planting Moon, Corn Moon, Hare's Moon
   Buddha Purnima
   June Flower Moon Strawberry Moon Rose Moon, Hot Moon, Planting Moon Wat
   Purnima
   July Hay Moon Buck Moon Thunder Moon, Mead Moon Guru Purnima
   August Grain Moon Sturgeon Moon Red Moon, Green Corn Moon, Lightning
   Moon, Dog Moon Narali Purnima, Raksha bandhan
   September Fruit Moon Harvest Moon Corn Moon, Barley Moon Bhadrapad
   Pornima
   October Harvest Moon Hunter's Moon Travel Moon, Dying Grass Moon, Blood
   Moon Kojagiri or Sharad Pornima
   November Hunter's Moon Beaver Moon Frost Moon, Snow Moon Kartik Pornima
   December Oak Moon Cold Moon Frost Moon, Long Night's Moon, Moon Before
   Yule Margashirsha Pornima
   These are the traditional English names for each month's Full Moon and
   the names given by Native Americans in the northern and eastern United
   States.

   Traditionally these names corresponded to the seasons rather than
   calendar months. So, for instance, the Egg Moon (the Full Moon before
   Easter) would always be the first moon after March 21st, and the Lenten
   Moon would always be the last moon on or before March 21st.

The Blue moon

   The origin of the folkloric term " Blue Moon" is complicated, because
   its meaning has changed over time. Modern practice is to name a Full
   Moon a blue moon if it is the second of two Full Moons to occur in the
   same calendar month. The original meaning of blue moon was the third
   Full Moon in a season when there were four Full Moons in that season.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Full_moon"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
