   #copyright

Galerina

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Plants

                    iGalerina
   Galerina marginata
   Galerina marginata

                             Conservation status

   See text
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom:     Fungi
   Division:    Basidiomycota
   Subdivision: Hymenomycotina
   Class:       Homobasidiomycetes
   Order:       Agaricales
   Family:      Cortinariaceae
   Genus:       Galerina
                Earle

                                Type Species

   Galerina vittiformis ( Fr.) Earle

                                  Subgenera

   Galerina Kühner
   Naucoriopsis Kühner
   Tubariopsis Kühner

   Galerina sp.
   mycological characteristics:
                                ?

   gills on hymenium

   cap is convex

   hymenium is seceding

   stipe has a ring

   spore print is brown

   ecology is saprophytic

   edibility: deadly

   Galerina is a genus of small brown-spored saprotrophic agarics, with
   over 300 species found throughout the world.  This group is most noted
   for toxic species which are occasionally confused with hallucinogenic
   species of Psilocybe.

Biological aspects

   Galerina fruiting bodies are typically small, undistinguished mushrooms
   with a typical " little brown mushroom" morphology and a cinnamon-brown
   spore print. The pileus is typically glabrous and often hygrophanous,
   and a cortina-type veil is often present in young specimens, though it
   sometimes disappears as the mushroom ages. Microscopically, they are
   highly variable as well, though most species have spores that are
   ornamented, lack a germ pore, and have a plage. Many species also have
   characteristic tibiiform cystidia. However, there are many exceptions,
   and many species of Galerina lack one or more of these microscopic
   characteristics. Ecologically, all Galerina are saprotrophs, growing in
   habitats like rotting wood or in moss.

   Galerina has recently been found to be polyphyletic, consisting of
   three unrelated clades. Each of these clades corresponds to a subgenus
   of Galerina, as outlined by Kühner.  The great diversity of
   micromorphology found in Galerina is probably due to the polyphyly of
   the genus.

   Phaeogalera is genus that was segregated from Galerina by Kühner.
   Phaeogalera resemble Galerina in their habitat, macroscopic appearance,
   and spore print colour, however, their microscopic characteristics
   (smooth spores with a distinct germ pore and non-tibiiform cystidia)
   more closely resemble Psilocybe. A recent study  confirms the affinity
   of Phaeogalera and the non-psilocybin Psilocybe.

Chemistry and toxicology

   Many (though not all) Galerina contain alpha-amanitin and other
   amatoxins.

Identification

   The extreme toxicity of some Galerina species means that recognition of
   Galerina is of great importance to mushroom hunters, particularly those
   who are seeking hallucinogenic Psilocybe. Species like Galerina
   marginata may bear a superficial resemblance to Psilocybe cyanescens
   and other Psilocybe species. Galerina can be distinguished from
   psilocybian Psilocybe by the following characterisics:
     * Spore print colour: blackish-brown to lilac-brown in Psilocybe,
       rusty brown in Galerina. Spore colour can be seen by taking a spore
       print or by looking for evidence of spore drop on the stipe or on
       surrounding mushrooms.

     * Staining reaction: Psilocybian Psilocybe fruiting bodies stain blue
       to varying degrees when bruised, while Galerina do not. The
       strength of this reaction varies with the amount of psilocin
       present in the tissues of the mushroom. Fruiting bodies with little
       psilocin will stain weakly if at all, while sporocarps with a high
       psilocin content will stain strongly blue. No Galerina has
       blue-staining tissue, though in some cases the flesh will blacken
       when handled, and this may be misinterpreted as a bluing reaction.

     * Size: (This characteristic is not entirely reliable, but can be
       helpful in identification of Galerina.) Galerina tend to be smaller
       than the psilocybian Psilocybe, though overlap in size is
       possible.

   Since mixed patches of Psilocybe and Galerina can occur, it is
   essential to be sure of the identity of each sporocarp collected.

   Galerina also present some risk of confusion with several species of
   small edible mushrooms, notably Kuehnermomyces mutabilis and "candy
   cap" Lactarius (L. camphoratus, L. fragilis, and L. rubidus).

Notable species

   Galerina vittiformis is the type species of the genus Galerina.

   Galerina marginata (also known as autumn skullcap, or deadly galerina)
   is a poisonous species found throughout the temperate regions of the
   world, in habitats as diverse as forests and urban parklands, wherever
   rotting wood is found. DNA studies  found that Galerina autumnalis and
   five other species of Galerina with similar morphologies were, in fact,
   synonyms of Galerina marginata.

   Several Galerina species are listed by the US Forest Service as
   "species of special concern" in the Northwest Forest Plan.  These
   species are considered indicator species for old growth coniferous
   forest in the Pacific Northwest: Galerina atkinsonia, Galerina cerina
   Galerina heterocystis, Galerina sphagnicola, and Galerina vittiformis.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galerina"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
