   #copyright

Ganges shark

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Insects, Reptiles and
Fish

                  iGanges shark

                             Conservation status

   Critically endangered (CR)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Animalia
   Phylum:   Chordata
   Class:    Chondrichthyes
   Subclass: Elasmobranchii
   Order:    Carcharhiniformes
   Family:   Carcharhinidae
   Genus:    Glyphis
   Species:  G. gangeticus

                                Binomial name

   Glyphis gangeticus
   ( Müller & Henle, 1839)

   The Ganges shark, Glyphis gangeticus, is a rare species of fresh water
   shark that dwells in the Ganges River. It should not be confused with
   the Bull shark, which also inhabits the Ganges River and is sometimes
   referred to as the Ganges shark.

Appearance

   In its external appearance, G. gangeticus is a typical requiem shark.
   It is stocky, with a broadly rounded snout and small eyes. The first
   dorsal fin is over the last third of the pectoral fins, with a free
   rear tip that is well in front of the pelvic fins. The second dorsal
   fin is much smaller than the first, but is still relatively large. The
   anal fin is slightly smaller than the second dorsal fin. The pectoral
   fins are broad and falcate. A longitudinal upper precaudal pit is
   present, but the interdorsal ridge is absent.

   The shark tends to have a uniform gray to brownish coloration, with no
   discernible pattern or markings.

Distribution

   The Ganges shark, as its name suggests, is largely restricted to the
   rivers of the Indo-Western Pacific, particularly the Hooghly River of
   West Bengal, India. Individuals have also been sighted in waters in the
   vicinity of Karachi, Pakistan.

Biology

   The shark, though poorly documented, is known to inhabit only
   freshwater, inshore marine and estuarine systems. Its feeding habits
   are unknown. Its maximum size is probably in the area of 204 cm. It is
   probably viviparous, measuring 55 to 60 cm at birth.

   A related species is the speartooth shark, Glyphis glyphis, although
   its distribution is different.

Endangerment

   The Ganges shark is believed to be seriously endangered.

Danger to humans

   The shark appears to pose a threat to humans, but this has not been
   proven. Though some consider the Ganges shark to be "extremely
   dangerous", it has so far been impossible to separate its attacks from
   those of bull sharks.(Allen, 107) Most likely the shark is a
   specialized species that feeds primarily on small fish. Amongst deadly
   sharks habitating the Ganges, the bull shark represents a greater
   definite danger than this extremely endangered and elusive species.
   According to the International Union for Conservation of Nature and
   Natural Resources, the Ganges shark is one of 20 sharks on the "Red
   List" of endangered shark species. (from the San Diego Union-Tribune,
   August 31, 2006, p. E8).

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ganges_shark"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
