   #copyright

Garden Gnome Liberation Front

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Animal & Human Rights

   A gnome protests in an undisclosed garden.
   Enlarge
   A gnome protests in an undisclosed garden.

Liberators

   The Garden Gnome Liberation Fronts (GGLF) are international
   organizations that stand for the liberation of garden gnomes. These
   so-called "liberation groups"—which can be seen as cults or simply
   groups of practical jokers—attempt to rid the world of "unjust"
   imprisonment of gnomes. They are often cited for illegal conduct
   including theft and trespassing.

Styles of Liberating

   The most notorious liberating group, the Front de Libération des Nains
   de Jardin (FLNJ), liberates their gnomes by putting them in their
   natural habitat. This means sticking them in the local forest with
   claim tickets. Another notable group, the Movimento Autonomo per la
   Liberazione delle Anime da Giardino (MALAG), smashes them "to release
   the gnome spirit." This group is extremely organized and carries out
   their work with ease. A locally run grassroots group in Corvallis,
   Oregon gives the owner of the gnome a letter explaining the cruelty and
   gives the owner a chance to hand the gnome over.
   European Gnome Sanctuary, Barga Italy.
   Enlarge
   European Gnome Sanctuary, Barga Italy.

   A separate but related group, Free The Gnomes, is the legitimate
   political wing of the subversive Garden Gnome Liberation Front. As a
   political advocacy group, they seek to further the rights of gnomes
   around the world through legal, non-violent means. The largest of these
   groups is the French Mouvement d´Émancipation des Nains de Jardin
   (MENJ). The fundamental premise of this group and most Garden Gnome
   Liberation groups is that gnomes, like humans, have an inalienable
   right to freedom. These groups claim that forcing gnomes to stand in
   gardens without just compensation, against their free will and for the
   sake of ornamentation is immoral. The European Gnome Sanctuary in
   Barga, Tuscany (Italy) (open since 1999) has been a place of refuge for
   all freedom-loving gnomes.

Missing Gnomes

   Recently, Gnomes Without Homes was created as an international database
   of missing gnomes. The site allows people looking for wayward gnomes to
   post photos and information that might lead to their return. In
   addition, Gnomes Without Homes allows gnome-gnappers to post travel
   photos and information on gnomes that have been abducted.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garden_Gnome_Liberation_Front"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
