   #copyright

Gardening

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Recreation

   A gardener
   Enlarge
   A gardener

   Gardening is the art of growing plants with the goal of crafting a
   purposeful landscape. Residential gardening most often takes place in
   or about a residence, in a space referred to as the garden. Although a
   garden typically is located on the land near a residence, it may also
   be located in a roof, in an atrium, on a balcony, in a windowbox, or on
   a patio or vivarium.

   Gardening also takes place in non-residential green areas, such as
   parks, public or semi-public gardens ( botanical gardens or zoological
   gardens), amusement and theme parks, along transportation corridors,
   and around tourist attractions and hotels. In these situations, a staff
   of gardeners or groundskeepers maintains the gardens.

   Indoor gardening is concerned with the growing of houseplants within a
   residence or building, in a conservatory, or in a greenhouse. Indoor
   gardens are sometimes incorporated as part of air conditioning or
   heating systems.

   Water gardening is concerned with growing plants adapted to pools and
   ponds. Bog gardens are also considered a type of water garden. These
   all require special conditions and considerations. A simple water
   garden may consist solely of a tub containing the water and plant(s).

   Container gardening is concerned with growing plants in any type of
   container either indoors or outdoors. Common containers are pots,
   hanging baskets, and planters. Container gardening is usually used in
   atriums and on balconies, patios, and roof tops.

Gardens as art

   Garden design is considered to be an art in most cultures,
   distinguished from gardening, which generally means garden maintenance.
   In Japan, for instance, Samurai and Zen monks were often required to
   build decorative gardens or practice related skills like flower
   arrangement known as ikebana. In 18th century Europe, country estates
   were refashioned by landscape gardeners into formal gardens or
   landscaped parklands, such as at Versailles, France or Stowe, England.
   Today, landscape architects and garden designers continue to produce
   artistically creative designs for private garden spaces.

   See also:
     * Landscape architecture
     * History of gardening

Social aspect

   In modern Europe and North America, people often express their
   political or social views in gardens, intentionally or not. The lawn
   vs. garden issue is played out in urban planning as the debate over the
   " land ethic" that is to determine urban land use and whether
   hyperhygienist bylaws (e.g. weed control) should apply, or whether land
   should generally be allowed to exist in its natural wild state. In a
   famous Canadian Charter of Rights case, "Sandra Bell vs. City of
   Toronto", 1997, the right to cultivate all native species, even most
   varieties deemed noxious or allergenic, was upheld as part of the right
   of free expression, at least in Canada.

   It is clear that in the British Isles (i.e. United Kingdom, Republic of
   Ireland and The Isle of Man people surround their house and garden with
   a hedge, often of Privet ( Ligustrum). The idea of open gardens without
   hedges is distaceful to many, they like privacy. Beech ( Fagus) is also
   used as a hedge. This has the advantage to the wildlife that there is a
   habitat for the birds and other wild plants (not weeds). What therefore
   is a weed? A weed is a plant in the wrong place!

   Gardening is thus not only a food source and art, but also a right. The
   Slow Food movement has sought in some countries to add an edible
   schoolyard and garden classrooms to schools, e.g. in Fergus, Ontario,
   where these were added to a public school to augment the kitchen
   classroom.

   In US and British usage, the production of ornamental plantings around
   buildings is called landscaping, landscape maintenance or
   groundskeeping, while international usage uses the term gardening for
   these same activities.

Garden pests

     * A garden pest is what one considers a pest. The beautiful
       Tropaeolum speciosum can be considered if it seeds and starts to
       grow where is not wanted. As the root is well below ground pulling
       it up does not remove it, it simply grows again and becomes what
       may be considered a pest.
     * In lawns moss can become dominant and be impossible to eradicate.
       In some lawns lichens, especially very damp lawns lichens such as
       Peltigera lactucfolia and P. membranacea can become difficult and
       considered pests.

Restrictions

   Governments of most countries are restricting imports of plant
   material. In the past, someone could send such things as lily seeds and
   bulbs to friends in any country. Today, most of those avenues are
   closed. While it's a good measure to limit the spread of disease and
   pests, it also limits the exchange of new genetic material.

History

   Gardening for food extends far back into prehistory. Ornamental gardens
   were known in ancient times, a famous example being the Hanging Gardens
   of Babylon, while ancient Rome had dozens of gardens.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gardening"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
