   #copyright

Gas

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: General Physics

   A gas is one of the four major phases of matter (after solid and
   liquid, and followed by plasma, that subsequently appear as a solid
   material is subjected to increasingly higher temperatures. Thus, as
   energy in the form of heat is added, a solid (e.g., ice) will first
   melt to become a liquid (e.g., water), which will then boil or
   evaporate to become a gas (e.g., water vapor). In some circumstances, a
   solid (e.g., " dry ice") can directly turn into a gas: this is called
   sublimation. If the gas is further heated, its atoms or molecules can
   become (wholly or partially) ionized, turning the gas into a plasma.

Physics

   In the gas phase, the atoms or molecules constituting the matter
   basically move independently, with no forces keeping them together or
   pushing them apart. Their only interactions are rare and random
   collisions. The particles move in random directions, at high speed. The
   range in speed is dependent on the temperature and defined by the
   Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. Therefore, the gas phase is a
   completely disordered state. Following the second law of
   thermodynamics, gas particles will immediately diffuse to homogeneously
   fill any shape or volume of space that is made available to them.

   The thermodynamic state of a gas is characterized by its volume, its
   temperature, which is determined by the average velocity or kinetic
   energy of the molecules, and its pressure, which measures the average
   force exerted by the molecules colliding against a surface. These
   variables are related by the fundamental gas laws, which state that the
   pressure in an ideal gas is proportional to its temperature and number
   of molecules, but inversely proportional to its volume.

   Like liquids and plasmas, gases are fluids: they have the ability to
   flow and do not tend to return to their former configuration after
   deformation, although they do have viscosity. Unlike liquids, however,
   unconstrained gases do not occupy a fixed volume, but expand to fill
   whatever space they can occupy. The kinetic energy per molecule in a
   gas is the second greatest of the states of matter (after plasma).
   Because of this high kinetic energy, gas atoms and molecules tend to
   bounce off of any containing surface and off one another, the more
   powerfully as the kinetic energy is increased. A common misconception
   is that the collisions of the molecules with each other is essential to
   explain gas pressure, but in fact their random velocities are
   sufficient to define that quantity. Mutual collisions are important
   only for establishing the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution.

   Gas particles are normally well separated, as opposed to liquid
   particles, which are in contact. A material particle (say a dust mote)
   in a gas moves in Brownian Motion. Since it is at the limit of (or
   beyond) current technology to observe individual gas particles (atoms
   or molecules), only theoretical calculations give suggestions as to how
   they move, but their motion is different from Brownian Motion. The
   reason is that Brownian Motion involves a smooth drag due to the
   frictional force of many gas molecules, punctuated by violent
   collisions of an individual (or several) gas molecule(s) with the
   particle. The particle (generally consisting of millions or billions of
   atoms) thus moves in a jagged course, yet not so jagged as we would
   expect to find if we could examine an individual gas molecule.

Some types of gases

     * Ideal gas, in physics
     * Various hydrocarbon gases used for heating, lighting, and energy
       transmission:
          + Natural gas
          + Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG), including propane and butane
          + Syngas: various synthetic fuel gases: names include coal gas,
            water gas, illuminating gas, wood gas, producer gas, holzgas,
            air gas, blue gas, manufactured gas, town gas, hygas
     * Gas (chemical warfare), various poison gases used in warfare
     * Inhalational anaesthetic, including laughing gas (= nitrous oxide)
     * Trace gas
     * Toxic gases
     * Noble gases

Etymology

   The word "gas" was apparently proposed by the 17th century chemist Jan
   Baptist van Helmont, as a phonetic spelling of his Dutch pronunciation
   of the Greek word " chaos".

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gas"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
