   #copyright

George II of Great Britain

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Monarchs of Great Britain

                       George II
   King of Great Britain and Ireland
   Elector of Hanover; Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg
      Reign     11 June 1727 – 25 October 1760
    Coronation  4 October 1727
   Predecessor  George I
    Successor   George III
     Consort    Caroline of Ansbach
                         Issue
   Frederick, Prince of Wales
   Anne, Princess Royal
   Princess Amelia Sophia
   Princess Caroline Elizabeth
   Prince George William of Wales
   Prince William Augustus, Duke of Cumberland
   Princess Mary, Landgravine of Hesse
   Louise, Queen of Denmark and Norway
                       Full name
   George Augustus
   German: Georg August
                        Titles
   HM The King
   HRH The Prince of Wales
   HRH The Duke of Cornwall
   HSH The Duke of Cambridge
   HSH The Hereditary Prince of Hanover
   HSH Prince Georg August of Hanover
   HSH Duke Georg August of Brunswick-Lüneburg
   Royal House  House of Hanover
   Royal anthem God Save the King
      Father    George I
      Mother    Sophia of Celle
       Born     10 November 1683
                Herrenhausen Palace, Hanover
       Died     25 October 1760
                Kensington Palace, London
      Burial    11 November 1760
                Westminster Abbey, London

   George II (George Augustus; 10 November 1683 – 25 October 1760) was
   King of Great Britain and Ireland, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg (Hanover)
   and Archtreasurer and Prince-Elector of the Holy Roman Empire from 11
   June 1727 until his death.

   He was the last British monarch to have been born outside of Great
   Britain, and was famous for his numerous conflicts with his father and,
   subsequently, with his son. As King, he exercised little control over
   policy in his early reign, the government instead being controlled by
   Great Britain's first (unofficial) " Prime Minister", Sir Robert
   Walpole.

Early life

   HSH Duke Georg August of Hanover was born at Herrenhausen Palace,
   Hanover. He was the son of Georg Ludwig, then the Hereditary Prince of
   Brunswick-Lüneburg, and his wife, Sophia of Celle; the latter's alleged
   adultery led to them being divorced in 1694.

   He married Margravine Caroline of Brandenburg-Ansbach in 1705.

Act of Settlement

   Under the Act, the Hereditary Prince became a naturalised English
   subject in that same year. Anne, who had succeeded to the English
   Throne in 1702, admitted him to the Order of the Garter in 1706. She
   created him Duke of Cambridge, Earl of Milford Haven, Viscount
   Northallerton and Baron Tewkesbury later the same year.

   When Anne died on 1 August 1714, George Louis acceded as George I, and
   the Duke, automatically became Duke of Cornwall, Duke of Rothesay and
   Earl of Carrick. His father created him Prince of Wales and Earl of
   Chester on 27 September 1714.

Quarrel with the King

   The Prince of Wales had an extremely poor relationship with his father.
   When the Princess of Wales gave birth to Prince George William in 1717,
   a family quarrel ensued; at the baptism, the Prince of Wales insisted
   on having the Duke of Newcastle (whom the King detested) as a
   godfather, whilst the King chose his brother, the Duke of York and
   Albany. When he publicly vituperated his father, the Prince of Wales
   was temporarily put under arrest. Afterwards, the King banished his son
   from St. James's Palace, the King's residence, and excluded him from
   all public ceremonies.

Political opposition

   The Prince of Wales did all in his power to encourage opposition to
   George I's policies. His London residence, Leicester House, became a
   meeting place for his father's opponents, including Sir Robert Walpole
   and Viscount Townshend. In 1720, Walpole encouraged the King and his
   son to reconcile. In the same year, Walpole made a return to political
   office, from which he had been excluded since 1717.

   In 1721, the economic disaster of the South Sea Bubble allowed Sir
   Robert to rise to the pinnacle of government. Walpole and his Whig
   Party were dominant in politics, for George I feared that the Tories
   did not support the succession laid down in the Act of Settlement. The
   power of the Whigs was so great that the Tories would not come to hold
   power for another half-century. Sir Robert essentially controlled
   British government, but, by joining the King's side, lost the favour of
   the Prince of Wales.

Early reign


        Monarchical Styles of
   King George II of Great Britain
   Reference style:   His Majesty
   Spoken style:      Your Majesty
   Alternative style: Sire

   George II succeeded to the throne at the time of his father's death on
   11 June 1727, but a battle of wills continued with his son and
   heir-apparent, Prince Frederick. The King may have planned to exile his
   son to the British colonies, but, in any event, did not actually do so.
   George was crowned at Westminster Abbey on 4 October. The Hanoverian
   composer Handel was commissioned to write four new anthems for the
   coronation; one of which, Zadok the Priest, has been sung at every
   coronation since.

   It was widely believed both that George would dismiss Walpole, who had
   distressed him by joining his father's government, and that he would be
   replaced by Sir Spencer Compton; George requested Compton, rather than
   Walpole, to write his first speech for him. Sir Spencer, however,
   requested Walpole for aid in the task, leading Queen Caroline, an
   ardent supporter of Sir Robert, to claim that Compton was incompetent.
   George did not behave obstinately; instead, he agreed with his wife and
   retained Walpole as Prime Minister, who continued to slowly gain royal
   favour, securing a generous civil list of £800,000 for the King.

   He also persuaded many Tory politicians to accept the succession laid
   down in the Act of Settlement as valid. In turn, the King helped Sir
   Robert to gain a strong parliamentary majority by creating peers
   sympathetic to the Whigs.
                 British Royalty
                House of Hanover
                    George II
       Frederick, Prince of Wales
       Anne, Princess of Orange
       Princess Amelia Sophia
       Princess Caroline Elizabeth
       William Augustus, Duke of Cumberland
       Mary, Landgravine of Hesse-Cassel
       Louise, Queen of Denmark
   Grandchildren
       Augusta Charlotte, Duchess of Brunswick
      George III
       Edward Augustus, Duke of York
       Princess Elizabeth Caroline
       William Henry, Duke of Gloucester
       Henry Frederick, Duke of Cumberland
       Caroline Matilda, Queen of Denmark
   Great-grandchildren
       Princess Sophia of Gloucester
       William Frederick, Duke of Gloucester

   Whilst the Queen was still alive, Walpole's position was secure. He was
   the master of domestic policy, and he still exerted some control over
   George's foreign policy. Whilst the King was eager for war in Europe,
   the Prime Minister was more cautious. Thus, in 1729, he encouraged
   George to sign a peace treaty with Spain.
   Frederick, Prince of Wales
   Enlarge
   Frederick, Prince of Wales

Family problems

   George's relationship with the Prince of Wales worsened during the
   1730s. When the Prince of Wales married, an open quarrel broke out; the
   King banished him and his family from the royal court in 1737.

   After losing his son, George also lost his wife, who died on 20
   November 1737. Reputedly, when she asked her husband to remarry, he
   replied, "Non, j'aurai des maitresses!" (French for "No, I will have
   mistresses!"). George had already had an illegitimate son, Johann
   Ludwig, Graf von Wallmoden-Gimborn. The most famous of his mistresses
   was Henrietta Howard, Countess of Suffolk, who was one of Caroline's
   ladies-of-the-bedchamber.

War and rebellion

   Against Walpole's advice, George once again entered into war, the War
   of Jenkins' Ear, with Spain in 1739. The entire continent of Europe was
   plunged into war upon the death of the Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI in
   1740. At dispute was the right of his daughter, Maria Theresa, to
   succeed to his Austrian dominions. George II's war with Spain quickly
   became part of the War of the Austrian Succession.

   Sir Robert Walpole was powerless to prevent a major European conflict.
   He also faced the opposition of several politicians, led by John, Baron
   Carteret, later Earl Granville. Accused of rigging an election, Walpole
   retired, in 1742, after over twenty years in office. He was replaced by
   Spencer Compton, 1st Earl of Wilmington, George's original choice for
   the premiership, who had previously failed to gain office due to the
   manœuvres of Queen Caroline. Lord Wilmington, however, was a
   figurehead; actual power was held by Lord Carteret. When Lord
   Wilmington died in 1743, Henry Pelham took his place.

   The pro-war faction was led by Lord Carteret, who claimed that if Maria
   Theresa failed to succeed to the Austrian Throne, then French power in
   Europe would increase. George II agreed to send more troops to Europe,
   ostensibly to support Maria Theresa, but in reality to prevent enemy
   troops from marching into Hanover. The British army had not fought in a
   major European war in over twenty years, during which time the
   government had badly neglected their upkeep. Nevertheless, the King
   enthusiastically sent his troops to Europe. He personally accompanied
   them, leading them into the Battle of Dettingen in 1743, thus becoming
   the last British monarch to lead troops into battle. His armies were
   controlled by his military-minded son, HRH The Duke of Cumberland. The
   war was not welcomed by the British public, who felt that the King and
   Lord Carteret were subordinating British interests to Hanoverian ones.
   Half-Crown of George II, 1746. The inscription reads GEORGIUS II DEI
   GRATIA (George II by the Grace of God). Under the King's head is the
   word LIMA, signifying that the coin was struck from silver seized from
   the Spanish treasure fleet off Lima, Peru.
   Half-Crown of George II, 1746. The inscription reads GEORGIUS II DEI
   GRATIA (George II by the Grace of God). Under the King's head is the
   word LIMA, signifying that the coin was struck from silver seized from
   the Spanish treasure fleet off Lima, Peru.

   Shrewdly, George II's French opponents encouraged rebellion by the
   Jacobites during the War of the Austrian Succession. The Jacobites were
   the supporters of the Roman Catholic James II, who had been deposed in
   1689 and replaced not by his Catholic son, but by his Protestant
   daughter. James II's son, James Francis Edward Stuart, known as the Old
   Pretender, had attempted two prior rebellions; that of 1715, " the
   Fifteen", which was after he fled to France; and the rebellion of 1719,
   " the Nineteen", which was so weak that it was almost farcical. The Old
   Pretender's son, Charles Edward Stuart, popularly known, both then and
   since, as Bonnie Prince Charlie, however, led a much stronger rebellion
   on his father's behalf in 1745.

   Bonnie Prince Charlie landed in Scotland in July 1745. Many Scots were
   loyal to his cause; he defeated British forces in September. He then
   attempted to enter England, where even Roman Catholics seemed hostile
   to the invasion. The French monarch, Louis XV, had promised to send
   twelve thousand soldiers to aid the rebellion, but did not deliver. A
   British army under the Duke of Cumberland, meanwhile, drove the
   Jacobites back into Scotland. On 16 April 1746, Bonnie Prince Charlie
   faced the Duke of Cumberland in the Battle of Culloden, the last battle
   ever fought on British soil. The ravaged Jacobite troops were routed by
   the British Government Army. Bonnie Prince Charlie escaped to France,
   but many of his Scottish supporters were caught and executed.
   Jacobitism was all but crushed; no further serious attempt was made at
   restoring the House of Stuart.

   After the Forty-Five, the War of the Austrian Succession continued.
   Peace was made in 1748, with Maria Theresa being recognised as
   Archduchess of Austria. She subsequently dropped Great Britain as a key
   ally, deeming it too unreliable.

Later life

   For the remainder of his life, George did not take any active interest
   in politics or war. During his last years, the foundation of the
   Industrial Revolution was laid as the population rose rapidly. British
   dominance in India increased with the victories of Robert Clive at the
   Battle of Arcot and the Battle of Plassey.

   The Prince of Wales died suddenly in 1751, his son, Prince George
   immediately succeeded him as Duke of Edinburgh. The new Duke was soon
   created Prince of Wales in recognition of his status as heir-apparent.
   However, the Dowager Princess of Wales mistrusted the King, and kept
   the two apart.

   In 1752, Great Britain reformed its calendar. It had previously
   operated under the Julian Calendar, but during 1752 adopted the
   Gregorian Calendar. The calendar change required omitting eleven days;
   2 September was followed by 14 September. Furthermore, 1 January became
   the official beginning of the New Year, instead of 25 March. The former
   date had been commonly regarded as the beginning of the New Year for a
   long time, but the latter was retained in formal usage. To ensure
   consistency of financial record keeping, and to prevent annual payments
   falling due before they would have under the Julian Calendar, the
   fiscal year was not shortened, with the result that in the United
   Kingdom each tax year has since begun on 6 April.

   George's Prime Minister, Henry Pelham died in 1754, to be succeeded by
   his brother, the Duke of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, and, thereafter, by the
   Duke of Devonshire in 1756. Another notable minister was William Pitt,
   the Elder. Pitt was appointed a Secretary of State in Lord Devonshire's
   administration, but was disliked by the King, for he had previously
   opposed involvement in the War of the Austrian Succession. The
   hostility was marked by George's criticism of Pitt's speeches in early
   1757. In April of the same year, George dismissed Pitt, but later
   recalled him. At the same time, Lord Newcastle returned as Prime
   Minister.

   As Secretary of State for the Southern Department, Pitt the Elder
   guided policy relating to the Seven Years' War, which may be viewed as
   a continuation of the War of the Austrian Succession. Maria Theresa,
   Archduchess of Austria, made an alliance with her nation's former
   enemies, Russia and France, and became the enemy of Great Britain and
   Hanover. George II feared that this new alliance would invade Hanover;
   thus, he aligned himself with Prussia. Great Britain, Hanover and
   Prussia were thus pitted against many major European powers, including
   Austria, Russia, France, Sweden and Saxony. The war spread from Europe
   to North America (where the conflict is also known as the French and
   Indian War) and to India, where it was termed the Second Carnatic War.
   Statue of George II in Golden Square, Soho, London. By John Nost the
   elder, this was erected in 1753, but had actually been made 33 years
   previously for the Duke of Chandos. It is badly corroded (it has been
   suggested that this is due to over-zealous cleaning) and the right hand
   is damaged. The only other public statue of this king in London is at
   the Royal Naval College in Greenwich. (January 2006)
   Enlarge
   Statue of George II in Golden Square, Soho, London. By John Nost the
   elder, this was erected in 1753, but had actually been made 33 years
   previously for the Duke of Chandos. It is badly corroded (it has been
   suggested that this is due to over-zealous cleaning) and the right hand
   is damaged. The only other public statue of this king in London is at
   the Royal Naval College in Greenwich. (January 2006)

   The King died unceremoniously of aortic dissection while seated on the
   lavatory on 25 October 1760. He was subsequently buried in Westminster
   Abbey. He was succeeded by his grandson, who became George III.

Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles

     * 1683- 1692: His Serene Highness Duke Georg August of
       Brunswick-Lüneburg
     * 1692- 1698: His Serene Highness Prince Georg August of Hanover
     * 1698- 1706: His Serene Highness The Hereditary Prince of Hanover
     * 1706- 1714: His Serene Highness The Duke of Cambridge
     * 1714: His Royal Highness The Duke of Cornwall
     * 1714- 1727: His Royal Highness The Prince of Wales
     * 1727- 1760: His Majesty The King

Styles

   In Great Britain, George II used the official style "George the Second,
   by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
   Defender of the Faith, etc." In some cases (especially in treaties),
   the formula "Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg, Archtreasurer and
   Prince-Elector of the Holy Roman Empire" was added before "etc."

Arms

   George II's arms were: Quarterly, I Gules three lions passant guardant
   in pale Or (for England) impaling Or a lion rampant within a tressure
   flory-counter-flory Gules (for Scotland); II Azure three fleurs-de-lys
   Or (for France); III Azure a harp Or stringed Argent (for Ireland); IV
   tierced per pale and per chevron (for Hanover), I Gules two lions
   passant guardant Or (for Brunswick), II Or a semy of hearts Gules a
   lion rampant Azure (for Lüneburg), III Gules a horse courant Argent
   (for Westfalen), overall an escutcheon Gules charged with the crown of
   Charlemagne Or (for the dignity of Archtreasurer of the Holy Roman
   Empire).

Ancestors





   George, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg ( 1582- 1641)


   Ernest Augustus, Elector of Brunswick-Lüneburg ( 1629- 1698)






   Anne Eleonore of Hesse-Darmstadt ( 1601- 1649)


   George I of Great Britain ( 1660- 1727)






   Frederick V, Elector Palatine ( 1596- 1632)


   Sophia of Hanover ( 1630- 1714)






   Elizabeth of Bohemia ( 1596– 1662)

                  George II of Great Britain ( 1683- 1760)





   George, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg ( 1582- 1641)


   George William, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg ( 1624- 1705)






   Anne Eleonore of Hesse-Darmstadt ( 1601- 1649)


   Sophia Dorothea of Celle ( 1666- 1726)






   Alexander II d'Olbreuse ( 1608- 1660)


   Eleonore d'Esmier d'Olbreuse ( 1637– 1722)






   Jacquette Poussard de Vendre

Issue

   Caroline's nine pregnancies, between 1707 - 1724, resulted in eight
   live births:
   Name Birth Death Notes
   Frederick, Prince of Wales 1 February 1707 31 March 1751 married, 1736,
   Princess Augusta of Saxe-Gotha; had issue
   Anne, Princess Royal and Princess of Orange 2 November 1709 12 January
   1759 married, 1734, William IV, Prince of Orange; had issue
   Princess Amelia Sophia 10 July 1711 31 October 1786
   Princess Caroline Elizabeth 21 June 1713 28 December 1757
   Prince George William of Wales 13 November 1717 17 February 1718 died
   in infancy
   Prince William Augustus, Duke of Cumberland 26 April 1721 31 October
   1765
   Princess Mary, Landgravine of Hesse 5 March 1723 14 January 1772
   married, 1740, Frederick II, Landgrave of Hesse; had issue
   Louise, Queen of Denmark and Norway 18 December 1724 19 December 1751
   married, 1743, Frederick V of Denmark; had issue

Legacy

     * The Seven Years' War continued after George II's death. It
       concluded during the early reign of George III, and led to
       important territorial gains for the British in North America and
       Asia. Nevertheless, the expensive conflict crippled the royal
       finances. British attempts to tax the Americans would lead to the
       American Revolution. Great Britain, however, fared much better in
       India. Company rule (that is, rule by the British East India
       Company) was secured within years of George II's death.

     * He served as the ninth Chancellor of Trinity College, Dublin
       between 1715 and 1718.

     * In 1734 George II founded the Georg August University of Göttingen.

     * George II's disinterest in British government had contributed to
       the decline of the royal power. His successor, George III, sought
       to reverse the trend, but failed; thus, the power of ministers
       became well-established.

     * The patriotic song " God Save the King" was developed during George
       II's reign. It is thought that the first public performance of the
       song—sometimes cited as an adaptation of a piece by the French
       composer Jean-Baptiste Lully—occurred during the Forty-Five. In
       reference to the Jacobite Rebellion, a fourth verse (which included
       the words "Rebellious Scots to crush") was added, though it is now
       rarely sung. "God Save the King" (or "God Save the Queen") is now
       the unofficial national anthem of the United Kingdom, one of the
       two national anthems of New Zealand (along with " God Defend New
       Zealand"), and the royal anthem of Australia and Canada.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_II_of_Great_Britain"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
