   #copyright

George Eliot

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Writers and critics

   CAPTION: Mary Anne Evans

   George Eliot at 30 by François D'Albert Durade
   Pseudonym:  George Eliot
      Born:    22 November 1819
               South Farm, Arbury, near Nuneaton
      Died:    22 December 1880
   Occupation: Novelist
   George Eliot's birthplace at South Farm, Arbury
   George Eliot's birthplace at South Farm, Arbury

   Mary Anne Evans ( 22 November 1819 – 22 December 1880), better known by
   her pen name George Eliot, was an English novelist. She was one of the
   leading writers of the Victorian era. Her novels, largely set in
   provincial England, are well known for their realism and psychological
   perspicacity.

   She used a male pen name, she said, to ensure that her works were taken
   seriously. Female authors published freely under their own names, but
   Eliot wanted to ensure that she was not seen as merely a writer of
   romances. An additional factor may have been a desire to shield her
   private life from public scrutiny and to prevent scandals attending her
   relationship with the married George Henry Lewes.

Biography

   Mary Anne Evans was the third child of Robert and Christiana Evans (née
   Pearson). When born, Mary Anne, often shortened to Marian, had two
   teenage siblings, a half-brother and sister from her father's previous
   marriage to Harriet Poynton. Robert Evans was the manager of the Arbury
   Hall Estate for the Newdigate family in Warwickshire, and Mary Anne was
   born on the estate at South Farm, Arbury, near Nuneaton. In early 1820
   the family moved to a house named Griff, part way between Nuneaton and
   Coventry.

   The young Mary Anne was obviously intelligent, and due to her father's
   important role on the estate, she was allowed access to the library of
   Arbury Hall, which greatly aided her education and breadth of learning.
   Her classical education left its mark; Christopher Stray has observed
   that "George Eliot's novels draw heavily on Greek literature (only one
   of her books can be printed without the use of a Greek font), and her
   themes are often influenced by Greek tragedy" (Classics Transformed, p.
   81). Her frequent visits also allowed her to contrast the wealth in
   which the local landowner lived with the lives of the often much poorer
   people on the estate, and different lives lived in parallel would
   reappear in many of her works. The other important early influence in
   her life was religion. She was brought up within a narrow low church
   Anglican family, but at that time the Midlands was an area with many
   religious dissenters, and those beliefs formed part of her education.
   She boarded at schools in Attleborough, Nuneaton and Coventry. At the
   second she was taught by the evangelical Maria Lewis—-to whom her
   earliest surviving letters are addressed—-and at the Coventry school
   she received instruction from Baptist sisters.

   In 1836 her mother died and Mary Anne returned home to act as
   housekeeper, but she continued her education with a private tutor and
   advice from Maria Lewis. It was while she was acting as the family's
   housekeeper that she invented the Marmalade Brompton cake. She passed
   the recipe to a local baker who produced it on a commercial basis and,
   for a while, it was the most popular cake in England. When she was 21,
   her brother Isaac married and took over the family home, so Mary Anne
   and her father moved to Foleshill near Coventry. The closeness to
   Coventry society brought new influences, most notably those of Charles
   and Cara Bray. Charles Bray had become rich as a ribbon manufacturer
   and had used his wealth in building schools and other philanthropic
   causes. He was a freethinker in religious matters, a progressive in
   politics, and his home Rosehill was a haven for people who held and
   debated radical views. The people whom the young woman met at the
   Brays' house included Robert Owen, Herbert Spencer, Harriet Martineau
   and Ralph Waldo Emerson. Through this society, Mary Anne was introduced
   to more liberal theologies, many of which cast doubt on the
   supernatural elements of Biblical stories, and she stopped going to
   church. This caused a rift between her and her family, with her father
   threatening to throw her out, although that did not happen. Instead,
   she respectably attended church and continued to keep house for him
   until his death in 1849. Her first major literary work was the
   translation of David Strauss' Life of Jesus ( 1846), which she
   completed after it was begun by another member of the Rosehill circle.

   Before her father's death, she travelled to Switzerland with the Brays,
   and on her return moved to London with the intent of becoming a writer
   and calling herself Marian Evans. She stayed at the house of John
   Chapman, the radical publisher whom she had met at Rosehill and who had
   printed her translation. Chapman had recently bought the campaigning,
   left-wing journal The Westminster Review, and Marian became its
   assistant editor in 1851. Although Chapman was the named editor, it was
   Marian who did much of the work in running the journal for the next
   three years, contributing many essays and reviews.
   She had a low forehead, a dull grey eye, a vast pendulous nose, a huge
   mouth full of uneven teeth and a chin and jawbone 'qui n'en finissent
   pas'... Now in this vast ugliness resides a most powerful beauty which,
   in a very few minutes, steals forth and charms the mind, so that you
   end, as I ended, in falling in love with her. Yes, behold me in love
   with this great horse-faced bluestocking. — Henry James
   She had a low forehead, a dull grey eye, a vast pendulous nose, a huge
   mouth full of uneven teeth and a chin and jawbone 'qui n'en finissent
   pas'... Now in this vast ugliness resides a most powerful beauty which,
   in a very few minutes, steals forth and charms the mind, so that you
   end, as I ended, in falling in love with her. Yes, behold me in love
   with this great horse-faced bluestocking.
   — Henry James

   Women writers were not uncommon at the time, but Marian's role at the
   head of a literary enterprise was. Even the sight of an unmarried young
   woman mixing with the predominantly male society of London at that time
   was unusual, even scandalous to some. Although clearly strong minded,
   she was frequently sensitive, depressed, and crippled by self-doubts.
   She was well aware of her ill-favoured appearance, but it did not stop
   her from making embarrassing emotional attachments, including her
   employer, the married Chapman, and Herbert Spencer. Yet another highly
   inappropriate attraction would be much more successful and beneficial
   for Evans.

   The philosopher and critic George Henry Lewes met Marian Evans in 1851,
   and by 1854 they had decided to live together. Lewes was married to
   Agnes Jervis, but they had decided to have an open marriage, and in
   addition to having three children together, Agnes also had had several
   children with another man. As he was listed on the birth certificate as
   the father of one of these children despite knowing this to be false,
   and since he was therefore complicit in adultery, he was not able to
   divorce Agnes. In 1854 Lewes and Evans travelled to Weimar and Berlin
   together for the purposes of research. Before going to Germany, Marian
   continued her interest in theological work with a translation of Ludwig
   Feuerbach's Essence of Christianity and while abroad she wrote essays
   and worked upon her translation of Baruch Spinoza's Ethics, which she
   would never complete.

   The trip to Germany also doubled as a honeymoon as they were now
   effectively married with Marian now calling herself Marian Evans Lewes.
   It was not unusual for men in Victorian society to have mistresses,
   including both Charles Bray and John Chapman. What was scandalous was
   the Lewes' open admission of the relationship. On their return to
   England, they lived apart from the literary society of London, both
   shunning and being shunned in equal measure. While continuing to
   contribute pieces to the Westminster Review, Marian had resolved to
   become a novelist, and she set out a manifesto for herself in one of
   her last essays for the Review: Silly Novels by Lady Novelists. The
   essay criticised the trivial and ridiculous plots of contemporary
   fiction by women. In other essays she praised the realism of novels
   written in Europe at the time, and an emphasis on realistic
   story-telling would be clear throughout her subsequent fiction. She
   also adopted a new nom de plume, the one for which she would become
   best known: George Eliot. This masculine name was partly to distance
   herself from the lady writers of silly novels, but it also quietly hid
   the tricky subject of her marital status.

   In 1857 Amos Barton, the first of the Scenes of Clerical Life, was
   published in Blackwood's Magazine and, along with the other Scenes, was
   well received. Her first complete novel, published in 1859, was Adam
   Bede and was an instant success, but it prompted an intense interest in
   who this new author was. The Scenes of Clerical Life was widely
   believed to have been written by a country parson or perhaps the wife
   of a parson. With the release of the incredibly popular Adam Bede, the
   speculation increased markedly, and there was even a pretender to the
   authorship, Joseph Liggins. In the end, the real George Eliot stepped
   forward: Marian Evans Lewes admitted she was the author. The
   revelations about Eliot's private life surprised and shocked many of
   her admiring readers, but it apparently did not affect her popularity
   as a novelist. Eliot's relationship with Lewes gave her the
   encouragement and stability she needed to write fiction and ease her
   self-doubts, but it would take time before they were accepted into
   polite society. Acceptance was finally confirmed in 1877, when they
   were introduced to Princess Louise, the daughter of Queen Victoria, who
   was a reader of George Eliot's novels.

   After the popularity of Adam Bede, she continued to write popular
   novels for the next fifteen years. Her last novel was Daniel Deronda in
   1876, after which she and Lewes moved to Witley Surrey, but by this
   time Lewes' health was failing and he died two years later on 30
   November 1878. Eliot spent the next two years editing Lewes' final work
   Life and Mind for publication, and she found solace with John Walter
   Cross an American banker whose mother had recently died.
   George Eliot died at 4 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea.
   George Eliot died at 4 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea.

   On 6 May 1880 George Eliot courted controversy once more by marrying a
   man twenty years younger than herself, and again changing her name,
   this time to Mary Anne Cross. The legal marriage at least pleased her
   brother Isaac, who sent his congratulations after breaking off
   relations with his sister when she had begun to live with Lewes. John
   Cross was a rather unstable character, and apparently jumped or fell
   from their hotel balcony into the Grand Canal in Venice during their
   honeymoon. Cross survived and they returned to England. The couple
   moved to a new house in Chelsea but Eliot fell ill with a throat
   infection. This, coupled with the kidney disease she had been afflicted
   with for the past few years, led to her death on the 22 December 1880
   at the age of 61.

   She is buried in Highgate Cemetery (East), Highgate, London in the area
   reserved for religious dissenters, next to George Henry Lewes.

Literary assessment

   Eliot's most famous work, Middlemarch, is a turning point in the
   history of the novel. Making masterful use of a counterpointed plot,
   Eliot presents the stories of a number of denizens of a small English
   town on the eve of the Reform Bill of 1832. The main characters,
   Dorothea Brooke and Tertius Lydgate, long for exceptional lives but are
   powerfully constrained both by their own unrealistic expectations and
   by a conservative society. The novel is notable for its deep
   psychological insight and sophisticated character portraits.

   Throughout her career, Eliot wrote with a politically astute pen. From
   Adam Bede to The Mill on the Floss and the frequently-read Silas
   Marner, Eliot presented the cases of social outsiders and small-town
   persecution. No author since Jane Austen had been as socially conscious
   and as sharp in pointing out the hypocrisy of the country squires.
   Felix Holt, the Radical and The Legend of Jubal were overtly political
   novels, and political crisis is at the heart of Middlemarch. Readers in
   the Victorian era particularly praised her books for their depictions
   of rural society, for which she drew on her own early experiences, and
   she shared with Wordsworth the belief that there was much interest and
   importance in the mundane details of ordinary country lives. Eliot did
   not, however, confine herself to her bucolic roots. Romola, an
   historical novel set in late 15th century Florence and touching on the
   lives of several real persons such as the priest Girolamo Savonarola,
   displays her wider reading and interests. In The Spanish Gypsy, Eliot
   made a foray into verse, creating a work whose initial popularity has
   not endured.

   The religious elements in her fiction also owe much to her upbringing,
   with the experiences of Maggie Tulliver from The Mill on the Floss
   sharing many similarities with the young Mary Anne Evans' own
   development. When Silas Marner is persuaded that his alienation from
   the church means also his alienation from society, the author's life is
   again mirrored with her refusal to attend church. She was at her most
   autobiographical in Looking Backwards, part of her final printed work
   Impressions of Theophrastus Such. By the time of Daniel Deronda,
   Eliot's sales were falling off, and she faded from public view to some
   degree. This was not helped by the biography written by her husband
   after her death, which portrayed a wonderful, almost saintly, woman
   totally at odds with scandalous life they knew she had led. In the 20th
   century she was championed by a new breed of critics; most notably by
   Virginia Woolf, who called Middlemarch "one of the few English novels
   written for grown-up people". The various film and television
   adaptations of Eliot's books have re-introduced her to the
   wider-reading public.

   As an author, Eliot was not only very successful in sales, but she was,
   and remains, one of the most widely praised for her style and clarity
   of thought. Eliot's sentence structures are clear, patient, and well
   balanced, and she mixes plain statement and unsettling irony with rare
   poise. Her commentaries are never without sympathy for the characters,
   and she never stoops to being arch or flippant with the emotions in her
   stories. Villains, heroines and bystanders are all presented with
   awareness and full motivation.

Works

Novels

     * Adam Bede, 1859
     * The Mill on the Floss, 1860
     * Silas Marner, 1861
     * Romola, 1863
     * Felix Holt, the Radical, 1866
     * Middlemarch, 1871-72
     * Daniel Deronda, 1876

Other works

     * Translation of "The Life of Jesus Critically Examined" by David
       Strauss, 1846
     * Translation of "The Essence of Christianity" by Ludwig Feuerbach,
       1854
     * Scenes Of Clerical Life, 1858
          + Amos Barton
          + Mr Gilfil's Love Story
          + Janet's Repentance
     * The Lifted Veil, 1859
     * Brother Jacob, 1864
     * Impressions of Theophrastus Such, 1879

Poetry

   Poems by George Eliot include:
     * The Spanish Gypsy (a dramatic poem) 1868
     * Agatha, 1869
     * Armgart, 1871
     * Stradivarius, 1873
     * The Legend of Jubal, 1874
     * Arion, 1874
     * A Minor Prophet, 1874
     * A College Breakfast Party, 1879
     * The Death of Moses, 1879

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Eliot"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
