   #copyright

George W. Bush

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: USA Presidents

   George Walker Bush
   George W. Bush
     __________________________________________________________________

   43rd President of the United States
   Incumbent
   Assumed office
   January 20, 2001
   Vice President(s)   Dick Cheney
   Preceded by Bill Clinton
   Succeeded by Incumbent
     __________________________________________________________________

   Born July 6, 1946 (age 60)
   United States New Haven, CT, USA
   Political party Republican
   Spouse Laura Welch Bush
   Religion United Methodist
   Signature

   George Walker Bush (born July 6, 1946) is the current President of the
   United States, inaugurated on January 20, 2001 and re-elected in the
   2004 election. He was the 46th Governor of Texas from 1995 to 2000. A
   member of the politically influential Republican Bush family, he is the
   eldest son of the 41st U.S. President, George Bush, grandson of the
   former U.S. Senator from Connecticut, Prescott Bush, and elder brother
   to Jeb Bush, Governor of Florida.

   George W. Bush was president during the September 11, 2001 attacks and
   responded by declaring a global War on Terrorism. In early October 2001
   he ordered the invasion of Afghanistan to overthrow the Taliban and
   destroy Al-Qaeda. In March 2003, Bush ordered the invasion of Iraq,
   asserting that Iraq was in violation of UN Resolution 1441 regarding
   weapons of mass destruction and had to be disarmed by force. Following
   the overthrow of Saddam Hussein's regime, Bush committed the U.S. to
   establishing democracy in the Middle East, starting with Afghanistan
   and Iraq.

   A self-described "war president," Bush won re-election in 2004 after an
   intense and heated election campaign, becoming the first candidate to
   win a majority vote in 16 years. Since his re-election, he has received
   increasingly heated criticism, even from former allies, on the Iraq
   War, Guantánamo Bay and Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse scandals,
   as well as domestic issues such as federal funding of stem cell
   research, Hurricane Katrina, and controversies such as NSA warrantless
   surveillance activities and the Plame affair. According to polls of job
   approval rating, his popularity has significantly declined from its
   record heights after the September 11, 2001 attacks, which contributed
   to what Bush called the "thumping" of the GOP in the 2006 mid-term
   elections.

Early life

   Lt. George W. Bush while in the National Guard.
   Enlarge
   Lt. George W. Bush while in the National Guard.

   Born in New Haven, Connecticut, Bush was the first child of George H.
   W. Bush and his wife Barbara Bush. His paternal ancestors emigrated
   from Somerset in the West Country of England in the seventeenth
   century. Bush's parents moved from Connecticut to Texas when he was two
   years old. He was raised in Midland and Houston, Texas, with his four
   siblings, Jeb, Neil, Marvin, and Dorothy. Another younger sister,
   Robin, died in 1953 at the age of three from leukemia. Bush's
   grandfather, Prescott Bush, was a U.S. Senator, and his father served
   as U.S. President from 1989 to 1993. George W. Bush is sometimes
   mistakenly referred to as George Bush, Jr; this is not correct as his
   father is known as George H. W. Bush. His brother Jeb was twice elected
   governor of Florida.

   Bush attended Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts and, following
   in his father's footsteps, was accepted into Yale University, where he
   received a Bachelor of Arts degree in history in 1968. At the same
   time, he worked in various Republican campaigns, including his father's
   1964 and 1970 Senate campaigns in Texas. As a college senior, Bush
   became a member of the secretive Skull and Bones society. By his own
   characterization, Bush was an average student.

   In May 1968, at the height of the ongoing Vietnam War, Bush was
   accepted into the Texas Air National Guard. After training, he was
   assigned to duty in Houston, flying Convair F-102s out of Ellington Air
   Force Base. Throughout his political career, Bush has been criticized
   over his induction and period of service. Critics allege that Bush was
   favorably treated due to his father's political standing, and that he
   was irregular in attendance. Bush took a transfer to the Alabama Air
   National Guard in 1972 to work on a Republican senate campaign, and in
   1974 he obtained permission to end his six-year service obligation six
   months early to attend Harvard Business School, receiving an honorable
   discharge.

   There are a number of accounts of substance abuse and otherwise
   disorderly conduct by Bush from this time. Bush has admitted to
   drinking "too much" in those years and described this period of his
   life as his "nomadic" period of "irresponsible youth". On September 4,
   1976, at the age of 30, Bush was arrested for driving under the
   influence of alcohol near his family's summer home in Kennebunkport,
   Maine. He pleaded guilty, was fined $150, and had his driver's license
   suspended until 1978 in Maine. Bush was able to keep his drunk driving
   arrest a secret throughout his years as governor of Texas.

   After obtaining an MBA from Harvard University (Bush is the only US
   President to serve holding a Master of Business Administration degree),
   Bush entered the Oil industry in Texas. In 1977, he was introduced by
   friends to Laura Welch, a schoolteacher and librarian. After three
   months of courting, Bush married Laura and settled in Midland, Texas.
   His twin daughters, Jenna and Barbara, were born in 1981. Bush also
   left his family's Episcopal Church to join his wife's Methodist Church.
   Today, they are members of the congregation of the Highland Park United
   Methodist Church, near Dallas.
   George and Laura Bush with their daughters, Jenna and Barbara, in 1990.
   Enlarge
   George and Laura Bush with their daughters, Jenna and Barbara, in 1990.

   In 1978, Bush ran for the U.S. House of Representatives from the 19th
   Congressional District of Texas. Facing Kent Hance of the Democratic
   Party, Bush stressed his energy credentials and conservative values in
   the campaign. Hance, however, also held many conservative views,
   opposing gun control and strict regulation; he portrayed Bush as being
   out of touch with rural Texans. Bush campaigned hard and was an
   effective fundraiser, but lost by 6,000 votes. Hance later became a
   Republican and donated money to Bush's campaign for Governor of Texas
   in 1993.

   Bush returned to the oil industry, becoming a senior partner or chief
   executive officer of several ventures, such as Arbusto Energy
   ('arbusto' means bush in Spanish), Spectrum 7, and Harken Energy. These
   ventures suffered from the general decline of oil prices in the 1980s
   that had affected the industry and the regional economy, but he
   remained active through mergers, acquisitions and consolidations of his
   firms. Bush credits a reinvigorated faith in life as helping him
   abandon alcohol (in 1986), as well as to face other personal and
   professional difficulties. Bush began studying the Bible and Christian
   philosophy, and participating in church and community study groups.
   Following a personal meeting and exchange with Reverend Billy Graham,
   he became a born-again Christian.

   Bush moved with his family to Washington, D.C. in 1988, to work on his
   father's campaign for the U.S. presidency. With colleagues Lee Atwater
   and Doug Wead, he helped to develop and coordinate a political strategy
   for courting conservative Christians and evangelical voters, who were
   seen as key to winning the nomination and the election. Delivering
   speeches at rallies and fundraisers, Bush met with representatives of
   conservative and religious organizations on behalf of his father.

   Returning to Texas, Bush purchased a share in the Texas Rangers
   baseball franchise in April 1989, where he served as managing general
   partner of the Rangers for five years. He was active in the team's
   media relations and in securing the construction of a new stadium,
   which opened in 1994 as The Ballpark in Arlington. Bush actively led
   the team's projects and regularly attended its games, often choosing to
   sit in the open stands with fans. Bush's role with the Rangers gave him
   prominent media exposure and attention, as well as garnering public,
   business and political support. The Rangers were mostly successful
   while Bush was a leader of the organization. During his tenure, the
   Rangers acquired Hall-of-Fame pitcher Nolan Ryan, who was popular with
   the fans during the last years of his career. The team nearly won its
   first division title in 1994, before a strike shortened the season. In
   1989, Bush presided during the trade of the eventually famous Sammy
   Sosa to the Chicago White Sox. The eventual sale of Bush's share in the
   Texas Rangers brought him over $15 million from his initial $800,000
   investment.{{cn}

   George W. Bush is the first president to have run a marathon. Before
   running for governor of Texas he completed the 1993 Houston Marathon in
   3:44:52 for a pace of about 8:36/mile. He had been running since he was
   26, and before taking office, ran 15 to 30 miles a week.

   He is often referred to by the nickname "Dubya", playing on a
   stereotyped and generalized Southern pronunciation of the letter W.

Governor of Texas

   CAPTION: George W. Bush

   46^th Governor of Texas
     Term of office:    January 17, 1995 – December 21, 2000
   Lieutenant Governor: Bob Bullock, Rick Perry
       Predecessor:     Ann Richards
        Successor:      Rick Perry
          Born:         July 6, 1946
                        New Haven, Connecticut, USA
     Political party:   Republican
       Profession:      Businessman, politician
         Spouse:        Laura Bush

   With his father's election in 1988, speculation had arisen amongst
   Republicans that Bush would enter the 1990 gubernatorial election, but
   this was offset by Bush's purchase of the Rangers baseball team and
   personal concerns regarding his own record and profile. Following his
   success as owner and manager of the Rangers, Bush declared his
   candidacy for the 1994 election, even as his brother Jeb first sought
   the governorship of Florida. Winning the Republican primary easily,
   Bush faced incumbent Governor Ann Richards, a popular Democrat who was
   considered the easy favorite, given Bush's lack of political
   credentials.

   Bush was aided in his campaign by a close coterie of political advisors
   that included Karen Hughes, a former journalist who was his
   communications advisor; John Allbaugh, who became his campaign manager,
   and Karl Rove, a personal friend and political activist who is believed
   to have been a strong influence in encouraging Bush to enter the
   election. Bush's aides crafted a campaign strategy that attacked
   Governor Richards' record on law enforcement, her political
   appointments, and her support of liberal political causes. Bush
   developed a positive image and message with themes of "personal
   responsibility" and "moral leadership". His campaign focused on issues
   such as education (seeking more accountability for schools over student
   performance), crime, deregulation of the economy, and tort reform. The
   Bush campaign was criticized for allegedly using controversial methods
   to disparage Richards. Following an impressive performance in the
   debates, however, Bush's popularity grew. He won with 52 percent
   against Richards' 47 percent.

   As governor, Bush successfully sponsored legislation for tort reform,
   increased education funding, set higher standards for schools, and
   reformed the criminal justice system. Under his leadership, Texas
   executed 152 prisoners, more than under any other governor in modern
   American history; critics such as Helen Prejean argue that he failed to
   give serious consideration to clemency requests. School finance was
   considered a sensitive issue at the time by politicians and the press.
   The state financed its school system through property taxes. Seeking to
   reduce the high rates to benefit homeowners while increasing general
   education funding, Bush sought to create business taxes, but faced
   vigorous opposition from his own party and the private sector. Failing
   to obtain political consensus for his proposal, Bush used a budget
   surplus to push through a $2 billion tax-cut plan, which was the
   largest in Texas history and cemented Bush's credentials as a
   pro-business fiscal conservative.

   Bush also pioneered faith-based welfare programs by extending
   government funding and support for religious organizations providing
   social services such as education, alcohol and drug abuse prevention,
   and reduction of domestic violence. Governor Bush signed a memorandum
   on April 17, 2000 proclaiming June 10 to be Jesus Day in Texas, a day
   where he "urge[d] all Texans to answer the call to serve those in
   need." Although Bush was criticized for violating the constitutional
   separation of church and state ("Congress shall make no law respecting
   an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise
   thereof..."), his initiative was popular with most people across the
   state, especially religious and social conservatives.

   In 1998, Bush won re-election in a landslide victory with nearly 69% of
   the vote, becoming the first Texas governor to be elected for two
   consecutive four-year terms (before 1975, the gubernatorial term of
   office was two years).

2000 presidential election

   As one of the most popular governors in the nation, Bush was seen in
   the media and the Republican Party as a strong potential contender for
   the U.S. presidential election in 2000. Bush had personally envisioned
   running for the presidency since his re-election, and upon announcing
   his candidacy, he immediately became the Republican front-runner and
   raised the largest amount in campaign funds.

   Bush labeled himself a " compassionate conservative," a term coined by
   University of Texas professor Marvin Olasky, and his political campaign
   promised to "restore honour and dignity to the White House". Bush
   proposed lowering taxes in response to a projected surplus, while
   promising a balanced budget. He supported participation of religious
   charities in federally funded programs, and promoted education
   vouchers, national education reform, oil drilling in the Arctic
   National Wildlife Refuge, and structural changes to the United States
   armed forces. Bush's foreign policy campaign platform supported a
   stronger economic and political relationship with Latin America and
   especially Mexico, free trade and reduced involvement in "
   nation-building" and other minor military engagements indirectly
   related to U.S. interests. Bush also pledged to expand the National
   Missile Defense initiative and to reform Social Security and Medicare.

   Bush's campaign was managed by Rove, Hughes and Albaugh, as well as by
   other political associates from Texas. He was endorsed by a majority of
   Republicans in 38 state legislatures. After winning the Iowa caucus,
   Bush was handed a surprising defeat by U.S. Senator John McCain of
   Arizona in the New Hampshire primary. During his campaign, Bush was
   criticized for visiting the controversial Bob Jones University, which
   bore a reputation for a bias against Catholicism and a ban on
   interracial dating. Bush then won the South Carolina primary, severely
   crippling the momentum McCain had picked up with his win in New
   Hampshire. McCain countered by winning in Michigan. However, McCain
   inexplicably decided to criticize Pat Robertson and Jerry Falwell just
   before the Virginia primary, stirring the ire of religious
   conservatives. Bush went on to win the Virginia Primary and then, a
   week later, he captured nine of thirteen Super Tuesday state primaries,
   effectively clinching the Republican nomination. He chose Dick Cheney,
   a former U.S. Representative and Secretary of Defense, as his running
   mate. His campaign was endorsed by prominent Republicans such as Donald
   Rumsfeld and Colin Powell, who assumed roles as advisers on issues of
   national security and foreign relations. While stressing his successful
   record as governor of Texas, Bush's campaign attacked the Democratic
   nominee, incumbent Vice President Al Gore, over gun control and
   taxation. Bush criticized the Kyoto Protocol (although in 1998 the
   Senate vote to participate in the treaty was 0 for and 95 against),
   championed by Gore, citing the decline of the industries in the
   Midwestern states, such as West Virginia, and resulting economic
   hardships.

   In the televised Republican presidential debate held in Des Moines,
   Iowa on December 13, 1999, all of the participating candidates were
   asked "What political philosopher or thinker do you most identify with
   and why?" Unlike the other candidates, who cited former Presidents and
   other political figures, Bush responded, "Christ, because He changed my
   heart." Bush's appeal to religious values is believed to have aided his
   election, since those who said they "attend church weekly" gave him 56%
   of their vote in 2000 (and 63% of their vote in 2004).

   On election day, November 7, 2000, Bush won key midwestern states such
   as Ohio, Missouri, and Arkansas. He also clinched Gore's home state of
   Tennessee, New Hampshire, and the erstwhile Democratic bastion of West
   Virginia. Television networks initially called the state of Florida for
   Gore, then withdrew that projection and later called the state, along
   with the entire election, for Bush. Finally, it was declared that the
   results were too close to call. Sometime after the networks reported
   that Bush had won Florida, Gore conceded the election, and then
   rescinded that concession less than one hour later. The vote count,
   which favored Bush in preliminary tallies, was contested over
   allegations of irregularities in the voting and tabulation processes.
   Because of Florida state law, a state-wide machine recount was ordered.
   Although it narrowed the gap, the recount still left Bush in the lead.
   Eventually, four counties in Florida which had large numbers of
   presidential undervotes began a manual hand recount of ballots. On
   December 8, the Florida Supreme Court ruled that every county with a
   large number of undervotes would perform a hand recount. On December 9,
   in the Bush v. Gore case, the U.S. Supreme Court stopped the statewide
   hand recount. The machine recount showed that Bush had won the Florida
   vote - making it the 30th of the 50 states he carried. Despite having
   lost the nationwide popular contest by more than half a million votes,
   he won 271 electoral votes to Gore's 266. This made him the first
   President elected despite a popular vote loss since Benjamin Harrison
   in 1888.

First term

   President George W. Bush was regarded by his political opponents and
   many in the media as lacking a popular mandate, having lost the popular
   vote. Upon assuming office, Bush appointed Andrew Card as his Chief of
   Staff, Karl Rove as his political advisor and Karen Hughes as White
   House communications director. He appointed Colin Powell as Secretary
   of State, Paul O'Neill as Secretary of the Treasury, and Donald
   Rumsfeld as the Secretary of Defense.

   His appointment of former Senator John Ashcroft as Attorney General was
   intensely criticized by Democrats because of Ashcroft's opposition of
   abortion and support for social and religious conservative causes
   concerning gay rights and capital punishment. Despite this, Ashcroft
   was confirmed, and Bush was lauded by conservatives.

Domestic policy

   Bush signs the No Child Left Behind Act into law.
   Enlarge
   Bush signs the No Child Left Behind Act into law.

   On his first day in office, Bush moved to block federal aid to foreign
   groups that offered counselling or any other assistance to women in
   obtaining abortions. Bush also successfully pushed for the
   Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act, enacted in 2003 with some bi-partisan
   support but criticized by pro-choice groups as incursive on legalized
   abortion rights.

   Days into his first term, Bush announced his commitment to channeling
   more federal aid to faith-based service organizations. Bush created the
   White House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives to assist
   faith-based service organizations. Critics claimed that this was an
   infringement of the separation of church and state.

   Following a national controversy over the recognition of same-sex
   marriages in San Francisco and Massachusetts, Bush announced his
   opposition to the recognition of same-sex marriage, but supported
   allowing states to recognize civil unions. He endorsed the Federal
   Marriage Amendment to the United States Constitution, which would
   define marriage as a union between one man and one woman. This
   amendment failed to gain enough votes to pass.

   Bush staunchly opposes euthanasia. He supported Ashcroft's decision to
   file suit against the voter-approved Oregon Death with Dignity Act,
   which was ultimately decided by the Supreme Court in favour of the
   Oregon law. As governor of Texas, however, Bush had signed a law which
   gave hospitals the authority to take terminally ill patients off of
   life support against the wishes of their spouse or parents, if the
   doctors deemed it medically appropriate. This became an issue in 2005,
   when the President signed controversial legislation forwarded and voted
   on by only three members of the Senate to initiate federal intervention
   in the court battle of Terri Schiavo.

   Bush's domestic agenda carried forward themes of increased
   responsibility for performance from his days as Texas governor, and he
   worked hard to lobby the adoption of the No Child Left Behind Act, with
   Democratic Senator Ted Kennedy as chief sponsor. The legislation aims
   to close the achievement gap, measures student performance, provides
   options to parents with students in low-performing schools, and targets
   more federal funding to low-income schools. NCLBA has been a source of
   ongoing controversy. Critics argue that Bush has underfunded his own
   program, and Kennedy himself has claimed: "The tragedy is that these
   long overdue reforms are finally in place, but the funds are not." Many
   educational experts are critical of the reforms in question, claiming
   that NCLB allows some students to flee failing public schools instead
   of improving those schools. Others contend that NCLBA's focus on "high
   stakes testing" and quantitative outcomes is counterproductive. Bush
   increased funding for the National Science Foundation and National
   Institutes of Health in his first years of office, and created
   education programs to strengthen the grounding in science and
   mathematics for American high school students. However, funding for NIH
   failed to keep up with inflation in 2004 and 2005, and was actually cut
   in 2006, the first such cut in 36 years.

   Bush promoted increased de-regulation and investment options in social
   services, leading Republican efforts to pass the Medicare Act of 2003,
   which added prescription drug coverage to Medicare and created Health
   Savings Accounts, which would permit people to set aside a portion of
   their Medicare tax to build a "nest egg". The elderly group, AARP
   worked with the Bush Administration on the program and gave their
   endorsement. Bush said the law, estimated to cost US$400 billion over
   the first 10 years, would give the elderly "better choices and more
   control over their health care".

   In the wake of the Columbia space shuttle disaster, on January 14, 2004
   Bush announced a major re-direction for the National Aeronautics and
   Space Administration. Known as the Vision for Space Exploration, it
   calls for the completion of the International Space Station by 2010 and
   the retirement of the space shuttle while developing a new spacecraft
   called the Crew Exploration Vehicle under the title Project
   Constellation. The CEV would be used to return American astronauts to
   the Moon by 2018.

   President Bush supports stem cell research, but only to the extent that
   human embryos are not destroyed in order to harvest additional stem
   cells. His supporters see this as a principled stand for the rights of
   human embryos; one to which the President has remained true despite
   heavy criticism. In 2004, more than two hundred Republican and
   Democratic members of Congress sent President Bush a letter asking him
   to change the August 2001 Executive Order “that has crippled stem cell
   research in our country.” On February 27, 2004, after expressing
   disapproval of administration policy, Dr. Elizabeth Blackburn was
   removed from the President's Council on Bioethics, prompting
   allegations that President Bush had violated the Federal Advisory
   Committee Act of 1972, which requires committees to be “fairly balanced
   in terms of the points of view represented.” In response to this and
   other controversies, the Union of Concerned Scientists released a
   statement entitled Scientific Integrity in Policy Making: Further
   Investigation of the Bush Administration’s Misuse of Science.
   Meanwhile, the National Right to Life Committee has commended President
   Bush’s veto of the Stem Cell Research Enhancement Act, a bill that
   would have allowed the destruction of human embryos created via in
   vitro fertilization.

   Bush signed the Amber Alert legislation into law on April 30, 2003,
   which was developed to quickly alert the general public about child
   abductions using various media sources. On July 27, 2006 Bush signed
   the Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act which establishes a
   national database requiring all convicted sex offenders to register
   their current residency and related details on a monthly instead of the
   previous yearly basis. Newly convicted sex offenders will also face
   longer mandatory incarceration periods.

Economic policy

   President Bush talks on the phone with Vice President Dick Cheney while
   looking out a window of Air Force One, September 11, 2001.
   Enlarge
   President Bush talks on the phone with Vice President Dick Cheney while
   looking out a window of Air Force One, September 11, 2001.

   Facing opposition in Congress, Bush held town hall-style public
   meetings across the nation to increase public support for his plan for
   a $1.3 trillion tax cut. Bush and his economic advisers argued that
   unspent government funds should be returned to taxpayers. With reports
   of the threat of recession from Federal Reserve Chairman Alan
   Greenspan, Bush argued that such a tax cut would stimulate the economy
   and create jobs. In the end, five Senate Democrats crossed party lines
   to join Republicans in approving Bush's $1.35 trillion tax cut program
   — one of the largest in U.S. history.

   During his first term, Bush sought and obtained Congressional approval
   for two additional tax cuts: the Job Creation and Worker Assistance Act
   of 2002 and the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003.
   These acts increased the child tax credit and eliminated the so-called
   "marriage penalty." Arguably, cuts were distributed disproportionately
   to higher income taxpayers through a decrease in marginal rates, but
   the change in marginal rates was greater for those of lower income,
   resulting in an income tax structure that was more progressive overall.
   Complexity was increased with new categories of income taxed at
   different rates and new deductions and credits, however; at the same
   time, the number of individuals subject to the alternative minimum tax
   increased since it had remained unchanged.

   Under the Bush Administration, unemployment peaked at a high of 6.2% in
   June 2003, and is currently at a low of 4.4%. The economy has remained
   strong, with Wall Street setting several record highs and the GDP
   experiencing healthy growth . Critics argue that the economy, however
   strong, is only benefiting the wealthy, and not the majority of middle
   and lower-class citizens.

   Bush's imposition of a tariff on imported steel and on Canadian
   softwood lumber was controversial in light of his advocacy of free
   market policies in other areas; this attracted criticism both from his
   fellow conservatives and from nations affected. The steel tariff was
   later rescinded under pressure from the World Trade Organization. A
   negotiated settlement to the softwood lumber dispute was reached in
   April 2006, and the historic seven-year deal was finalized on July 1,
   2006.

Foreign policy

   Bush, President of the Palestinian Authority Mahmoud Abbas, and former
   Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon meet at the Red Sea Summit in
   Aqaba, Jordan on June 4, 2003.
   Enlarge
   Bush, President of the Palestinian Authority Mahmoud Abbas, and former
   Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon meet at the Red Sea Summit in
   Aqaba, Jordan on June 4, 2003.

   The Bush administration withdrew US support for several international
   agreements, including the Kyoto Protocol, the International Criminal
   Court, and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty (ABM) with Russia. It
   pursued a national missile defense which was previously barred by the
   ABM treaty and was never ratified by Congress. Bush publicly condemned
   Kim Jong-Il of North Korea, naming North Korea one of three states in
   an " axis of evil," and saying that "[t]he United States of America
   will not permit the world's most dangerous regimes to threaten us with
   the world's most destructive weapons." Within months, "both countries
   had walked away from their respective commitments under the U.S.-DPRK
   Agreed Framework of October 1994." Bush also boldly expressed U.S.
   support for the defense of Taiwan following the stand-off in March 2001
   with the People's Republic of China over the crash between an EP-3E
   American spyplane and a Chinese air force jet, leading to the detention
   of U.S. personnel. In 2003-04, Bush authorized U.S. military
   intervention in Haiti and Liberia to restore order and oversee a
   transition to democracy.

   Bush emphasized a "hands-off" approach to the conflict between Israel
   and the Palestinians in wake of rising violence and the alleged failure
   of the Clinton Administration's efforts to negotiate. Bush denounced
   Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat for his support of the violence and
   militant groups. But prompted by European leaders, he became the first
   American President to embrace a two-state solution in which an
   independent Palestine would exist side-by-side with Israel. Bush
   sponsored dialogs between Prime Ministers Ariel Sharon and Mahmoud
   Abbas but continued his boycott of Arafat. Bush also supported Sharon's
   unilateral disengagement plan, and lauded the democratic elections held
   in Palestine following Arafat's death.
   Philippine President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo with George W. Bush
   inspects the Malacanang Palace Honor Guards during the latter's 8-hour
   State Visit to the Philippines in October 2003
   Enlarge
   Philippine President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo with George W. Bush
   inspects the Malacanang Palace Honour Guards during the latter's 8-hour
   State Visit to the Philippines in October 2003

   In his State of the Union Address in January 2003, Bush outlined a
   five-year strategy for global emergency AIDS relief, the President's
   Emergency Plan For AIDS Relief. Bush announced $15 billion for this
   effort—$3 billion per year for five years—but requested less in annual
   budgets, though some members of Congress added amendments to increase
   the requested amounts. The emergency relief effort is led by U.S.
   Ambassador Randall L. Tobias, former CEO of Eli Lilly and Global AIDS
   Coordinator at the Department of State. At the time of the speech, $9
   billion was earmarked for new programs in AIDS relief for the 15
   countries most affected by HIV/AIDS, another $5 billion for continuing
   support of AIDS relief in 100 countries where the U.S. already had
   bilateral programs established, and an additional $1 billion towards
   the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. Almost one
   quarter of the $15 billion went to religious groups that tend to
   emphasize sexual abstinence over condom use. This budget represented
   more money contributed to fight AIDS globally than all other donor
   countries combined.

   Bush condemned the attacks by militia forces on the people of Darfur,
   and denounced the killings in Sudan as genocide. Bush said that an
   international peacekeeping presence was critical in Darfur, but opposed
   referring the situation in Darfur to the International Criminal Court.

War on Terror

   The September 11 terrorist attacks were a major turning point in Bush's
   presidency. Bush was visiting an elementary school in Florida when
   Chief of Staff Andrew Card informed him that a plane had crashed into
   the World Trade Centre in New York City. Following news of a second
   collision, Bush remained with the class for seven minutes while they
   finished reading a story. He then flew to air bases in Louisiana and
   Nebraska before returning to Washington, D.C. in the late afternoon.
   That evening, he addressed the nation from the Oval Office, promising a
   strong response to the attacks but emphasizing the need for the nation
   to come together and comfort the families of the victims. On September
   14, he visited the World Trade Centre site, meeting with Mayor Rudy
   Giuliani and firefighters, police officers and volunteers. In a moment
   captured by press and media, Bush addressed the gathering via megaphone
   from atop a heap of rubble:
   President Bush addresses rescue workers at Ground Zero in New York,
   September 14, 2001: "I can hear you. The rest of the world hears you.
   And the people who knocked these buildings down will hear all of us
   soon."
   Enlarge
   President Bush addresses rescue workers at Ground Zero in New York,
   September 14, 2001: "I can hear you. The rest of the world hears you.
   And the people who knocked these buildings down will hear all of us
   soon."


   George W. Bush

     I can hear you. The rest of the world hears you. And the people who
           knocked these buildings down will hear all of us soon.


   George W. Bush

   In a September 20, 2001 speech, President Bush condemned Osama bin
   Laden and al Qaeda, and issued the Taliban regime in Afghanistan an
   ultimatum to "hand over the terrorists, or ... share in their fate."

Afghanistan

   On October 7, 2001, U.S. and British forces initiated bombing campaigns
   that led to the November 13 arrival of Northern Alliance troops in
   Kabul. By December 2001, the UN had organized both the Bonn agreement,
   which instated the Afghan Interim Authority chaired by Hamid Karzai,
   and the ISAF, a multinational fighting force whose numbers and
   territory have since steadily increased.

   In 2003, after it became apparent that the Taliban was amassing new
   funds and recruits, NATO assumed ISAF control. By 2005, NATO had moved
   into western and southern parts of the country, and in 2006, requesting
   increased international cooperation, it announced expansion of
   operations to eastern Afghanistan.

   Large-scale offensives such as the 2006 Operation Mountain Thrust had
   limited success against a Taliban insurgency larger, fiercer, and
   better organized than expected. Bin Laden and the Afghan leader of the
   Taliban, Mohammed Omar, remained at large as of November 2006. In
   October 2006, NATO broadened security operations to include every
   province in the country. Foreign troops in the region numbered more
   than 41,000 in October 2006. In a September, 2006 address to the UN,
   President Bush pledged his continuing support for the Afghan people:
   "We'll help you defeat these enemies and build a free Afghanistan that
   will never again oppress you, or be a safe haven for terrorists."

Iraq

   Following the overthrow of the Taliban, President Bush also promoted
   urgent action in Iraq, stating that Iraqi President Saddam Hussein
   possessed weapons of mass destruction (WMD), and that in the post 9/11
   world it was too dangerous to allow unstable regimes to possess weapons
   that could "potentially fall into the hands of terrorists." Bush argued
   that Saddam, through his continued violation of the UN Cease Fire
   Agreement and UN Security Council Resolutions 687, 688, 707, 715, 986,
   1115, 1134, 1137, 1284, and 1373, was a threat to U.S. security,
   destabilized the Middle East, inflamed the Israeli-Palestinian
   conflict, and financed various terrorist organizations. Central
   Intelligence Agency reports asserted that Saddam Hussein had tried to
   acquire nuclear material, had not properly accounted for Iraqi
   biological weapons and chemical weapons material in violation of U.N.
   sanctions, and that some Iraqi missiles had a range greater than
   allowed by the UN sanctions.
   President Bush, with Naval Flight Officer Lieutenant Ryan Philips, in
   the flight suit he wore for his televised arrival and speech aboard the
   USS Abraham Lincoln in 2003.
   Enlarge
   President Bush, with Naval Flight Officer Lieutenant Ryan Philips, in
   the flight suit he wore for his televised arrival and speech aboard the
   USS Abraham Lincoln in 2003.

   Bush urged the United Nations to enforce Iraqi disarmament mandates,
   precipitating a diplomatic crisis. On November 13, 2002, under UN
   Security Council Resolution 1441, Hans Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei led
   UN weapons inspectors in Iraq. There was controversy over the efficacy
   of inspections and lapses in Iraqi compliance. UN inspection teams
   departed Iraq upon U.S. advisement given four days prior to the U.S.
   invasion, despite their requests for more time to complete their tasks.
   The U.S. initially sought a UN Security Council resolution authorizing
   the use of military force pursuant to Chapter VII of the United Nations
   Charter. Upon facing vigorous opposition from several nations
   (primarily France and Germany), however, the U.S. dropped the bid for
   UN approval and began to prepare for war; Benjamin Ferenccz, a former
   chief prosecutor of the Nuremberg Trials argued that for these actions
   Bush, with his Administration, could be prosecuted for war crimes. Kofi
   Annan, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, as well as leaders of several nations
   made similar statements, implying that the attack constitutes a war
   crime. The war effort was joined by more than 20 other nations (most
   notably the United Kingdom) who were designated the " coalition of the
   willing".

   The invasion of Iraq commenced on March 20, 2003, ostensibly to
   pre-empt Iraqi WMD deployment and remove Saddam from power, and was
   completed on May 1, 2003 when U.S. forces took control of Baghdad. The
   success of U.S. operations increased Bush's popularity, but the U.S.
   forces would be challenged by public disorder, as well as increasing
   insurgency led by pro-Saddam and Islamist groups. The Bush
   Administration was assailed in subsequent months following the report
   of the Iraq Survey Group, which, apart from a few stockpiles, did not
   find the large quantities of weapons that the regime was believed to
   possess. On December 14, 2005, while discussing the WMD issue, Bush
   stated that "It is true that much of the intelligence turned out to be
   wrong." Bush would nevertheless remain unwavering when asked if the war
   had been worth it, or whether he would have made the same decision if
   he had known more. U.S. efforts in Iraq would become the centrepiece of
   Bush's expressed vision to promote democracy as a means to discourage
   and defeat terrorists, by removing radical regimes and fostering social
   and economic development. However a 2006 National Intelligence Estimate
   (a consensus report of the heads of 16 U.S. intelligence agencies)
   asserted that the Iraq war had increased Islamic radicalism and
   worsened the terror threat. Bush and his top officials told early
   October 2006 that the United States must press on with war in Iraq.
   They accuse critics, including some Democrats, who call for a U.S.
   troop pullout or a timetable for withdrawal, of advocating a policy of
   'cut-and-run'.

   On October 21, 2006, Bush held a video teleconference with Vice
   President Cheney and military commanders in the Roosevelt Room of the
   White House, to discuss the Iraq War. Bush admitted that there were
   strategic mistakes made in regards to the stability of Iraq and would
   modify plans but not the overall strategy.

   On November 28, 2006, facing mounting criticism for his Iraq war
   policy, Bush told the NATO Summit 2006 in Latvia that "We'll continue
   to be flexible, and we'll make the changes necessary to succeed. But
   there's one thing I'm not going to do: I'm not going to pull our troops
   off the battlefield before the mission is complete."

Campaign for re-election

   George W. Bush speaks at a campaign rally in 2004.
   Enlarge
   George W. Bush speaks at a campaign rally in 2004.

   Bush commanded broad support in the Republican Party and did not
   encounter a primary challenge. He appointed Kenneth Mehlman as campaign
   manager, and the campaign political strategy was devised by Karl Rove.
   Bush outlined a 2004 agenda that included a strong commitment in the
   wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, a renewal of the USA PATRIOT Act, making
   the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts permanent, cutting the budget deficit in
   half, promoting education, tort reform, social security and national
   tax reform. Bush emphasized his social conservatism by arguing for the
   Federal Marriage Amendment. In most of his speeches, Bush also stressed
   a vision and commitment for spreading freedom and democracy across the
   world.

   Having had great success at fundraising, the campaign began running
   television and radio advertisement campaigns across the nation against
   Democratic candidates, including Bush's emerging opponent,
   Massachusetts Senator John Kerry. Kerry and other Democrats attacked
   Bush on the conduct of the war in Iraq, perceived excesses of the USA
   PATRIOT Act and for allegedly failing to stimulate the economy and job
   growth, as well as controversies surrounding Bush's service in the
   National Guard. Bush emphasized his leadership in war and national
   security challenges, evoking the patriotism and passion aroused by the
   9/11 terrorist attacks. The Bush campaign portrayed Kerry as a staunch
   liberal who would raise taxes, increase the size of government, and
   fail to oppose a constitutional amendment banning same-sex marriage.
   The Bush campaign continuously criticized Kerry's allegedly
   contradictory statements on the war in Iraq, and claimed Kerry lacked
   the decisiveness and vision necessary for success in the war on
   terrorism. Popular politicians such as Rudy Guiliani, John McCain,
   Arnold Schwarzenegger, and conservative Democrat Zell Miller campaigned
   actively for Bush, who traveled across the country delivering speeches
   at three to four different locations on most days. The campaign
   organized a large group of volunteers and focused its efforts on swing
   states such as Ohio, Pennsylvania, Florida, Wisconsin, Michigan and
   Minnesota. Bush carried 31 of 50 states for a total of 286 Electoral
   College votes.

Cabinet

   President Bush meeting with his Cabinet at the White House.
   Enlarge
   President Bush meeting with his Cabinet at the White House.
   Office Name Term
   President George W. Bush 2001—
   Vice President Richard B. Cheney 2001—
   Sec. of State Colin L. Powell 2001–2005
   Condoleezza Rice 2005—
   Sec. of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld 2001—
   Robert Gates not in office (Secretary-designate)
   Sec. of the Treasury Paul H. O'Neill 2001–2003
   John W. Snow 2003–2006
   Henry M. Paulson 2006—
   Attorney General John D. Ashcroft 2001–2005
   Alberto R. Gonzales 2005—
   Sec. of the Interior Gale A. Norton 2001–2006
   Dirk Kempthorne 2006—
   Sec. of Agriculture Ann M. Veneman 2001–2005
   Michael O. Johanns 2005—
   Sec. of Commerce Donald L. Evans 2001–2005
   Carlos M. Gutierrez 2005—
   Sec. of Labor Elaine L. Chao 2001—
   Sec. of HHS Tommy G. Thompson 2001–2005
   Michael O. Leavitt 2005—
   Sec. of HUD Melquiades R. Martinez 2001–2003
   Alphonso R. Jackson 2004—
   Sec. of Transportation Norman Y. Mineta 2001–2006
   Mary Peters 2006—
   Sec. of Energy E. Spencer Abraham 2001–2005
   Samuel W. Bodman 2005—
   Sec. of Education Roderick R. Paige 2001–2005
   Margaret Spellings 2005—
   Sec. of Veterans Affairs Anthony J. Principi 2001–2005
   R. James Nicholson 2005—
   Sec. of Homeland Security Thomas J. Ridge 2003–2005
   Michael Chertoff 2005—

Second term

   Bush sworn into his second term on January 20, 2005 by Chief Justice
   William Rehnquist, watched on by First Lady Laura Bush and their
   daughters Barbara and Jenna Bush, as well as Senate Majority Leader
   Bill Frist and Speaker of the House Dennis Hastert.
   Enlarge
   Bush sworn into his second term on January 20, 2005 by Chief Justice
   William Rehnquist, watched on by First Lady Laura Bush and their
   daughters Barbara and Jenna Bush, as well as Senate Majority Leader
   Bill Frist and Speaker of the House Dennis Hastert.

   Bush won re-election in 2004 after an intense and heated election
   campaign, becoming the first candidate to win a majority vote in 16
   years. Bush was inaugurated for his second term on January 20, 2005.
   The oath of office was administered by Chief Justice William Rehnquist.
   Bush's inaugural address centered mainly on a theme of spreading
   freedom and democracy around the world:

   We are led, by events and common sense, to one conclusion: The survival
   of liberty in our land increasingly depends on the success of liberty
   in other lands. The best hope for peace in our world is the expansion
   of freedom in all the world...The great objective of ending tyranny is
   the concentrated work of generations. The difficulty of the task is no
   excuse for avoiding it....From the viewpoint of centuries, the
   questions that come to us are narrowed and few. Did our generation
   advance the cause of freedom? And did our character bring credit to
   that cause?

   For his second term, Bush assembled what is regarded as one of the most
   diverse U.S. cabinets in history, with the appointments of the first
   Hispanic American U.S. Attorney General and Commerce Secretary, as well
   as making Condoleezza Rice the first African American woman to head the
   U.S. State Department. Bush retained Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld,
   whose dismissal had been demanded by many in the U.S. Congress. During
   a visit to the Republic of Georgia on May 10, 2005, Vladimir Arutinian
   attempted to assassinate Bush. Arutinian threw a grenade which
   eventually landed in the large crowd some 18.6 meters (61 feet) from
   the podium where Bush was delivering a speech, but failed to detonate.

   In August 2005, with his nomination of the controversial John Bolton as
   U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations filibustered by the Senate, Bush
   took the rarely-used expedient of installing him via a recess
   appointment. Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid criticized this action
   as an abuse of Presidential power.

   In 2006, Bush replaced long-time chief of staff Andrew Card with Joshua
   Bolten and undertook major staff and cabinet changes with the stated
   intention of revitalizing his Administration.

   In November 2006, Bush announced plans to replace Secretary of Defense
   Donald Rumsfeld with former CIA Director Robert Gates, in response to
   pressure from the midterm elections and military publications.

   Since his re-election, he has received criticism, even from former
   allies, on the Iraq War, prisoner detention at Camp X-Ray on Guantanamo
   Bay Naval Base, the Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse scandals, and
   the practice of extraordinary rendition, as well as domestic issues
   such as federal funding of stem cell research, Hurricane Katrina, and
   controversies such as NSA warrantless surveillance activities and the
   Plame affair. According to polls of job approval rating, his popularity
   has significantly declined from its record heights after the September
   11, 2001 attacks, which contributed to what Bush called the "thumping"
   of the GOP in the 2006 mid-term elections.

Domestic policy

   Bush in the U.S. Congress to deliver the 2006 State of the Union
   Address.
   Enlarge
   Bush in the U.S. Congress to deliver the 2006 State of the Union
   Address.

   President Bush began his second term by outlining a major initiative to
   reform Social Security, which was facing record deficit projections
   beginning in 2005. Bush made it the centerpiece of his agenda despite
   contrary beliefs in the media and in the U.S. Congress, which saw the
   program as the " third rail of politics," with the American public
   being suspicious of any attempt to change it. It was also widely
   believed to be the province of the Democratic Party, with Republicans
   in the past having been accused of efforts to dismantle or privatize
   it. In his 2005 State of the Union Address, Bush discussed the
   allegedly impending bankruptcy of the program and attacked political
   inertia against reform. He proposed options to permit Americans to
   divert a portion of their Social Security tax (FICA) into secured
   investments, creating a "nest egg" that he claimed would enjoy steady
   growth. Despite emphasizing safeguards and remaining open to other
   plans, Bush's proposal was criticized for its high cost, and Democrats
   attacked it as an effort to partially privatize the system, and for
   leaving Americans open to the whims of the market. Bush embarked on a
   60-day national tour, campaigning vigorously for his initiative in
   media events ("Conversations on Social Security") in a largely
   unsuccessful attempt to gain support from the general public. According
   to at least one poll, Bush failed to convince the public that the
   Social Security program was in crisis.
   President George W. Bush and Laura Bush look over the World Trade
   Center site during a visit to Ground Zero in New York City to mark the
   fifth anniversary of the September 11th terrorist attacks.
   Enlarge
   President George W. Bush and Laura Bush look over the World Trade
   Centre site during a visit to Ground Zero in New York City to mark the
   fifth anniversary of the September 11th terrorist attacks.

   In 2006, Bush somewhat shifted focus to re-emphasize immediate and
   comprehensive immigration reform. Going beyond calls from Republicans
   and conservatives to secure the border, Bush demanded that Congress
   create a "temporary guest-worker program" to allow more than 12 million
   illegal immigrants to obtain legal status. Bush continues to argue that
   the lack of legal status denies the protections of U.S. laws to
   millions of people who face dangers of poverty and exploitation, and
   penalizes employers despite a demand for immigrant labor. On May 15,
   2006, Bush proposed expanding "Basic Pilot," an online system to allow
   employers to easily confirm the eligibility of new hires; creating a
   new identification card for all foreign workers; and increasing
   penalties for businesses that violate immigration laws. Bush urged
   Congress to provide additional funding for border security, and
   committed to deploying 6,000 National Guard troops to the United
   States-Mexico border.

   On June 15, 2006, Bush created the 75th, and largest, National Monument
   in U.S. history and the largest Marine Protected Area in the world with
   the formation of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands National Monument.

   On July 19, 2006, Bush used the first veto of his presidency against
   the Stem Cell Research Enhancement Act. The bill would have granted
   federal funding to scientists engaging in stem cell research derived
   from discarded human embryos, and would have overridden the president's
   policy of only allowing federal funding of research on 21 stem cell
   lines that existed prior to 2001.

   In 2005-06, Bush emphasized the need for comprehensive energy reform
   and proposed increased funding for research and development of
   renewable sources of energy such as hydrogen power, nuclear power,
   ethanol and clean coal technologies. Bush proposed the American
   Competitiveness Initiative which seeks to support increasing
   competitiveness of the U.S. economy, with greater development of
   advanced technologies, as well as greater education and support for
   American students.

   Bush appointed First Lady Laura Bush to oversee an initiative to
   improve opportunities and education for inner-city boys.

   On August 1, 2005, in response to a question about teaching intelligent
   design in public schools, Bush seemed to endorse the intelligent design
   movement's Teach the Controversy approach. He answered, "I think that
   part of education is to expose people to different schools of thought."
   The National Academy of Sciences and the established scientific
   community regard this stance as politically motivated. These groups
   point out that intelligent design is based on the religious concepts
   found in creationism, and does not constitute valid science.

   On August 17, 2006 Bush signed the Pension Protection Act, which
   increased fines for companies that underpay money to Social Security,
   making such underpayments unprofitable.

   That same day, a U.S. district court judge in Detroit ruled that
   warrantless and otherwise congressionally unauthorized eavesdropping on
   telephone calls under the Terrorist Surveillance Program were
   unconstitutional. The judge agreed to place her ruling on hold pending
   an appeal.

   On 28 August 2006 Congress approved a bill that made the detainee
   interrogation program legal. The bill was in response to the Supreme
   Court's decision in June that the program is illegal. It was the second
   time Bush tried to approve it through Congress. Bush signed the bill
   into law on October 17, 2006 as the Military Commissions Act of 2006.

Hurricane Katrina

   One of the worst natural disasters in the nation’s history, Hurricane
   Katrina, struck early in Bush’s second term. Katrina was the
   sixth-strongest Atlantic hurricane ever recorded and the
   third-strongest landfalling U.S. hurricane on record. Katrina formed in
   late August during the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season and devastated
   much of the north-central Gulf Coast of the United States, particularly
   New Orleans.

   President Bush declared a state of emergency in Louisiana on August 27,
   and in Mississippi and Alabama on August 28. The eye of the hurricane
   made landfall on August 29. After the hurricane reached ground, Bush
   mobilized the Coast Guard and National Guard to help rescue the
   approximately 60,000 people stranded in New Orleans.

   Both local and federal governments were vehemently criticized for their
   response to Katrina, which was considered insufficient and
   disorganized. Criticisms of Bush focused on three main issues. First,
   leaders from both parties attacked the president for having appointed
   incompetent leaders to positions of power at FEMA, the Federal
   Emergency Management Agency, most notably Michael D. Brown. Second,
   many people argued that the inadequacy of the federal response was the
   result of the Iraq War and the demands it placed on the armed forces
   and the federal budget. Third, in the days immediately following the
   disaster, President Bush denied having received warnings about the
   possibility of floodwaters overflowing the levees protecting New
   Orleans. However, the presidential videoconference briefing of Aug. 28
   shows Max Mayfield warning the President that it was "obviously a very,
   very grave concern." Critics claimed that the President was
   misrepresenting his administration's role in what they saw as a flawed
   response.

Foreign policy

   President George W. Bush traverses Cross Hall in the White House with
   British Prime Minister Tony Blair to attend a press conference in the
   East Room in 2006 discussing the Middle east Crisis between Israel and
   Lebanon.
   Enlarge
   President George W. Bush traverses Cross Hall in the White House with
   British Prime Minister Tony Blair to attend a press conference in the
   East Room in 2006 discussing the Middle east Crisis between Israel and
   Lebanon.
   President George W. Bush, former President of Mexico, Vicente Fox and
   Canada's Prime Minister Stephen Harper stand in front of the Chichen
   Itza archaeological ruins March 30, 2006.
   Enlarge
   President George W. Bush, former President of Mexico, Vicente Fox and
   Canada's Prime Minister Stephen Harper stand in front of the Chichen
   Itza archaeological ruins March 30, 2006.

   Bush began his second term with an emphasis on improving strained
   relations with European nations. He appointed long-time advisor Karen
   Hughes to oversee a global public relations campaign to improve the
   image of the U.S. and significantly increased development aid to
   countries with a focus on encouraging democracy and human rights. Bush
   strongly lauded the pro-democracy struggles in Georgia and Ukraine and
   the election of Mahmoud Abbas as president of the Palestinian
   Authority. He led international pressure against Syria to withdraw
   troops from Lebanon. In March 2006, Bush visited India, leading to
   renewed ties between the two countries, particularly in areas of
   nuclear energy and counterterrorism cooperation. Bilateral relations
   between the U.S.A. on the one hand and Germany and Canada on the other
   also improved following the election of conservative governments in
   those countries. However, midway through Bush's second term, many
   analysts observed a retreat from his freedom and democracy agenda,
   highlighted in policy changes toward some oil-rich former Soviet
   republics in central Asia.

   Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan and Ilham Aliyev of Azerbaijan, both
   undemocratically elected and fiercely autocratic, received official
   state visits to the White House, along with increased economic and
   military assistance. The President had encouraged both leaders to hold
   free and fair elections early on in his second term, but in fact
   neither leader carried out significant reforms. The democratic election
   of the Hamas organization in the parliamentary elections of the
   Palestinian Territories, along with democratic gains in legislatures
   for the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt and Hezbollah in Lebanon, all of
   whom are seen as terrorist organizations by the United States, also
   contributed to a far less aggressive approach to democratic reform
   world-wide from the Bush administration. Reports in late 2006 suggested
   that pro-democracy groups across the Middle East had become
   "pessimistic about the prospects for meaningful reform."

   Iraqi elections and a referendum to approve a constitution were held in
   January and December 2005. Initial media reports of high voter turnout
   were overestimateda, and were later estimated at less than 50%. Since
   then, the fighting in Iraq escalated, and the country appeared to be on
   the brink of, if not already engaged in, civil war. Bush's leadership
   against global terrorism and in the war in Iraq met increasing
   criticism, with increasing demands within the United States to set a
   timetable to withdraw troops from Iraq. Sectarian violence and
   political deadlock in Iraq, and the deaths of more than 2,700 U.S.
   soldiers, increased negative impressions of Bush's leadership and the
   situation in Iraq. Allegations of abuse by U.S. troops accompanied
   calls from European and Asian leaders to shut down detention centers in
   Guantanamo Bay and elsewhere. Bush firmly defended his policies and
   progress in Iraq. He paid a surprise visit to Iraq following the death
   of terrorist leader Abu Musab al-Zarqawi and the appointment of a new
   government.

North Korea

   North Korea's October 9, 2006 detonation of a nuclear device further
   complicated President Bush's foreign policy, which centered for both
   terms of his presidency on "[preventing] the terrorists and regimes who
   seek chemical, biological or nuclear weapons from threatening the
   United States and the world." The reported test, which according to the
   IAEA Director General "creates serious security challenges not only for
   the East Asian region but also for the international community,"
   intensified criticisms that the President took neither military nor
   diplomatic measures to oppose North Korea's acquisition of WMD. These
   criticisms date back at least to the 2003 resignation of Special Envoy
   to North Korea Charles Pritchard, who claimed that "the Bush
   administration's refusal to engage directly with the country made it
   almost impossible to stop Pyongyang from going ahead with its plans to
   build, test and deploy nuclear weapons." On October 11, 2006, in his
   first extended press conference since the North Korean announcement of
   a nuclear detonation, President Bush contested the more specific
   criticism that his endorsement since the test of a policy of attempting
   "all diplomatic measures before we commit our military" in North Korea
   is an abandonment of his policy of military force in response to the
   potential threat of WMD-possession in Iraq. Posing to himself the
   pre-emptive, follow-up question, "why did you use military action in
   Iraq," President Bush responded, "And the reason why is because we
   tried the diplomacy." President Bush condemned North Korea's claim,
   reaffirmed his commitment to "a nuclear-free Korean Peninsula," and
   stated that "transfer of nuclear weapons or material by North Korea to
   states or non-state entities would be considered a grave threat to the
   United States," for which North Korea would be held accountable.

Criticism and public perception

   CBS News/New York Times Bush public opinion polling from February 2001
   to October 2006. Blue denotes "approve", red "disapprove", and gray
   "unsure". Large increases in approval followed the September 11 attacks
   and the beginning of the 2003 Iraq conflict.
   Enlarge
   CBS News/ New York Times Bush public opinion polling from February 2001
   to October 2006. Blue denotes "approve", red "disapprove", and gray
   "unsure". Large increases in approval followed the September 11 attacks
   and the beginning of the 2003 Iraq conflict.

   Time magazine named George W. Bush as its Person of the Year for 2000
   and 2004, hailing him as the most influential person for these two
   years. Bush began his presidency with approval ratings near 50%. In the
   time of national crisis following the September 11 attacks, Bush
   enjoyed approval ratings of greater than 85%, maintaining 80–90%
   approval for four months after the attacks. Since then, his approval
   ratings and approval of handling of domestic and foreign policy issues
   steadily dropped. Polls conducted in early 2006 showed an average of
   around 40% for Bush, up slightly from the previous September, but still
   historically low from a President coming off of his State of the Union
   Address, which generally provides a boost. As of November 5, 2006, an
   average of major polls indicated that Bush's approval rating stood at
   39.0%.

   At the beginning of his first term, Bush was regarded by some as
   lacking legitimacy due to his narrow victory in Florida and the
   attendant controversy surrounding his electoral college victory, which
   included accusations of vote suppression and tampering. Activist and
   filmmaker Michael Moore's 2004 movie Fahrenheit 9/11 accused Bush of
   using public sentiments following 9/11 for political purposes and lying
   about the cause for war in Iraq. Bush was also criticised in the
   international community: he was targeted by the global anti-war and
   anti-globalization campaigns, and criticized for his foreign policy.
   Bush's policies were also the subject of heated criticism in the 2002
   elections in Germany and the 2006 elections in Canada. and Bush was
   openly condemned by international leaders such as Gerhard Schröder,
   Jean Chrétien, José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, Romano Prodi, Paul Martin,
   and Hugo Chavez. Diplomatic visits made by Bush were accompanied by
   large-scale protests.
   George W. Bush answering a reporter’s question during a joint press
   availability with Prime Minister Tony Blair in the East Room of the
   White House, July 28, 2006. White House photo by Paul Morse
   Enlarge
   George W. Bush answering a reporter’s question during a joint press
   availability with Prime Minister Tony Blair in the East Room of the
   White House, July 28, 2006. White House photo by Paul Morse

   Bush enjoyed strong support among Americans holding conservative and
   pro-military views, and for the 2004 elections, 95-98% of the
   Republican electorate approved of him. This support waned, however, due
   mostly to Republicans' growing frustration with Bush on the issues of
   spending and illegal immigration. Many Republicans began criticizing
   Bush on his policies in Iraq, Iran and Palestine. Bush also enjoyed
   strong personal and working relationships with foreign leaders such as
   Tony Blair, John Howard, Junichiro Koizumi, Angela Merkel, Stephen
   Harper, and Ehud Olmert, as well as good rapport with Vladimir Putin
   and Vicente Fox. Here, tensions arose, such as the cooling of the
   relationship between Bush and Putin.

   From time to time, Bush's intellectual capacities were questioned by
   the news media and other politicians Detractors tended to cite the
   various linguistic errors made by Bush during his public speeches
   (colloquially known as Bushisms). Bush's habit of mispronouncing words
   received much ridicule in the media and in popular culture. Even as
   early as the 2000 presidential debates, this was the subject of a
   Saturday Night Live sketch (see Strategery).
   A mural of President Bush in West Belfast, Northern Ireland, depicting
   the local population's perception of his foreign policy and
   relationship with the British government.
   Enlarge
   A mural of President Bush in West Belfast, Northern Ireland, depicting
   the local population's perception of his foreign policy and
   relationship with the British government.

   In 2006 a majority of respondents in 18 of 21 countries surveyed around
   the world were found to hold an unfavorable opinion of Bush.
   Respondents indicated that they judged his administration as "negative"
   for world security. A poll taken in mid-September 2006 found that 48
   percent of Americans believed the war with Iraq had made the U.S. less
   safe, while 41 percent believed the war had made the U.S. safer from
   terrorism. Another poll showed that a majority of Americans, by a
   margin of 61 to 35 percent, believed that the United States was not
   better off because of Bush's policies. A poll conducted in Britain
   placed Bush at the second biggest "threat to world peace" right after
   Bin Laden, topping North Korean dictator Kim Jong-Il. According to a
   poll taken in November of 2006, Finns, as well as Britons, believed
   that Bush was the second biggest "threat to the world peace" after Bin
   Laden. Kim Jong-Il came 3rd in poll and Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and Hassan
   Nasrallah came joint fourth.

   Some people, such as Benjamin Ferencz, a chief prosecutor at the
   Nuremberg trials, expressed the view that Bush should be tried, along
   with Saddam Hussein, for starting a war of aggression, the supreme
   international crime under the Nuremberg Principles. Other experts also
   regarded the Bush Administration's decision to invade Iraq as
   illegitimate: "There was no authorization from the U.N. Security
   Council ... and that made it a crime against the peace," said Francis
   Boyle, professor of international law, who also said the U.S. Army's
   field manual required such authorization for an offensive war. However,
   historians point out that every permanent member of the U.N. Security
   Council has undertaken at least one war without the council's
   permission or endorsement, and no such authorization came from the U.N.
   in other U.S. led wars and/or interventions such as Vietnam, Haiti,
   Kosovo, Panama or Grenada, or for that matter President Jimmy Carter's
   attempt to rescue American hostages during the Iran Hostage Crisis.

Legislation and programs

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_W._Bush"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
