   #copyright

George Thomas Coker

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Military People

                    George Thomas Coker
   Born July 14, 1943
    Place of birth  Amarillo, Texas
      Allegiance    United States
   Years of service 1963–1986
         Rank       Commander
         Unit       Attack Squadron 65, USS Constellation
     Battles/wars   Vietnam War
        Awards      Navy Cross
                    Silver Star
                    Legion of Merit
                    Distinguished Flying Cross
                    Bronze Star (2)
                    Purple Heart (2)
                    POW Medal
      Other work    Distinguished Eagle Scout

   George Thomas Coker (born July 14, 1943) is a retired US Navy
   commander, honored with the Navy Cross for his leadership as a prisoner
   of war (POW) during the Vietnam War, and a Distinguished Eagle Scout
   noted for his devotion to Scouting.

   In 1966, the A-6 Intruder on which Coker was serving as
   bombardier–navigator was shot down over North Vietnam. He was held as a
   prisoner of war in the " Hanoi Hilton" and other camps for 6.5 years
   (1966–1973). After his release, he continued to serve in the Navy until
   his retirement in 1986. He also returned to active participation in
   Scouting.

Personal information

   George Coker was born in Amarillo, Texas in 1943. In 1951, his family
   moved to Linden, New Jersey, where he became a New Jersey high school
   state wrestling champion in the 142 lb weight class and played high
   school varsity football. Coker attended Rutgers University from
   1961–1963, where he also wrestled. While at Rutgers, he partipated in
   an aviation officer cadet program and was a commissioned an Ensign in
   the U.S. Navy. After his release from Vietnam, he returned to college
   to complete his degree. He graduated from the University of San Diego
   in 1976 with a BS in political science and then studied education and
   mathematics at Old Dominion University from 1982–1986. Coker is married
   and has two daughters and a son.

Scouting life

   George Thomas Coker after receiving his DESA award; August 9, 2005.
   Enlarge
   George Thomas Coker after receiving his DESA award; August 9, 2005.

   Coker grew up in Linden, New Jersey and became an Eagle Scout in Troop
   32 of Saint Elizabeth's Catholic Church in Linden on January 27, 1959.
   His passion for Scouting is one of the things that got him through his
   6.5 years as a POW in North Vietnam, and he states that it is what got
   him through his darkest days in the POW camps – to the point that at
   times all he could remember was the Scout Oath, but not even the names
   of his family members.

   Both of Coker's older brothers were involved in Scouting and Coker
   first became involved when he joined Cub Scouts in late 1951. He
   completed the Cubbing program and joined Troop 32. Troop 32 had about a
   dozen members at that time but had over 60 members when Coker made
   Eagle Scout in 1959. During this time the troop formed an Explorer Post
   and Sea Scout unit. After making Eagle Scout, Coker joined the Sea
   Scout unit and worked at summer camp before the joined the Navy in
   October 1963. When Coker returned to Linden after being released from
   captivity, the Scouts were his biggest supporter. Troop 32 now had over
   100 members. Local citizens turned out by the hundreds to greet him.
   Coker visited many of the local Scouting units. Coker was then inactive
   in Scouting during busy Naval career, but got involved again when his
   son joined Cub Scouts as a Tiger Cub after the family had settled in
   Virginia Beach, Virginia. He became the den leader of 7 boys, all of
   whom earned their Arrow of Light, the highest recognition in American
   Cub Scouts. They moved on to Troop 62, Virginia Beach, in May 1994;
   with five of them later becoming Eagle Scouts, including his son.

   Troop 62's adults asked Coker to become Scoutmaster, a position in
   which he served for several years. Coker is also a Vigil Honour member
   of the Order of the Arrow (OA). Coker began serving as the lodge
   adviser for the Blue Heron Lodge of the OA in December 2005. He was
   honored by the Boy Scouts of America with their Distinguished Eagle
   Scout Award on August 09, 2005.

Military service

   George Thomas Coker shortly after his release from the POW camps in
   North Vietnam; March 1973.
   Enlarge
   George Thomas Coker shortly after his release from the POW camps in
   North Vietnam; March 1973.

   Coker served as a naval aviation officer for 23 years in the U.S. Navy
   from 1963–1986. He was serving as a Bombardier–Navigator of an A-6A
   Intruder from squadron VA-65 operating from the USS Constellation
   (CV-64), when he and his pilot, John H. "Jack" Fellowes, were shot down
   over North Vietnam on August 27, 1966. He was not released until March
   4, 1973. During his captivity, he was, and still is, recognized as a
   leader of the POW resistance movement. Coker was one of the fiercest
   resistors of his captors. In a scene from the 1997 movie Faith of Our
   Fathers, a biography of Senator John McCain, McCain's character
   attempts to memorize the names of fellow POWs. Coker is one of the
   names he recites in the movie and book. A fellow POW, CDR Paul Galanti,
   said "George is one of my heroes...the real reason North Vietnam gave
   in (on the POW issue) was they wanted to get rid of George".

   Coker was considered one of "the baddest of the baddest" of the POWs, a
   reference to his fierce resistance to his captivity. Coker and Air
   Force Captain George McKnight (another of the "baddest") were cellmates
   for awhile and were the only POWs to ever escape from the Hao Lo Prison
   (" Hanoi Hilton"). They swam down the Red River, hid in the mud, and
   were recaptured 12 1/2 hours later. Coker received the Navy Cross for
   his action; the citation reads in part:

          ...for extraordinary heroism during an extremely daring escape
          from a solitary confinement cell while a Prisoner of War in
          Hanoi, North Vietnam on 12 October 1967. During a period of
          particularly harsh treatment, Lieutenant Commander Coker and
          another prisoner executed an escape as a two-man team despite
          the high risk of brutal reprisal or possible loss of life. That
          night, after opening the cell door by removing door bolt
          brackets from inside the room, he proceeded over the wall and
          through several blocks of housing to the Domer Bridge. Walking
          under the bridge to the Red River's edge, he swam downstream all
          night and at sunrise buried himself in a mudbank in an effort to
          remain concealed. He was later discovered, recaptured, severely
          beaten for many hours, and banished to solitary confinement for
          two and a half years.

   Vietnam–era POWs were released in order of capture. Fellowes and Coker
   were in the second large release group and were about #123 and #124. Of
   their 2,382 days in captivity (6.5 years), 2.5 years were in solitary
   confinement and 2.5 years in the "Hanoi Hilton". They also spent time
   in several other POW camps around Hanoi.

   Coker's return to his hometown after leaving Vietnam can be seen in the
   1974 documentary Hearts and Minds.

Military decorations

     * Navy Cross
     * Silver Star
     * Legion of Merit + Combat V
     * Distinguished Flying Cross
     * Bronze Star Medal, two, + Combat V
     * Purple Heart, two
     * Meritorious Service Medal
     * Air Medal, five
     * Navy Commendation, three, + Combat V
     * Combat Action Ribbon
     * Navy Unit Commendation
     * POW Medal
     * National Defense Service Medal
     * Vietnam Service Medal

In retirement

   In addition to continued Scouting activities, Coker has been involved
   in supporting ex-POWs for many years. In December 2004, he was elected
   Commander of his local POW chapter, the Tidewater ex-POW Association.
   Coker and his wife are also active in church and civic activities, such
   as counseling young married couples.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Thomas_Coker"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
