   #copyright

Georgia (country)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; European
Countries

   საქართველო
   Georgia

   Flag of Georgia (country) Coat of arms of Georgia (country)
   Flag                      Coat of arms
   Motto: ძალა ერთობაშია  ( Georgian)
   "Strength is in Unity"
   Anthem: Tavisupleba  ("Freedom")
   Location of Georgia (country)
   Capital
   (and largest city) Tbilisi
   41°43′N 44°47′E
   Official languages Georgian
   Government Unitary republic
    - President Mikheil Saakashvili
    - Prime Minister Zurab Noghaideli
   Consolidation
    - Establishment of first Georgian Kingdoms of Colchis and Iberia c.
   2000 BC
    - Establishment of unified Georgian Kingdom 1008 AD
    - Establishment of Democratic Republic of Georgia May 26, 1918
    - Independence from the Soviet Union
    - Declared March 11, 1990
    - Recognized September 6, 1991
    - Completed December 25, 1991
   Area
    - Total 69,700 km² ( 121st)
   26,912 sq mi
   Population
    - 2005 estimate 4,474,404 ( 117th^1)
    - Density 64/km² ( 129)
   166/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total $15.5 billion ( 122nd)
    - Per capita $3,616 ( 120th)
   HDI  (2003) 0.732 (medium) ( 100th)
   Currency Lari (ლ) ( GEL)
   Time zone MSK ( UTC+3)
    - Summer ( DST) MSD ( UTC+4)
   Internet TLD .ge
   Calling code +995
   ^1 Population figure excludes Abkhazia and South Ossetia.

   Georgia ( Georgian: საქართველო, transliterated as Sakartvelo), known
   officially from 1990 to 1995 as the Republic of Georgia, is a country
   in Eurasia to the east of the Black Sea, most of which is located in
   the South Caucasus, while a portion of the territory lies in the North
   Caucasus. It shares borders with Russia in the north and Turkey,
   Armenia, and Azerbaijan in the south.

   Georgia is a unitary, emerging liberal democratic nation-state with an
   ancient historical and cultural heritage. Georgian civilization
   stretches back for more than three thousand years of history with an
   exclusive literary and artistic heritage. Culturally, historically, and
   politically Georgia is considered part of Europe; however, the official
   geographic classification of the country varies according to different
   sources. Sometimes Georgia is considered a transcontinental nation.

   The English name Georgia is a transliteration of the Hellenistic term (
   Greek: Γεωργία) derived from Georgios ( Greek: Γεώργιος), a Greek name
   meaning "farmer"; Georgia here is indicative of a farmland. Georgians
   used the Greek and Aramaic alphabets before adopting the Georgian
   alphabet, reformed by King Pharnavaz I of Iberia, which is not directly
   related to any other alphabet in the world. In 337, Christianity was
   declared the official state religion in the ancient Georgian Kingdom of
   Iberia, making Georgia the second oldest country after Armenia (301) to
   declare Christianity its official state religion. The Bible was
   translated into Georgian in the 5th century.

   Geographically, Georgia is diverse and its natural resources are
   abundant. The mixture of Alpine zone in the Caucasus mountains and the
   subtropical Black Sea coast of western Georgia attracts many tourists,
   because the country is considered both an excellent ski resort and an
   excellent sea resort. Georgia has one of the most ancient wine-making
   traditions in the world. Georgian wine is characterized as naturally
   semi-sweet and very competitive to French, Spanish and other Western
   European wines and is well known around the world, especially in
   Eastern Europe. Georgia has been called the birthplace of wine, due to
   archeological findings which indicate wine production back to 5000 B.C.

History

   The recorded history of Georgia dates back more than 4,000 years.

Antiquity

   Two Georgian Kingdoms of late antiquity, known to Greece and Rome as
   Iberia in the east of the country and Colchis in the west, were among
   the first nations in the region to adopt Christianity (in 337 AD, or in
   319 AD as recent research suggests.). Colchis is the location of the
   Golden Fleece sought by Jason and the Argonauts in the Greek myth and
   may have derived from the local practice of using fleeces to sift gold
   dust from rivers. Known to its natives as Egrisi or Lazica, Colchis
   often saw battles between the rival power of Persia and the Byzantine
   Empire, both of which managed to conquer Western Georgia from time to
   time. As a result, those Kingdoms disintegrated into various feudal
   regions in the early Middle Ages. This made it easy for Arabs to
   conquer Georgia in the 7th century. The rebellious regions were
   liberated and united into the Georgian Kingdom at the beginning of the
   11th century. Starting in the 12th century the rule of Georgia extended
   over the significant part of the Southern Caucasus, including
   northeastern parts and almost entire northern coast of what is now
   Turkey.

Medieval

   Image:Geordavidjg1.jpg
   Kingdom of Georgia at the peak of her might, 1184-1225
   Enlarge
   Kingdom of Georgia at the peak of her might, 1184-1225

   The Georgian Kingdom, which was tolerant towards its Muslim and Jewish
   subjects (who had already been settled there for many centuries),
   reached its zenith in the 12th to early 13th centuries. This period has
   been widely termed as Georgia's Golden Age. The revival of the Georgian
   Kingdom was shortlived however, and the Kingdom was eventually
   subordinated by the Mongols in 1236. Thereafter, different local rulers
   fought for their independence from the central Georgian rule, until the
   total disintegration of the Kingdom in the 15th century. Neighbouring
   kingdoms exploited the situation and from the 16th century, the Persian
   Empire and the Ottoman Empire subordinated the eastern and western
   regions of Georgia, respectively.
   Tondo depicting Saint Mamas from the Gelati Monastery, 14th-15th
   centuries
   Enlarge
   Tondo depicting Saint Mamas from the Gelati Monastery, 14th-15th
   centuries

   The rulers of regions, which remained partly autonomous, organised
   rebellions on various occasions. Subsequent Persian and Turkish
   invasions further weakened local kingdoms and regions.

   As a result of wars against the neighbouring countries the population
   of Georgia was reduced to 250 000 inhabitants at one point .

Russian subjugation

   In 1783 Russia and the eastern Georgian kingdom of Kartli-Kakheti
   signed the Treaty of Georgievsk, according to which Kartli-Kakheti
   received protection by Russia. This, however, did not prevent Tbilisi
   from being sacked by the Persians in 1795.

   On December 22, 1800 Tsar Paul I of Russia, at the alleged request of
   the Georgian king George XII, signed the Proclamation on the
   incorporation of Georgia (Kartli-Kakheti) within the Russian Empire. On
   January 8, 1801 Tsar Paul I of Russia, signed a decree on the
   incorporation of Georgia (Kartli-Kakheti) within the Russian Empire
   which was confirmed by Tsar Alexander I on September 12, 1801. The
   Georgian envoy in Saint Petersburg reacted with a note of protest that
   was presented to the Russian vice-chancellor Prince Kurakin. In May
   1801 Russian General Carl Heinrich Knorring dethroned the Georgian heir
   to the throne David Batonishvili and deployed a government headed by
   General Ivan Petrovich Lasarev.

   The Georgian nobility did not accept the decree until April 1802 when
   General Knorring compassed the nobility in Tbilisi's Sioni Cathedral
   and forced them to take an oath on the imperial crown of Russia. Those
   who disagreed were arrested temporarily.

   In the summer of 1805 Russian troops on the river Askerani near Zagam
   defeated the Persian army and saved Tbilisi from conquest.

   In 1810, after a brief war, the western Georgian kingdom of Imereti was
   annexed by Tsar Alexander I of Russia. The last Imeretian king and the
   last Georgian Bagrationi ruler Solomon II died in exile in 1815. From
   1803 to 1878, as a result of numerous Russian wars against Turkey and
   Iran, several territories were annexed to Georgia. These areas (
   Batumi, Artvin, Akhaltsikhe, Poti, and Abkhazia) now represent a large
   part of the territory of Georgia.

   The principality of Guria was abolished in 1828, and that of Samegrelo
   (Mingrelia) in 1857. The region of Svaneti was gradually annexed in
   1857– 1859.

The Soviet period

   After the Russian Revolution of 1917, Georgia declared independence on
   May 26, 1918 in the midst of the Russian Civil War. The parliamentary
   election was won by the Georgian Social-Democratic Party, considered to
   be a party of Mensheviks, and its leader, Noe Zhordania, became the
   prime minister. In 1918 a Georgian-Armenian war erupted over parts of
   Georgian provinces populated mostly by Armenians which ended due to
   British intervention. In 1918-1919 Georgian general Mazniashvili led a
   Georgian attack against White Army led by Moiseev and Denikin in order
   to claim the Black Sea coastline from Tuapse to Sochi and Adler for
   independent Georgia. The country's independence did not last long,
   however. In February 1921 Georgia was attacked by the Red Army.
   Georgian troops lost the battle and the Social-Democrat government fled
   the country. On February 25, 1921 the Red Army entered the capital
   Tbilisi and installed a puppet communist government led by Georgian
   Bolshevik Filipp Makharadze. Georgia was incorporated into the
   Transcaucasian SFSR uniting Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan. The TFSSR
   was disaggregated into its component elements in 1936 and Georgia
   became the Georgian SSR.

   The Georgian-born communist radical Ioseb Jughashvili was prominent
   among the Russian Bolsheviks, who came to power in the Russian Empire
   after the October Revolution in 1917. Jughashvili was better known by
   his nom de guerre Stalin (from the Russian word for steel: сталь).
   Stalin was to rise to the highest position of the Soviet state and to
   rule ruthlessly.

   From 1941 to 1945, during the Second World War, almost 700,000
   Georgians fought as Red Army soldiers against Nazi Germany. (A number
   also fought with the German army). About 350,000 Georgians died in the
   battlefields of the Eastern Front. Also during this period the Chechen,
   Ingush, Karachay and the Balkarian peoples from the Northern Caucasus,
   were deported to Siberia for alleged collaboration with the Nazis. With
   their respective autonomous republics abolished, the Georgian SSR was
   briefly granted some of their territory, until 1957.

   The most radical expression of the progressive part of the society
   opposed to the Soviet system was the dissidential movement, which
   started in the 60s. Among the Georgian dissidents, the most prominent
   activist was Merab Kostava. He was arrested several times by the state
   security committee and served his term in Soviet jail.

   The Georgian Eduard Shevardnadze, the USSR's Georgian minister for
   foreign affairs, was one of the main architects of the Perestroika
   reforms of the late 1980s. During this period, Georgia developed a
   vigorous multiparty system which strongly favoured independence. The
   country staged the first democratic, multiparty parliamentary elections
   in the Soviet Union on October 28, 1990. From November 1990 to March
   1991, one of the leaders of the National Liberation movement, Dr. Zviad
   Gamsakhurdia, was the Chairman of the Supreme Council of the Republic
   of Georgia (the Georgian parliament).

Independence

   Georgian child holding the flag of Independent Georgia, Tbilisi, April
   10, 1989
   Enlarge
   Georgian child holding the flag of Independent Georgia, Tbilisi, April
   10, 1989

   Along their tradition, the Georgian people have been very conscious of
   their ethnic, linguistic and religious identity. It is therefore not
   surprising that, in the wake of the Gorbachevian Perestroika, the
   Georgian SSR was the first Soviet Republic to commence the struggle for
   national independence. The definite ‘no’ to Moscow's supremacy came on
   9 April 1989, when a peaceful demonstration in the Georgian capital
   Tbilisi ended in a massacre in which several people were killed by
   Soviet troops. This incident launched an anti-Soviet mass movement
   similar to those of the Baltic republics, soon shattered, however, by
   the infightings of its radical and liberal wings. Before the October
   1990 elections to the Georgian Parliament (Supreme Council) —the first
   polls in the USSR held on a formal multi-party basis—the political
   landscape was reshaped again. While the more radical groups boycotted
   the elections and convened an alternative forum (National Congress),
   another part of the anticommunist opposition united into the Round
   Table—Free Georgia (RT-FG) around the former dissidents like Merab
   Kostava and Zviad Gamsakhurdia. The latter won the elections by a clear
   margin, with 155 out of 250 parliamentary seats, whereas the ruling
   Communist Party (CP) received only 64 seats. All other parties failed
   to get over the 5%-threshold and were thus allotted only some
   single-member constituency seats.

   On April 9, 1991, shortly before the collapse of the USSR, Georgia
   declared independence. On May 26, 1991 Zviad Gamsakhurdia was elected
   as a first President of independent Georgia. However, Gamsakhurdia was
   soon deposed in a bloody coup d'etat, from December 22, 1991 to January
   6, 1992. The coup was instigated by part of the National Guards and a
   paramilitary organization called " Mkhedrioni" which allegedly was
   supported by Russian military units stationed in Tbilisi. The country
   became embroiled in a bitter civil war which lasted almost until 1995.
   Eduard Shevardnadze returned to Georgia in 1992 and joined the leaders
   of the coup — Kitovani and Ioseliani — to head a triumvirate called the
   “State Council”.

   In 1995 Shevardnadze was officially elected as a president of Georgia,
   and reelected in 2000. At the same time, two regions of Georgia,
   Abkhazia and South Ossetia, quickly became embroiled in disputes with
   local separatists that led to widespread inter-ethnic violence and
   wars. Supported by Russia, Abkhazia and South Ossetia achieved and
   maintained de facto independence from Georgia. More than 250,000
   Georgians were ethnically cleansed from Abkhazia by Abkhaz separatists
   and North Caucasians volunteers, (including Chechens) in 1992-1993.
   More than 25,000 Georgians were expelled from Tskhinvali as well, and
   many Ossetian families were forced to abandon their homes in the
   Borjomi region and move to Russia.

   In 2003 Shevardnadze was deposed by the Rose Revolution, after Georgian
   opposition and international monitors asserted that the November 2
   parliamentary elections were marred by fraud. The revolution was led by
   Mikheil Saakashvili, Zurab Zhvania and Nino Burjanadze, former members
   and leaders of Shavarnadze's ruling party. Mikheil Saakashvili was
   elected as President of Georgia in 2004. Restoring Georgia's
   territorial integrity, reversing the effects of ethnic cleansing and
   returning refugees to their home places were the main pre-election
   promises of Saakashvili's government.

   Following the Rose Revolution, a series of reforms was launched to
   strengthen the country's military and economic capabilities. The new
   government's efforts to reassert the Georgian authority in the
   southwestern autonomous republic of Ajaria led to a major crisis early
   in 2004. Success in Ajaria encouraged Saakashvili to intensify his
   efforts, but without success, in the breakaway South Ossetia.

   The country hosted an official visit from President George W. Bush in
   2005.

Administrative subdivisions

   Administrative division.
   Enlarge
   Administrative division.

   Georgia is divided into 9 regions, 2 autonomous republics (avtonomiuri
   respublika), and 1 city (k'alak'i). The regions are further subdivided
   into 69 districts (raioni).

   There are two autonomous republics, Abkhazia and Ajaria.

   Currently, the status of South Ossetia, a former autonomous
   administrative district, also known as the Tskhinvali region, is being
   negotiated with the Russian-supported separatist government. Kodori
   Gorge is the only part of Abkhazia that remains under nominal Georgian
   control.

   Major cities include: Batumi, Chiatura, Gagra, Gori, Kutaisi, Poti,
   Rustavi, Sokhumi, Tbilisi, Tkibuli, Tskaltubo, Tskhinvali.

   The Districts of Georgia are: Abasha, Adigeni, Akhalgori, Akhalkalaki,
   Akhaltsikhe, Akhmeta, Ambrolauri, Aspindza, Baghdati, Batumi, Bolnisi,
   Borjomi, Chiatura, Chkhorotsku, Chokhatauri, Dedoplistskaro, Dmanisi,
   Dusheti, Gagra, Gali, Gori, Gudauta, Gulripshi, Gurjaani, Java, Kareli,
   Kaspi, Kedi, Kharagauli, Khashuri, Khelvachauri, Khobi, Khoni, Khulo,
   Kobuleti, Kutaisi, Kvareli, Lagodekhi, Lanchkhuti, Lentekhi, Liakhvi,
   Marneuli, Martvili, Mestia, Mtskheta, Ninotsminda, Ochamchire, Oni,
   Ozurgeti, Poti, Rustavi, Sachkhere, Sagarejo, Samtredia, Senaki,
   Shuakhevi, Sighnagi, Sokhumi, Stepantsminda, Telavi, Terjola,
   Tetritskaro, Tianeti, Tkibuli, Tsageri, Tskhinvali, Tsalenjikha,
   Tsalka, Tskaltubo, Vani, Zestaponi, and Zugdidi.

Origin of the name

   Georgians call themselves Kartvelebi (ქართველები), their land
   Sakartvelo (საქართველო), and their language Kartuli (ქართული). These
   names are derived from a chief called Kartlos, said to be the father of
   all Georgians. According to the legend Kartlos was a son of Targamos,
   grandson of Biblical Japheth.
   Plaque portraying St George slaying the Dragon. 15th century cloisonné
   enamel on gold. 15X11,5 cm (National Art Museum of Georgia)
   Enlarge
   Plaque portraying St George slaying the Dragon. 15th century cloisonné
   enamel on gold. 15X11,5 cm (National Art Museum of Georgia)

   The foreign name Georgia, used in many languages of the world, is
   derived from Greek: George ( Greek: Γεωργ), a Greek name meaning a
   farmer and therefore Georgia ( Greek: Γεωργία) indicating a farmland.

   The Eastern World knows Georgians as Gurjs via the Arabic Jurj and
   Persian گرجی Gurji, which indicates farming like the Greek name George.
   The Persian designation for the Georgians, گرجی Gurji, is also the
   source of Turkish Gürcü (pronounced "Gürdjü") and Russian Грузин
   ("Gruzin"). The name of the country is Gorjestan in Persian, Gürcistan
   in Turkish, and Грузия in Russian ("Gruziya").

   Historically, the dominant province of Georgia was Kartli, also known
   as Iberia. Kartli or Iberia was the seat of Georgian government in most
   parts of Georgian history. The name Iberia is confusing the geographers
   of antiquity, because the historical relation between Caucasian
   Iberians and the Iberians from the Peninsula is not known.

   There is also another way to spell Iberia as Iveria influenced from
   Armenian words for Georgia, respectively the ancient form of Virk
   (Վիրք) and the modern Vrastan (Վրաստան). There are also lots of legends
   and theories about the name of the country and most of them are not
   historically proven and correct. The name Georgia has been mistakenly
   supposed to have come from the country's patron St. George. According
   to others, the name may be related to the Persian word for wolf (gurg),
   object of an old cult by the Caucasian peoples, hence Gorjestan - land
   of wolves. Yet another proposed etymology relates the Persian name to a
   PIE word meaning 'mountainous'.

Geography

   In the north, Georgia has a 723km common border with Russia,
   specifically with the Northern Caucasus federal district. The following
   Russian republics/subdivisions - from west to east - border Georgia:
   Krasnodar Krai, Karachay-Cherkessia, Kabardino-Balkaria, North
   Ossetia-Alania, Ingushetia, Chechnya, Dagestan. Georgia also shares
   borders with Azerbaijan (322 km.) to the south-east, Armenia (164 km.)
   to the south, and Turkey (252 km.) to the south-west.
   Medieval Monastery and city on the cliffs of Vardzia
   Enlarge
   Medieval Monastery and city on the cliffs of Vardzia

   Mountains are the dominant geographic feature of Georgia. The Likhi
   Range divides the country into eastern and western halves.
   Historically, the western portion of Georgia was known as Colchis while
   the eastern plateau was called Iberia. Due to a complex geographic
   setting, mountains also isolate the northern region of Svaneti from the
   rest of Georgia.

   The Greater Caucasus Mountain Range separates Georgia from the North
   Caucasian Republics of Russia. The southern portion of the country is
   bounded by the Lesser Caucasus Mountains. The main Caucasus Range is
   much higher in elevation than the Lesser Caucasus Mountains, with the
   highest peaks rising more than 5,000 meters (16,400ft.) above sea
   level.
   Kazbek in the Khokh Range
   Enlarge
   Kazbek in the Khokh Range

   The highest mountain in Georgia is Mount Shkhara at 5,201 meters
   (17,059 feet), and the second highest is Mount Janga ( Jangi-Tau) at
   5,051 meters (16,572 feet) above sea level. Other prominent peaks
   include Kazbegi ( Kazbek) at 5,047 meters (16,554 feet), Tetnuldi
   (4,974m./16,319ft.), Shota Rustaveli (4,960m./16,273ft.), Mt. Ushba
   (4,710m./15,453ft.), and Ailama (4,525m./14,842ft.). Out of the
   abovementioned peaks, only Kazbegi is of volcanic origin. The region
   between Kazbegi and Shkhara (a distance of about 200 km. along the Main
   Caucasus Range) is dominated by numerous glaciers. The Lesser Caucasus
   Mountains are made up of various, interconnected mountain ranges
   (largely of volcanic origin) that do not exceed 3,400 meters
   (approximately 11,000 feet). Prominent features of the area include the
   Javakheti Volcanic Plateau, numerous lakes, including Tabatskuri and
   Paravani, as well as mineral water and hot springs.

   The Voronya Cave (aka Krubera-Voronia Cave) is the deepest known cave
   in the world. It is located in the Arabika Massif of the Gagra Range,
   in Abkhazia, Georgia, Caucasus. The height difference in the cave is
   2,140 (± 9) metres. The same cave set the previous record for depth at
   1,710 metres in 2001 by a Russian-Ukrainian team. In 2004 the
   penetrated depth was increased on each of three expeditions. At that
   point the Ukrainian team crossed the -2000 m mark for the first time in
   the history of speleology. In October 2005, a new, unexplored part was
   found by CAVEX team, and the cave became even deeper. This expedition
   confirmed the depth of the cave which is now - 2,140 (± 9) metres deep.

   Major rivers in Georgia include the Rioni and the Mtkvari.

   Main cities:
   Map of Georgia
   Enlarge
   Map of Georgia
     * Tbilisi 1,066,100 (metro area 1,270,800)
     * Kutaisi 183,300
     * Batumi 116,900

Landscape

   The landscape within the nation's boundaries is quite varied. Western
   Georgia's landscape ranges from low-land marsh-forests, swamps, and
   temperate rain forests to eternal snows and glaciers, while the eastern
   part of the country even contains a small segment of semi-arid plains
   characteristic of Central Asia. Forests cover around 40% of Georgia's
   territory while the alpine/ subalpine zone accounts for roughly around
   10% of the land.

   Much of the natural habitat in the low-lying areas of Western Georgia
   has disappeared over the last 100 years due to the agricultural
   development of the land and urbanization. The large majority of the
   forests that covered the Colchis plain are now virtually non-existent
   with the exception of the regions that are included in the national
   parks and reserves (i.e. Paleostomi Lake area). At present, the forest
   cover generally remains outside of the low-lying areas and is mainly
   located along the foothills and the mountains. Western Georgia's
   forests consist mainly of deciduous trees below 600 meters (1,968 ft.)
   above sea level and comprise of species such as oak, hornbeam, beech,
   elm, ash, and chestnut. Evergreen species such as box may also be found
   in many areas. There are significant concentrations of endemic species
   of plants as well. The west-central slopes of the Meskheti Range in
   Ajaria as well as several regions in Samegrelo and Abkhazia are covered
   by temperate rain forests. Between 600-1,500 meters (1,968-4,920 ft.)
   above sea level, the deciduous forest becomes mixed with both
   broad-leaf and coniferous species making up the plant life. The zone is
   made up mainly of beech, spruce, and fir forests. From 1,500-1,800
   meters (4,920-5,904 ft.), the forest becomes largely coniferous. The
   tree line generally ends at around 1,800 meters (5,904 ft.) and the
   alpine zone takes over, which in most areas, extends up to an elevation
   of 3,000 meters (9,840 ft.) above sea level. The eternal snow and
   glacier zone lies above the 3,000 meter line.

   Eastern Georgia's landscape (referring to the territory east of the
   Likhi Range) is considerably different from that of the west. Although,
   much like the Colchis plain in the west, nearly all of the low-lying
   areas of eastern Georgia including the Mtkvari and Alazani River plains
   have been deforested for agricultural purposes. In addition, due to the
   region's relatively drier climate, some of the low-lying plains
   (especially in Kartli and south-eastern Kakheti) were never covered by
   forests in the first place. The general landscape of eastern Georgia
   comprises numerous valleys and gorges that are separated by mountains.
   In contrast with western Georgia, nearly 85% of the forests of the
   region are deciduous. Coniferous forests only dominate in the Borjomi
   Gorge and in the extreme western areas. Out of the deciduous species of
   trees, beech, oak, and hornbeam dominate. Other deciduous species
   include several varieties of maple, aspen, ash, and hazelnut. In the
   upper Alazani River Valley, there are yew forests as well. At higher
   elevations above 1,000 meters (3,280 ft.) above sea level (particularly
   in the Tusheti, Khevsureti, and Khevi regions), pine and birch forests
   dominate. In general, the forests in eastern Georgia occur between
   500-2,000 (1,640-6,560 ft.) meters above sea level, with the alpine
   zone extending from 2,000/2,200-3,000/3,500 meters (roughly about
   6,560-11,480 ft.). The only remaining large, low-land forests remain in
   the Alazani Valley of Kakheti. The eternal snow and glacier zone lies
   above the 3,500 metre (11,480 ft.) line in most areas of eastern
   Georgia.

Climate

   The climate of Georgia is extremely diverse, considering the nation's
   small size. There are two main climatic zones, roughly separating
   Eastern and Western parts of the country. The Greater Caucasus Mountain
   Range plays an important role in moderating Georgia's climate and
   protects the nation from the penetration of colder air masses from the
   north. The Lesser Caucasus Mountains partially protect the region from
   the influence of dry and hot air masses from the south as well.

   Much of western Georgia lies within the humid subtropical zone with
   annual precipitation ranging from 1000-4000mm. (39-157 inches). The
   precipitation tends to be uniformly distributed throughout the year,
   although the rainfall can be particularly heavy during the Autumn
   months. The climate of the region varies significantly with elevation
   and while much of the lowland areas of western Georgia are relatively
   warm throughout the year, the foothills and mountainous areas
   (including both the Greater and Lesser Caucasus Mountains) experience
   cool, wet summers and snowy winters (snow cover often exceeds 2 meters
   in many regions). Ajaria is the wettest region of the Caucasus, where
   the Mt. Mtirala rainforest, east of Kobuleti receives around 4500mm
   (177 inches) of precipitation per year.

   Eastern Georgia has a transitional climate from humid subtropical to
   continental. The region's weather patterns are influenced both by dry,
   Central Asian/Caspian air masses from the east and humid, Black Sea air
   masses from the west. The penetration of humid air masses from the
   Black Sea is often blocked by several mountain ranges ( Likhi and
   Meskheti) that separate the eastern and western parts of the nation.
   Annual precipitation is considerably less than that of western Georgia
   and ranges from 400-1600mm. (16-63inches). The wettest periods
   generally occur during Spring and Autumn while Winter and the Summer
   months tend to be the driest. Much of eastern Georgia experiences hot
   summers (especially in the low-lying areas) and relatively cold
   winters. As in the western parts of the nation, elevation plays an
   important role in eastern Georgia as well, and climatic conditions
   above 1500 meters (4920ft.) above sea level are considerably cooler
   (even colder) than those of the low-lying areas. The regions that lie
   above 2000 meters (6560ft.) above sea level frequently experience frost
   even during the summer months.

Politics

   Newly adopted medieval Georgian flag over the government building in
   Tbilisi
   Enlarge
   Newly adopted medieval Georgian flag over the government building in
   Tbilisi

   Following a crisis involving allegations of ballot fraud in the 2003
   parliamentary elections, Eduard Shevardnadze resigned as president on
   November 23, 2003 in the bloodless Rose Revolution. The interim
   president was the speaker of the outgoing parliament (whose replacement
   was annulled), Nino Burjanadze. On January 4, 2004 Mikheil Saakashvili,
   leader of the National Movement - Democrats (NMD) (former United
   National Movement) won the country's presidential election and was
   inaugurated on January 25. Fresh parliamentary elections were held on
   March 28 where NMD secured the vast majority of the seats (with ca. 75%
   of the votes) with only one other party reaching the 7% threshold (the
   Rightist Opposition with ca. 7.5%). The vote is believed to have been
   one of the freest ever held in independent Georgia although an upsurge
   of tension between the central government and the Ajarian leader Aslan
   Abashidze affected the elections in this region.

   The tension between the Georgian government and that of Ajaria grew
   increasingly after the elections until late April. Climaxing on May 1
   when Abashidze responded to military maneuvers held by Georgia near the
   region with having the three bridges connecting Ajaria and the rest of
   Georgia over the Choloki River blown up. On May 5, Abashidze was forced
   to flee Georgia as mass demonstrations in Batumi called for his
   resignation and Russia increased their pressure by deploying Security
   Council secretary Igor Ivanov.
   Georgian troops in Iraq
   Enlarge
   Georgian troops in Iraq

   On February 3, 2005, Prime Minister Zurab Zhvania allegedly died of
   carbon monoxide poisoning in an apparent gas leak at the home of Raul
   Usupov, deputy governor of Kvemo Kartli region. Later, Zhvania's close
   friend and a long-time ally, Finance Minister Zurab Nogaideli has been
   appointed for the post by President Saakashvili.

   Since coming to power in 2003, Saakashvili has boosted spending on the
   country's armed forces and increased its overall size to around 26,000.
   Of that figure, 5,000 have been trained in advanced techniques by U.S.
   military instructors. Some of these troops have been stationed in Iraq
   as part of the international coalition in the region, serving in
   Baqubah and the Green Zone of Baghdad. In May 2005, the 13th Infantry
   Battalion ("Shavnabada") became the first full battalion to serve
   outside of Georgia. This unit was responsible for two checkpoints to
   the Green Zone, and provided security for the Iraqi Parliament. In
   October 2005, the unit was replaced by the 21st Infantry Battalion.
   Soldiers of the 13th battalion wear the "combat patches" of the
   American unit they served under, the Third Infantry Division. The
   Georgian government claims to have restored “constitutional order” in
   the upper Kodori Gorge — the sole Georgia-controlled part of breakaway
   region Abkhazia.

Political relations

   Meeting of Presidents from GUAM countries in Baku; Voronin, Aliev,
   Yushchenko and Saakashvili.
   Enlarge
   Meeting of Presidents from GUAM countries in Baku; Voronin, Aliev,
   Yushchenko and Saakashvili.

   Georgia maintains good relations with its direct neighbours Armenia,
   Azerbaijan and Turkey and participates actively in regional cooperation
   fora such as the Black Sea Economic Council and the GUAM Grouping.
   Georgia maintains very close and warm relations with Ukraine. During
   the Orange Revolution in Kiev, thousands of Georgians rallied in
   support of Viktor Yushchenko in Ukraine, Tbilisi and in North America.

Relations with NATO

   Georgia is working in becoming a full member of NATO. In August of
   2004, the Individual Partnership Action Plan of Georgia was submitted
   officially to NATO. On October 29, 2004, the North Atlantic Council of
   NATO approved the Individual Partnership Action Plan (IPAP) of Georgia
   under the silence procedure and Georgia moved on to the so-called
   second stage of Euro-Atlantic integration. In 2005, by the decision of
   the President of Georgia, a state commission was set up to implement
   the Individual Partnership Action Plan, which presents an
   interdepartmental group headed by the Prime Minister. The Commission
   was tasked with coordinating and controlling the implementation of the
   Individual Partnership Action Plan.
   Georgian soldier
   Enlarge
   Georgian soldier

   On February 14, 2005, the agreement on the appointment of Partnership
   for Peace (PfP) liaison officer between Georgia and the North Atlantic
   Treaty Organization came into force, whereby a liaison officer for the
   South Caucasus was assigned to Georgia. On March 2, 2005, the agreement
   was signed on the provision of the host nation support to and transit
   of NATO forces and NATO personnel. On March 6-9, 2006, the IPAP
   implementation interim assessment team arrived in Tbilisi. On April 13,
   2006, the discussion of the assessment report on implementation of the
   Individual Partnership Action Plan was held at NATO Headquarters,
   within 26+1 format.

Relations with European Union

   President Saakashvili views membership of the EU and NATO as a long
   term priority. As he does not want Georgia to become an arena of
   Russia-US confrontation he seeks to maintain close relations with the
   United States, at the same time underlining his ambitions to advance
   co-operation with Russia.

   The European Union is deeply concerned about continuing tension between
   Georgia and Russia and recent incidents in South Ossetia, which do not
   contribute to stability and freedom of movement. The European Union is
   particularly worried by the recent closure of the only recognized
   border crossing between Georgia and the Russian Federation. The
   European Union emphasises the importance of ensuring freedom of
   movement of goods and people, in particular by keeping the border
   crossing at Zemo Larsi open.

   On October 2, 2006, signed a joint statement on the agreed text of the
   Georgia-European Union Action Plan within the European Neighbourhood
   Policy (ENP). The Action Plan will be formally approved at the
   EU-Georgia Cooperation Council session which is planned for November 14
   in Brussels.

Relations with the United States

   George W. Bush visiting Georgia in 2005
   Enlarge
   George W. Bush visiting Georgia in 2005

   The growing US influence in Georgia, notably through the Train and
   Equip military assistance programme and the construction of the
   Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline, have made Tbilisi’s relations with Moscow
   frequently strained. The US has announced that the programme will come
   to an end in the early summer of 2004 and will be replaced by more
   regular military support activities. Former US Secretary of State Colin
   Powell has announced that it is not the intention of the US to
   establish military bases in Georgia.

   “We call on the Government of Georgia and the Abkhaz authorities to
   abide by the 1994 ceasefire agreement and all relevant agreements
   pertaining to Georgia's Abkhazia region. The United States supports
   demilitarizing the Kodori Valley... We urge the two parties to return
   promptly to the Coordination Council to resume discussions of a
   peaceful end to the conflict,” according to a US statement.

Relations with Russia

          see: Georgian-Russian relations

Economy

   Historically, Georgian economy was based on agriculture and tourism.
   Many ancient civilizations have gone through Georgia and enriched and
   sometimes destroyed the country economically. In 20th century, Georgian
   economy belonged to the Soviet Socialist planned regime. Since 1991,
   Georgia has undergone many changes while transporting the nation into
   the capitalist, free market economy. According to the recent
   statistics, total imports exceed the amount of total exports and the
   GDP slightly decreased as a result of government investments. However,
   according to the World Bank, Georgia is considered as the number one
   economic reformer in the world as it has in one year dropped from place
   112 to place 37 in term of ease of doing business, when most of the
   country's neighbours' are in the 100s of the World Bank rank.

   Georgia's economy has traditionally revolved around Black Sea tourism,
   cultivation of citrus fruits, tea and grapes; mining of manganese and
   copper; and output of a small industrial sector producing wine, metals,
   machinery, chemicals, and textiles. The country imports the bulk of its
   energy needs, including natural gas and oil products. Its only sizable
   internal energy resource is hydropower. Despite the severe damage the
   economy has suffered due to civil strife, since 1995, GDP has grown and
   inflation been lowered. The Georgian economy continues to experience
   large budget deficits due to a failure to collect tax revenues. The
   country's economic growth has also been greatly damaged by widespread
   corruption. Transparency International, an internationally recognised
   and widely respected organisation committed to highlighting and
   fighting corruption worldwide, places Georgia at joint number 99th in
   the world in its 2006 Corruption Perceptions Index (with number 1 being
   considered the least corrupt nation)(see
   www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/2006). This,
   however, is a significant improvement on the 2005 Corruption
   Perceptions Index when Georgia was rated joint 130th. Georgia also
   still suffers from energy shortages; it privatized the distribution
   network in 1998, and deliveries are steadily improving. Georgia is
   pinning its hopes for long-term recovery on the development of an
   international transportation corridor through the key Black Sea ports
   of P'ot'i and Batumi.

Demographics

   Georgia's current population is 4,661,473 (July 2006 est.) , with
   ethnic Georgians forming a majority of about 83.8%. Azerbaijanis form
   6.5% of the population, Armenians 5.7% and Russians 1.5% (most Russians
   have emigrated since Georgia declared its independence). The Abkhazians
   in Abkhazia and the Ossetians in South Ossetia (and across the border
   in North Ossetia) have tried to secede from Georgia since independence.
   Two other Kartvelian groups live in Georgia: the Svan and the
   Mingrelians, with smaller numbers of the Laz people, most of whom live
   in Turkey. They are linguistically different but closely related
   ethnically and culturally to other Georgians. There are numerous
   smaller groups in the country, including Assyrians, Chechens, Greeks,
   Kabardins, Kurds, Jews, Tatars, Turks and Ukrainians.

   Since the fall of the Soviet Union, Georgia has suffered a serious
   population collapse as the rebellion in Abkhazia, the strife in Ajaria
   and South Ossetia, a fragile economy, and bad job opportunities led
   hundreds of thousands of Georgians to emigrate in search of work,
   especially to Russia. That problem is exacerbated by a very low
   birthrate among the remaining population. A similar problem exists in
   neighboring Armenia. The population is currently estimated to be a full
   million less than it was back in 1990, and some observers suggest the
   actual number is even lower. A side effect of this emigration is that
   the ethnic minority proportion of the population has roughly halved in
   the last fifteen years, as minority groups are more likely to leave the
   country.

Religion

   A page from a rare Georgian bible, dating from 1030 A.D, depicting the
   Raising of Lazarus
   Enlarge
   A page from a rare Georgian bible, dating from 1030 A.D, depicting the
   Raising of Lazarus

   Today most of the population practices Orthodox Christianity of the
   Georgian Orthodox Church (83.9%). Georgia is the second oldest country
   after Armenia to declare Christianity as an official state religion of
   Kartli (Iberia) in 327. However, Christian communities already existed
   in Egrisi (modern day Abkhazia) before St. Nino preached Christianity.
   In addition, Christ's Appostles, Simon and Andrew preached Christianity
   in Georgia and this makes Georgian Orthodox Church Apostolic and it is
   mostly referred as Georgian Orthodox and Apostolic Church. Georgian
   Orthodox Church gained its autocephaly in the 5th century during the
   reign of Vakhtang Gorgasali. The Bible was also translated in Georgian
   in the 5th century.

   The religious minorities are: Muslim (9.9%); Armenian Apostolic (3.9%);
   Roman Catholic (0.8%). 0.8% of those recorded in the 2002 census
   declared themselves to be adherents of other religions and 0.7%
   declared no religion at all .

Gallery of Georgia

   Mountains of Georgia

   Ananuri Church

   Keselo Towers, Tusheti

   Mestia, Svaneti

   Tbilisi at night

   Mountain landscape

   Ananuri Church

   Metal Cross

   Sameba Church Gergeti, Kazbegi

   River Rioni in Imeretia

   Svaneti

   Svan Towers

   Tusheti

   Svan village

   Telavi, Georgia

   Jvari Church

   Jvari Church

   King Erekle, Telavi

   Gremi Church

   Sarpi

Culture

   See also Georgian language, Georgian alphabet, Music of Georgia, Public
   holidays in Georgia

Education

   Universities in Tbilisi include:
     * Tbilisi State University
     * Tbilisi State Medical University
     * Georgian Agrarian University
     * Georgian Technical University
     * Tbilisi State Pedagogical University
     * Tbilisi State University of Languages and Culture
     * International Black Sea University
     * Georgian University of Social Sciences

Neighbouring countries

   Flag of Ukraine  Ukraine •  Flag of Russia  Russia
   Image:Template CanadianCityGeoLocation North.png
   Black Sea
   Flag of Romania  Romania  Image:Template CanadianCityGeoLocation
   West.png   Black Sea Flag of Russia  Russia
   Flag of Bulgaria  Bulgaria  Image:Template CanadianCityGeoLocation
   West.png   Black Sea
   Flag of Turkey  Turkey  Image:Template CanadianCityGeoLocation West.png
     Black Sea North
   West    Flag of Georgia (country)  Georgia     East
   South
   Flag of Turkey  Turkey Flag of Armenia  Armenia Flag of Azerbaijan
   Azerbaijan

   Countries of Europe

   Albania · Andorra · Armenia^1 · Austria · Azerbaijan^2 · Belarus ·
   Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus^1 ·
   Czech Republic · Denmark · Estonia · Finland · France · Georgia^2 ·
   Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy · Kazakhstan^2 ·
   Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Republic of Macedonia
   · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands · Norway · Poland
   · Portugal · Romania · Russia^2 · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia ·
   Slovenia · Spain · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey^2 · Ukraine · United
   Kingdom · Vatican City

   (1) Entirely in Asia but having socio-political connections with
   Europe. (2) Has significant territory in Asia.
   Countries of Asia

   Afghanistan • Armenia • Azerbaijan ^1 • Bahrain • Bangladesh • Bhutan •
   Brunei • Cambodia • People's Republic of China ^2 • Cyprus • East Timor
   ^3 • Georgia ^1 • India • Indonesia ^3 • Iran • Iraq • Israel • Japan •
   Jordan • Kazakhstan ^1 • Kuwait • Kyrgyzstan • Laos • Lebanon •
   Malaysia • Maldives • Mongolia • Myanmar • Nepal • North Korea • Oman •
   Pakistan • Philippines • Qatar • Russia ^1 • Saudi Arabia • Singapore •
   South Korea • Sri Lanka • Syria • Tajikistan • Thailand • Turkey ^1 •
   Turkmenistan • United Arab Emirates • Uzbekistan • Vietnam • Yemen

   For dependent and other territories, see Dependent territory and List
   of unrecognized countries.

   ^1 Partly in Europe. ^2 The Republic of China (Taiwan) not officially
   recognized by the United Nations; see Political status of Taiwan.
   ^3 Partly or wholly reckoned in Oceania.
   Countries in Southwest Asia

   Afghanistan^1 • Armenia • Azerbaijan^1 • Bahrain • Cyprus • Georgia^1 •
   Iran • Iraq • Israel • Jordan • Kuwait • Lebanon • Oman • Qatar • Saudi
   Arabia • Syria • Turkey^1 • United Arab Emirates • Yemen

   Southwest Asia (1) Transcontinental countries.
   Southwest Asian countries
   Countries on the Black Sea

   Flag of Bulgaria  Bulgaria • Flag of Georgia (country)  Georgia • Flag
   of Romania  Romania • Flag of Russia  Russia • Flag of Turkey  Turkey •
   Flag of Ukraine  Ukraine
   Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)

   Armenia • Azerbaijan • Belarus • Georgia • Kazakhstan • Kyrgyzstan •
   Moldova • Russia • Tajikistan • Ukraine • Uzbekistan

   Associate Member: Turkmenistan
   Francophonie
   Members: Belgium • Benin • Bulgaria • Burkina Faso • Burundi • Cambodia
   • Cameroon • Canada • New Brunswick • Quebec • Ontario • Cape Verde •
   Central African Republic • Chad • Comoros • Côte d'Ivoire • Cyprus •
   Democratic Republic of the Congo • Djibouti • Dominica • Egypt •
   Equatorial Guinea • France • French Guiana • Gabon • Ghana • Guadeloupe
   • Guinea • Guinea-Bissau • Haiti • Laos • Lebanon • Madagascar • Mali •
   Martinique • Mauritania • Mauritius • Morocco • Niger • Republic of the
   Congo • Romania • Rwanda • Saint Lucia • São Tomé and Príncipe •
   Senegal • Seychelles • Saint-Pierre and Miquelon • Switzerland • Togo •
   Tunisia • Ukraine • Vanuatu • Vietnam

   Observers: Armenia • Austria • Croatia • Czech Republic • Georgia •
   Hungary • Lithuania • Mozambique • Poland • Serbia • Slovakia •
   Slovenia • Ukraine
   Black Sea Economic Cooperation

   Albania • Armenia • Azerbaijan • Bulgaria • Georgia • Greece • Moldova
   • Romania • Russia • Serbia • Turkey • Ukraine

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Georgia_%28country%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
