   #copyright

George Byron, 6th Baron Byron

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Writers and critics

   Lord Byron, Anglo-Scottish poet
   Enlarge
   Lord Byron, Anglo-Scottish poet

   George Gordon Byron, 6th Baron Byron ( 22 January 1788 – 19 April 1824)
   was an English poet and a leading figure in Romanticism. Among Lord
   Byron's best-known works are the narrative poems Childe Harold's
   Pilgrimage and Don Juan. The latter remained incomplete on his death.
   He was regarded as one of the greatest European poets, and is still
   widely read.

   Lord Byron's fame rests not only on his writings, but also on his life,
   which featured extravagant living, numerous love affairs, debts,
   separation, and allegations of incest and sodomy; he was famously
   described by Lady Caroline Lamb as "mad, bad, and dangerous to know".
   Byron served as a regional leader of Italy's revolutionary organization
   the Carbonari in its struggle against Austria, and later travelled to
   fight against the Turks in the Greek War of Independence, for which the
   Greeks consider him a national hero. He died from fever in Missolonghi.

   His daughter Ada Lovelace, notable in her own right, collaborated with
   Charles Babbage on the analytical engine, a predecessor to modern
   computers.

Name

   Byron had two last names (in addition to his title), but only one at
   any given time. He was born George Gordon Byron; at age ten, he
   inherited the family title, becoming George Gordon (Byron), Baron
   Byron. When his mother-in-law died, her will required that he change
   his surname to Noel in order to inherit half her estate. (It would have
   been more usual to hyphenate to Byron-Noel, as his grandsons changed
   from King to King-Noel, but his in-laws had come to hate the name of
   Byron.) He was thereafter George Gordon Noel, Lord Byron. He then
   signed himself "Noel Byron", boasting of having the same initials as
   Napoleon Bonaparte. Gordon was a baptismal name, not a surname (his
   mother had been a Gordon); Wentworth was Lady Byron's eventual title,
   not a surname (the Noels had inherited it from the Wentworths in 1745).

Early life

   Catherine Gordon, Byron's mother
   Enlarge
   Catherine Gordon, Byron's mother

   Byron was born in London, the son of Captain John "Mad Jack" Byron and
   his second wife, the former Catherine Gordon, heiress of Gight in
   Aberdeenshire. His paternal grandfather was Vice-Admiral John
   "Foulweather Jack" Byron, who had circumnavigated the globe, who was
   the younger brother of the 5th Baron Byron, known as "the Wicked Lord".
   He is one of the descendents of King Edward III of England.

   From Byron's birth he suffered from a malformation of the right foot
   (clubfoot), causing a slight lameness, which resulted in lifelong
   misery for him, aggravated by the suspicion that with proper care it
   might have been cured. He was christened George Gordon after his
   maternal grandfather, George Gordon of Gight, a descendant of King
   James I. This grandfather committed suicide in 1779. Byron's mother
   Catherine had to sell her land and title to pay her father's debts.
   John Byron may have married Catherine for her money and, after
   squandering it, deserted her. Byron's parents separated before his
   birth. Catherine moved back to Scotland shortly afterwards, where she
   raised her son in Aberdeen until 21 May 1798, when the death of his
   great-uncle made him the 6th Baron Byron, inheriting Newstead Abbey,
   rented to Lord Grey de Ruthyn during Byron's adolescence.

   He received his formal education at Aberdeen Grammar School. In 1801 he
   was sent to Harrow, where he remained until 1805, when he proceeded to
   Trinity College, Cambridge. There he met and shortly fell deeply in
   love with a fifteen year old choirboy by the name of John Edleston.
   About his "protégé" he wrote, "He has been my almost constant associate
   since October, 1805, when I entered Trinity College. His voice first
   attracted my attention, his countenance fixed it, and his manners
   attached me to him for ever." Later, upon learning of his friend's
   death, he wrote, "I have heard of a death the other day that shocked me
   more than any, of one whom I loved more than any, of one whom I loved
   more than I ever loved a living thing, and one who, I believe, loved me
   to the last." In his memory Byron composed Thyrza, a series of elegies,
   in which he changed the pronouns from masculine to feminine so as not
   to offend sensibilities.

Travels to the East

   From 1809 to 1811, Byron went on the Grand Tour then customary for a
   young nobleman. The Napoleonic Wars forced him to avoid most of Europe,
   and he instead turned to the Orient, which had fascinated him from a
   young age anyway. Correspondence among his circle of Cambridge friends
   also makes clear that a key motive was the hope of homosexual
   experience. He travelled from England over Spain to Albania and spent a
   lot of time there and in Athens. While in Athens he had a torrid love
   affair with Nicolò Giraud, a boy of fifteen or sixteen who taught him
   Italian. In gratitude for the boy's love Byron sent him to school at a
   monastery in Malta and bequeathed him seven thousand pounds sterling –
   almost double what he was later to spend refitting the Greek fleet. For
   most of the trip, he had a travelling companion in his friend John Cam
   Hobhouse. On this tour, the first two cantos of his epic poem Childe
   Harold's Pilgrimage were written, though some of the more risqué
   passages, such as those touching on pederasty, were suppressed before
   publication.

Beginning of poetic career

   Some early verses which he had published in 1806 were suppressed. He
   followed those in 1807 with Hours of Idleness, which the Edinburgh
   Review, a Whig periodical, savagely attacked. In reply, Byron sent
   forth English Bards and Scotch Reviewers ( 1809), which created
   considerable stir and shortly went through five editions. While some
   authors resented being satirized in its first edition, over time in
   subsequent editions it became a mark of prestige to be the target of
   Byron's pen.

   After his return from his travels, the first two cantos of Childe
   Harold's Pilgrimage were published in 1812, and were received with
   acclamation. In his own words, "I awoke one morning and found myself
   famous." He followed up his success with the poem's last two cantos, as
   well as four equally celebrated Oriental Tales, The Giaour, The Bride
   of Abydos, The Corsair, and Lara, which established the Byronic hero.
   About the same time began his intimacy with his future biographer,
   Thomas Moore.

Political career

   Byron eventually took his seat at the House of Lords in 1811, shortly
   after his return from the Levant, and made his first speech there on 27
   February 1812. A strong advocate of social reform, he received
   particular praise as one of the few Parliamentary defenders of the
   Luddites. He also spoke in defence of the rights of Roman Catholics.
   These experiences inspired Byron to write political poems such as "Song
   for the Luddites" ( 1816) and "The Landlords' Interest" ( 1823).
   Examples of poems where he attacked his political opponents include
   "Wellington: The Best of the Cut-Throats" ( 1819) and "The Intellectual
   Eunuch Castlereagh" ( 1818).

Affairs and scandals

   Byron's house in Southwell, Nottinghamshire
   Enlarge
   Byron's house in Southwell, Nottinghamshire

   Lord Byron cut a sexual swathe that still astonishes by its sheer
   brazenness and multiplicity - he once bragged that he had sex with 250
   women in Venice over the course of a single year. He was all-inclusive
   - boys, siblings, women of all classes. Ultimately he was to live
   abroad to escape the censure of British society, where men could be
   forgiven for sexual misbehaviour only up to a point, one which Byron
   far surpassed.

   In an early scandal, Byron embarked in 1812 on a well-publicised affair
   with Lady Caroline Lamb. Byron eventually broke off the relationship,
   and Lamb never entirely recovered.

   As a child, Byron had seen little of his half-sister Augusta Leigh; in
   adulthood, he formed a close relationship with her that has widely been
   interpreted as incestuous. Augusta had been separated from her husband
   since 1811 when she gave birth on 15 April 1814 to a daughter,
   Elizabeth Medora Leigh. The extent of Byron's joy over the birth has
   been construed as evidence that he was Medora's father, a theory
   reinforced by the many passionate poems he wrote to Augusta.

   Eventually Byron began to court Lady Caroline's cousin Anne Isabella
   Milbanke ("Annabella"), who refused his first proposal of marriage but
   later relented. They married at Seaham Hall, County Durham, on 2
   January 1815. The marriage proved unhappy. He treated her poorly and
   showed disappointment at the birth of a daughter ( Augusta Ada), rather
   than a son. On 16 January 1816, Lady Byron left him, taking Ada with
   her. On 21 April, Byron signed the Deed of Separation. Rumours of
   marital violence, adultery with actresses, incest with Augusta, and
   sodomy were circulated, assisted by a jealous Lady Caroline. In a
   letter, Augusta quoted him as saying: "Even to have such a thing said
   is utter destruction & ruin to a man from which he can never recover."

   After this break-up of his domestic life, Byron again left England, as
   it turned out, forever. Byron passed through Belgium and up the Rhine;
   in the summer of 1816 Lord Byron and his personal physician, John
   William Polidori settled in Switzerland, at the Villa Diodati by Lake
   Geneva. There he became friends with the poet Percy Bysshe Shelley, and
   Shelley's wife-to-be Mary Godwin. He was also joined by Mary's
   step-sister, Claire Clairmont, with whom he had had an affair in
   London. Byron initially refused to have anything to do with Claire, and
   would only agree to remain in her presence with the Shelleys, who
   eventually persuaded Byron to accept and provide for Allegra, the child
   she bore him in January 1817.

   At the Villa Diodati, kept indoors by the "incessant rain" of that
   "wet, ungenial summer", over three days in June the five turned to
   reading fantastical stories, including " Fantasmagoriana" (in the
   French edition), and then devising their own tales. Mary Shelley
   produced what would become Frankenstein, or The Modern Prometheus and
   Polidori was inspired by a fragmentary story of Byron's to produce The
   Vampyre, the progenitor of the romantic vampire genre. Byron's story
   fragment was published as a postscript to Mazeppa; he also wrote the
   third canto of Childe Harold. Byron wintered in Venice, but in 1817 he
   journeyed to Rome, whence returning to Venice he wrote the fourth canto
   of Childe Harold. About the same time he sold Newstead and published
   Manfred, Cain, and The Deformed Transformed. The first five cantos of
   Don Juan were written between 1818 and 1820, during which period he
   made the acquaintance of the Countess Guiccioli, who soon separated
   from her husband. It was about this time that he received a visit from
   Moore, to whom he confided his autobiography, which Moore, in the
   exercise of the discretion left to him, burned in 1824.
   George Gordon Byron, 6th Baron Byron, painted by Thomas Phillips in
   1813
   Enlarge
   George Gordon Byron, 6th Baron Byron, painted by Thomas Phillips in
   1813

Byron in Italy and Greece

   In 1821- 22 he finished cantos 6-12 of Don Juan at Pisa, and in the
   same year he joined with Leigh Hunt and Percy Bysshe Shelley in
   starting a short-lived newspaper, The Liberal, in the first number of
   which appeared The Vision of Judgment. His last Italian home was Genoa,
   where he was still accompanied by the Countess, and where he lived
   until 1823, when he offered himself as an ally to the Greek insurgents.
   By 1823 Byron had grown bored with his life in Genoa and with his
   mistress, the Contessa Guiccioli. When the representatives of the
   movement for Greek independence from the Ottoman Empire contacted him
   to ask for his support, he accepted. On 16 July, Byron left Genoa on
   the Hercules, arriving at Kefalonia in the Ionian Islands on 4 August.
   He spent £4000 of his own money to refit the Greek fleet, then sailed
   for Messolonghi in western Greece, arriving on 29 December to join
   Alexandros Mavrokordatos, leader of the Greek rebel forces.

   Mavrokordatos and Byron planned to attack the Turkish-held fortress of
   Lepanto, at the mouth of the Gulf of Corinth. Byron employed a
   fire-master to prepare artillery and took part of the rebel army under
   his own command and pay, despite his lack of military experience, but
   before the expedition could sail, on 15 February 1824, he fell ill, and
   the usual remedy of bleeding weakened him further. He made a partial
   recovery, but in early April he caught a violent cold which the
   bleeding — insisted on by his doctors — aggravated. The cold became a
   violent fever, and he died on 19 April.

Post mortem

   Lord Byron on his deathbed as depicted by Joseph-Denis Odevaere c.1826
   Oil on canvas, 166 x 234,5 cm Groeninge Museum, Bruges. Note the sheet
   covering his misshapen right foot.
   Enlarge
   Lord Byron on his deathbed as depicted by Joseph-Denis Odevaere c.1826
   Oil on canvas, 166 x 234,5 cm Groeninge Museum, Bruges. Note the sheet
   covering his misshapen right foot.

   The Greeks mourned Lord Byron deeply, and he became a national hero.
   Βύρων (Viron), the Greek form of "Byron", continues in popularity as a
   masculine name in Greece, and a suburb of Athens is called Vironas in
   his honour. His body was embalmed and his heart buried under a tree in
   Messolonghi. His remains were sent to England for burial in Westminster
   Abbey, but the Abbey refused. He is buried at the Church of St. Mary
   Magdalene in Hucknall, Nottingham. At her request, Ada, the child he
   never knew, was buried next to him. In later years, the Abbey allowed a
   duplicate of a marble slab given by the King of Greece, which is laid
   directly above Byron's grave. In 1969, 145 years after Byron's death, a
   memorial to him was finally placed in Westminster Abbey.

   Upon his death, the barony passed to a cousin, George Anson Byron
   (1789–1868), a career military officer and Byron's polar opposite in
   temperament and lifestyle.

Poetic works

   Byron wrote prolifically. In 1833 his publisher, John Murray, released
   the complete works in 17 octavo volumes, including a life by Thomas
   Moore. His magnum opus, Don Juan, a poem spanning 17 cantos, ranks as
   one of the most important long poems published in England since
   Milton's Paradise Lost. Don Juan, Byron's masterpiece, often called the
   epic of its time, has roots deep in literary tradition and, although
   regarded by early Victorians as somewhat shocking, equally involves
   itself with its own contemporary world at all levels – social,
   political, literary and ideological.
   Lord Byron (1803), as painted by Marie Louise Élisabeth Vigée-Lebrun.
   Lord Byron (1803), as painted by Marie Louise Élisabeth Vigée-Lebrun.

   The Byronic hero pervades much of Byron's work. Scholars have traced
   the literary history of the Byronic hero from Milton, and many authors
   and artists of the Romantic movement show Byron's influence -- during
   the 19th century and beyond. The Byronic hero presents an idealised but
   flawed character whose attributes include:
     * having great talent
     * exhibiting great passion
     * having a distaste for society and social institutions
     * expressing a lack of respect for rank and privilege
     * thwarted in love by social constraint or death
     * rebelling
     * suffering exile
     * hiding an unsavoury past
     * ultimately, acting in a self-destructive manner

Character

   Lord Byron, by all accounts, had a particularly magnetic personality –
   one may say astonishingly so. He obtained a reputation as being
   unconventional, eccentric, flamboyant and controversial. He was given
   to extremes of temper. Byron had a great fondness for animals, most
   famously for a Newfoundland dog named Boatswain; when Boatswain
   contracted rabies, Byron reportedly nursed him without any fear of
   becoming bitten and infected. Boatswain lies buried at Newstead Abbey
   and has a monument larger than his master's. The inscription, Byron's
   "Epitaph to a dog", has become one of his best-known works, reading in
   part:

                Near this Spot
                are deposited the Remains of one
                who possessed Beauty without Vanity,
                Strength without Insolence,
                Courage without Ferosity,
                and all the Virtues of Man without his Vices.
                This praise, which would be unmeaning Flattery
                if inscribed over human Ashes,
                is but a just tribute to the Memory of
                BOATSWAIN, a DOG,
                who was born in Newfoundland May 1803,
                and died at Newstead Nov.^r 18^th, 1808.

   Byron also kept a bear while he was a student at Trinity College,
   Cambridge (reputedly out of resentment of Trinity rules forbidding pet
   dogs - he later suggested that the bear apply for a college
   fellowship). At other times in his life, Byron kept a fox, monkeys, a
   parrot, cats, an eagle, a crow, a crocodile, a falcon, peacocks, guinea
   hens, an Egyptian crane, a badger, geese, and a heron.

Lasting influence

   The re-founding of the Byron Society in 1971 reflects the fascination
   that many people have for Byron and his work. This society has become
   very active, publishing a learned annual journal. Today some 36
   International Byron Societies function throughout the world, and an
   International Conference takes place annually. Hardly a year passes
   without a new book about the poet appearing. In the last 20 years two
   new feature films about him have screened, and a television play has
   been broadcast.

   Byron exercised a marked influence on Continental literature and art,
   and his reputation as poet is higher in many European countries than in
   England or America, although not as high as in his time. He has also
   appeared as a character in popular fiction, a testament to his
   influence. John Crowley's novel Lord Byron's Novel: The Evening Land
   (2005) involves the rediscovery of a lost manuscript by Lord Byron, as
   does Frederick Prokosch's The Missolonghi Manuscript (1968). Byron
   appears as a character in Tim Powers' The Stress of Her Regard (1989)
   and Walter Jon Williams' novella Wall, Stone Craft (1994), as also in
   Susanna Clarke's Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell (2004). The Black Drama
   by Manly Wade Wellman ( Weird Tales, 1938; Fearful Rock and Other
   Precarious Locales, 2001) involves the rediscovery and production of a
   lost play by Byron (from which Polidori's The Vampyre was plagiarised)
   by a man who purports to be a descendant of the poet. In the 1995 novel
   Lord Of The Dead, Tom Holland romantically describes how Lord Byron
   became a vampire during his first visit to Greece - a fictional
   transformation that explains a lot of his subsequent behaviour towards
   family and friends, and finds support in quotes from Byron poems and
   the diaries of John Cam Hobhouse. The Byron as vampire character
   returns in the sequel Slave of My Thirst...

   Tom Stoppard's play Arcadia revolves around a modern researcher's
   attempts to find out what made Byron leave the country.

   Television portrayals include a major 2003 BBC drama on Byron's life,
   and minor appearances in Highlander: The Series, Blackadder Series III
   and The Grim Adventures of Billy and Mandy.

   A complete picture of Byron's character has only been possible in
   recent years with the freeing up of the archive of Murray, Byron's
   original publishers, who had formerly withheld compromising letters and
   instructed at least one major biographer (Leslie Marchard) to censor
   details of his bisexuality. (The Guardian, November 9, 2002)

   Symphonic metal band Bal-Sagoth's vocalist Byron Roberts goes by the
   moniker Lord Byron. Whether this has relation to Lord Byron himself is
   unknown, but given Bal-Sagoth's lyrical style, Roberts was probably
   aware of Lord Byron, and took his moniker from there.

   The Black Metal band Cradle Of Filth has a song on their album
   Thornography called "The Byronic Man", which is based on the life of
   Lord Byron.

   The character of Brian Kinney, in Queer as Folk, is certainly of
   Byronic extraction.

Musical settings of poems by Byron

     * Germaine Tailleferre "Two Poems of Lord Byron"( 1934) 1. Sometimes
       in moments... 2. 'Tis Done I heard it in my dreams... for Voice and
       Piano (Tailleferre's only setting of English language texts)
     * Arnold Schoenberg "Ode to Napoleon" ( 1942) for Voice and String
       Quartet
     * Kris Delmhorst "We'll Go No More A-Roving" ( 2006)

   The 1991 movie "Gothic" directed by Ken Russell is based on the events
   that supposedly took place that fateful weekend in Lord Byron's Lake
   Geneva villa, June 1816, when Mary Godwin Shelley is purportedly to
   have written what would become her famous story "Frankenstein" or The
   Modern Prometheus.
   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Byron%2C_6th_Baron_Byron"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
