   #copyright

Ghana

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Countries;
Countries

   SOS Children works in Ghana. For more information see SOS Children in
   Ghana, Africa
                           Commonwealth of Ghana

   Flag of Ghana Coat of arms of Ghana
   Flag          Coat of arms
   Motto: "Freedom and Justice"
   Anthem: God Bless Our Homeland Ghana
   Location of Ghana
   Capital
   (and largest city)         Accra
                              5°33′N 0°15′W
       Official languages     English
   Government                 Constitutional republic
    - President of Ghana      John Agyekum Kufuor
    - Vice President of Ghana Aliu Mahama
          Independence        from the UK
    - Declared                6 March 1957
    - Constitution            1 July 1960
                                   Area
    - Total                   238,534 km² ( 81st)
                              92,098 sq mi
    - Water (%)               3.5
                                Population
    - 2005 estimate           22,113,000^1 ( 49th)
    - Density                 93/km² ( 103rd)
                              215/sq mi
           GDP ( PPP)         2005 estimate
    - Total                   $55.2 billion ( 72nd)
    - Per capita              $2,643 ( 127th)
          HDI  (2003)         0.520 (medium) ( 138th)
            Currency          Cedi ( GHC)
           Time zone          GMT ( UTC)
          Internet TLD        .gh
          Calling code        +233
   ^1 Estimates for this country explicitly take into account the effects
   of excess mortality due to AIDS; this can result in lower life
   expectancy, higher infant mortality and death rates, lower population
   and growth rates, and changes in the distribution of population by age
   and sex than would otherwise be expected (July 2005 estimate)

   Ghana, officially the Republic of Ghana, is a country in West Africa.
   It borders Côte d'Ivoire to the west, Burkina Faso to the north, Togo
   to the east, and the Atlantic Ocean to the south. Accra is the capital
   and largest city. The country's population in 2005 was 21,029,853.

   It was inhabited in pre-colonial times by a number of ancient kingdoms,
   including an inland kingdom within The Ashanti and various Fante states
   along the coast. Trade with European states flourished after contact
   with the Portuguese in the 15th century, and the British established a
   crown colony, Gold Coast, in 1874.

   It was the first black African country to obtain independence from
   colonial rule. Upon achieving independence from the United Kingdom in
   1957, the name Ghana was chosen for the new nation as a reference to
   its ancient roots in the Empire of Ghana.

   Wikimedia Atlas of Ghana .

History

   For most of Africa below the Sahara, but north of the tropical jungles,
   the development up to 500 A.D. was expanding agriculture.
   Well-organized villages arose; many were similar to the villages that
   exist today. Farming began earliest on the southern tips of the Sahara.
   Toward the end of the classical era, important regional kingdoms were
   forming in West Africa, which lead to the first great state - Ghana.
   Ghana faced challenges such as dense vegetation, disease's impact on
   domesticated animals, and slow spread of agriculture southward. But the
   strength of the agricultural economy would have an impact on the new
   kingdoms to the west of the Nile. Trade brought new crops from
   Southeast Asia near 100 A.D.

   Formed from the merger of the British colony Gold Coast and the British
   Togoland trust territory by a UN sponsored plebiscite, Ghana in 1957
   became the first sub-Saharan country in colonial Africa to gain its
   independence. Kwame Nkrumah was an African anti-colonial leader,
   founder and first president of the modern Ghanaian state. He was the
   1st African head of state in the Pan-African Movement, which was an
   idea he appropriated during his studies at Lincoln University in the
   United States, at the time when Marcus Garvey was becoming famous for
   his "Back to Africa Movement".

   Nkrumah was overthrown by a CIA-assisted coup. A series of subsequent
   coups ended with the ascension to power of Flight Lieutenant Jerry
   Rawlings in 1981. His changes resulted in the suspension of the
   constitution in 1981 and the banning of political parties. A new
   constitution, restoring multiparty politics, was approved in 1992, and
   Rawlings was elected in free elections of that year and also in 1996.
   The constitution prohibited him from running for a third term. John
   Kufuor, the current president, is now in his second term. 2007 will
   mark Ghana's Golden Jubilee celebration of 50 years of independence,
   Ghana@50.

Politics

   Although a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, Ghana is a Republic.
   Its head of state is President John Agyekum Kufuor, the ninth leader of
   the country since independence. The Parliament of Ghana is unicameral
   and dominated by two main parties, the New Patriotic Party and National
   Democratic Congress. Kofi Annan, the current Secretary-General of the
   United Nations, is from Ghana.
     * List of Prime Ministers of Ghana
     * List of political parties in Ghana

Economy

   Well endowed with natural resources, Ghana has twice the per capita
   output of the poorer countries in West Africa. Even so, Ghana remains
   heavily dependent on international financial and technical assistance.
   Gold, timber, and cocoa production are major sources of foreign
   exchange.

   The domestic economy continues to revolve around subsistence
   agriculture, which accounts for 40% of GDP and employs 60% of the work
   force, mainly small landholders. In 1995-97, Ghana made mixed progress
   under a three-year structural adjustment program in cooperation with
   the IMF. On the minus side, public sector wage increases and regional
   peacekeeping commitments have led to continued inflationary deficit
   financing, depreciation of the cedi, and rising public discontent with
   Ghana's austerity measures.

Administrative Divisions

   Ghana is divided into 10 regions, which are then subdivided into a
   total of 138 districts. To see more detailed maps, see either the
   Regions of Ghana or the Districts of Ghana. The regions of Ghana are as
   follows:
     * Ashanti
     * Brong Ahafo
     * Central
     * Eastern
     * Greater Accra

                      * Northern
                      * Upper East
                      * Upper West
                      * Volta
                      * Western

Geography

   Map of Ghana
   Enlarge
   Map of Ghana
   Satellite image of Ghana, generated from raster graphics data supplied
   by The Map Library
   Enlarge
   Satellite image of Ghana, generated from raster graphics data supplied
   by The Map Library

   Ghana is located on the Gulf of Guinea, only a few degrees north of the
   Equator. It is roughly the size of the state of Oregon. The coastline
   is mostly a low, sandy shore backed by plains and scrub and intersected
   by several rivers and streams. A tropical rain forest belt, broken by
   heavily forested hills and many streams and rivers, extends northward
   from the shore. North of this belt, the land is covered by low bush,
   park-like savanna, and grassy plains.

   The climate is tropical. The eastern coastal belt is warm and
   comparatively dry (see Dahomey Gap); the southwest corner, hot and
   humid; and the north, hot and dry. Lake Volta, the world's largest
   artificial lake, extends through large portions of eastern Ghana.

   The capital of Ghana is Accra with a population of about 3 million
   people.

Main cities

   Other cities include (see also Cities in Ghana):
     * Dansoman, aka DC
     * Navrongo
     * Asamankese
     * Sunyani
     * Bolgatanga
     * Koforidua
     * Cape Coast - home of Cape Coast Castle and University of Cape Coast
     * Elmina - home of Elmina Castle
     * Ho
     * Kumasi - (rail junction)
     * Nsawam - (rail junction)
     * Takoradi - port - railhead
     * Tamale
     * Tarkwa - (rail junction)
     * Techima
     * Techimantia
     * Tema - port - railhead
     * Wa
     * Odumase-Krobo
     * Somanya
     * Nkawkaw
     * Kpong -(Hydroelectric Dam)
     * Akosombo-(Hydroelectric Dam)
     * Akim-Manso
     * Nsoatre
     * Kyebi
     * Adenta
     * Madina
     * Anum

Demographics

   Major tribes: Akan 44%, Moshi-Dagomba 16%, Ewe 13%, Ga 8%. European and
   other: 0.2%

   Religions: Christian 63%, Indigenous beliefs 21%, Muslim 16%

   Languages: English (official), African languages (including Akan,
   Moshi-Dagomba, Ewe, and Ga)

Languages

   Ethnologue lists a total of 79 languages in Ghana.

   As with many ex-colonies in Africa, the official language of Ghana is
   the colonial language, English. Nine languages have the status of
   government-sponsored languages: Akan, Dagaare/Wale, Dagbane, Dangme,
   Ewe, Ga, Gonja, Kasem and Nzema.

   Ethnologue provides a language map of Ghana via their website.

Culture

   A man weaves kente cloth using a traditional loom in Bonwire (a
   village) in Ashanti region, Ghana.
   Enlarge
   A man weaves kente cloth using a traditional loom in Bonwire (a
   village) in Ashanti region, Ghana.

   Perhaps the most visible (and most marketable) cultural contribution
   from modern Ghana is Kente cloth, which is widely recognized and valued
   for its colors and symbolism. Kente cloth is made by skilled Ghanaian
   weavers, and the major weaving centers in and around Kumasi (Bonwire is
   known as the home of Kente, though areas of Volta Region also lay claim
   to the title) are full of weavers throwing their shuttles back and
   forth as they make long strips of Kente. These strips can then be sewn
   together to form the larger wraps which are worn by some Ghanaians
   (chiefs especially) and are purchased by tourists in Accra and Kumasi.
   The colors and patterns of the Kente are carefully chosen by the weaver
   and the wearer. Each symbol woven into the cloth has a special meaning
   within Ghanaian culture.

   Kente is one of the symbols of the Ghanaian chieftaincy, which remains
   strong throughout the south and central regions of the country,
   particularly in the areas populated by members of the culturally and
   politically dominant Ashanti tribe. The Ashanti's paramount chief,
   known as the Asantehene, is perhaps the most revered individual in the
   central part of the country. Like other Ghanaian chiefs, he wears
   bright Kente, gold bracelets, rings and amulets, and is always
   accompanied by numerous ornate umbrellas (which are also a symbol of
   the chieftaincy itself). The most sacred symbol of the Ashanti people
   is the Golden Stool, a small golden throne in which the spirit of the
   people is said to reside. It is kept in safekeeping in Kumasi, the
   cultural capital of the Ashanti people and the seat of the Asantehene's
   palace. Though the chieftaincy across Ghana has been weakened by
   allegations of corruption and cooperation with colonial oppression, it
   remains a very vital institution in Ghana.

   Because of its location, the northern regions of Ghana exhibit cultural
   ties with other Sahelian countries such as Burkina Faso, Mali and
   northern Nigeria. Although not being indigenous tribes to the area,
   there is strong Hausa and Mande influence in the culture of the
   northern Ghanaian peoples. The dominant tribe in this part of Ghana are
   the Dagomba. Northern Ghanaians are known for their traditional long
   flowing robes and distinct musical styles from southern and central
   regions. Tuo Zaafi, made from pounded rice, is a specialty from this
   region which has successfully become a staple across Ghana. The
   Larabanga mosque in Larabanga is the oldest mosque in Ghana and one of
   the oldest in West Africa, dating from the 12th century. It is an
   excellent example of the Sudanese Architecture style, of which other
   examples include the Djenné Mosque in Mali and the Grand Mosque in
   Agadez, Niger.

   Famous Ring of Honour wrestler and manager Prince Nana is a legitimate
   prince from Ghana. American soccer player Freddy Adu was also born in
   Ghana, along with Michael Essien of Chelsea FC who is Africa's most
   expensive football player ever.

   After Independence, the Ghanaian music scene flourished, particularly
   the up-tempo, danceable style known as highlife, which is still played
   consistently at the local clubs and bars, often called spots. Many
   Ghanaians are adept drummers, and it is not unusual to hear traditional
   drum ensembles play at social events or performances. On another note,
   Rita Marley, wife of the late Bob Marley, resides in Ghana. Hiplife,
   another genre of music in Ghana is now in stiff competition with the
   more established highlife for airplay on local radio stations and
   nightclubs. A movement that started in the mid 90s, hiplife is
   effectively a Ghanaian version of hip hop rap music, with raps
   basically in the local dialects, Twi being the most prevalent. Hiplife
   in present day Ghana arguably represents youth culture in general.
   Slowly but surely hiplife is surpassing "western music" in terms of
   airplay, whereas ten years ago the opposite was true. It is the most
   significant addition to Ghanaian culture in decades.

Education

   Ghana has 12,630 primary schools, 5,450 junior secondary schools, 503
   senior secondary schools, 21 training colleges, 18 technical
   institutions, two diploma-awarding institutions and five universities
   serving a population of 18 million; this means that most Ghanaians have
   relatively easy access to good education. In contrast, at the time of
   independence in 1957, Ghana had only one university and a handful of
   secondary and primary schools. In the past decade, Ghana's spending on
   education has been between 28 percent and 40 percent of its annual
   budget.

   Primary and middle school education is free and will be mandatory when
   enough teachers and facilities are available to accommodate all
   students. Pupils are enrolled in a nursery school and kindergarten
   prior to their 6-year primary education at age six. Under educational
   reforms implemented in 1987, they pass into a new junior secondary
   school system for 3 years of academic training combined with technical
   and vocational training, where they pass a Basic Education Certificate
   Examination (BECE).

   Those wishing to continue with their education move into the 3-year
   senior secondary school program. Entrance to universities is by
   examination following completion of senior secondary school. School
   enrollment totals almost 2 million: 1.3 million primary; 107,600
   middle; 48,900 secondary; 21,280 technical; 11,300 teacher training;
   and 5,600 university.

   There is currently an on-going educational reform in Ghana, and
   teaching is mainly in English, Ghana's official language.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ghana"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
