   #copyright

Global

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Politics and government

   The adjective "global" and the adverb "globally" are synonyms of
   worldwide and mean of or relating to or involving the entire world in
   the general sense or as the planet Earth. They are sometimes used as
   synonyms for international/internationally but this usage is not
   recorded in dictionaries and is usually considered incorrect:
     * "Global" implicitly implies the concept of " one world"
     * International is a broader term, in that it can refer to something
       involving all nations or as few as only two nations, but,
       presumably, all must be potentially involved before it becomes
       truly global.
     * Nations are concerned primarily with humanity's concerns, and that
       usually in a narrow time frame, whereas there are many global
       concerns that transcend species or generations.

   Nonetheless, "global" has passed into common usage, especially in the
   media, academia, and the business world, and among left-wing supporters
   of a "one world" concept. Many use this term in situations where
   "international" would clearly be the more appropriate term, as there
   are few things that are truly global (even the much-touted "global
   economy" for example does not include Antarctica, North Korea, etc.).
   Nevertheless, just as its synonym "worldwide", "global" is often
   appropriate when one wants to emphasise that something affects the
   entire world even if not all nations or all parts of the earth are
   directly included. For example, Antarctica and North Korea and even
   isolated jungle tribes are very strongly affected by the global economy
   even if they do not actively participate in global trade.

   The usage of "global" is correct when referring to things which do
   involve the Planet Earth as one single unit, for example: global maps,
   global weather patterns, global satellite photos.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
