   #copyright

Glorious Revolution

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: British History 1500-1750

   The Glorious Revolution, also called the Revolution of 1688, was the
   overthrow of James II of England in 1688 by a union of Parliamentarians
   and the Dutch stadtholder William III of Orange-Nassau (William of
   Orange). It is sometimes called the Bloodless Revolution, although
   there was fighting and loss of life in Ireland and Scotland.

   Catholic and Tory historians prefer the term "Revolution of 1688",
   claiming that "Glorious" or "Bloodless" reflect the biases of Whig
   historians. The expression "Glorious Revolution" was first used by John
   Hampden in the autumn of 1689. The Revolution is closely tied in with
   the events of the War of the Grand Alliance on mainland Europe, and may
   be seen as the last successful invasion of England. It can be argued
   that James's overthrow began modern English parliamentary democracy:
   never again would the monarch hold absolute power, and the Bill of
   Rights became one of the most important documents in the political
   history of Britain. The deposition of the Roman Catholic James II ended
   any chance of Catholicism becoming re-established in England, and also
   led to toleration for nonconformist Protestants.

Backgrounds

   James IIKing of England, Scotland and Ireland, Duke of Normandy.
   James II
   King of England, Scotland and Ireland, Duke of Normandy.

   During his three-year reign, King James II fell victim to the political
   battles in England between Catholicism and Protestantism on the one
   hand, and on the other, between the divine right of the Crown and the
   political rights of Parliament. James's greatest political problem was
   his Catholicism, which left him alienated from both parties in
   Parliament. The low church Whigs had failed in their attempt to exclude
   James from the throne between 1679 and 1681, and James's supporters
   were the High Church Anglican Tories. When James inherited the throne
   in 1685, he had much support in the 'Loyal Parliament', which was
   composed mostly of Tories. James's attempt to relax the penal laws
   alienated his natural supporters, however, because the Tories viewed
   this as tantamount to disestablishment of the Church of England.
   Abandoning the Tories, James looked to form a 'King's party' as a
   counterweight to the Anglican Tories, so in 1687 James supported the
   policy of religious toleration and issued the Declaration of
   Indulgence. By allying himself with the Catholics, Dissenters and
   nonconformists, James hoped to build a coalition that would give him
   Catholic emancipation.

   In 1686, James coerced the Court of the King's Bench into deciding that
   the King could dispense with religious restrictions of the Test Acts.
   James ordered the removal of Henry Compton, the anti-Catholic Bishop of
   London, and dismissed the Protestant fellows of Magdalen College,
   Oxford and replaced them with Catholics.

   James also created a large standing army and employed Catholics in
   positions of power in the army. To his opponents in Parliament this
   seemed like a prelude to arbitrary rule, so James prorogued Parliament
   without gaining Parliament's consent. At this time, the English
   regiments of the army were encamped at Hounslow, near the capital. The
   army in Ireland was purged of Protestants who were replaced with
   Catholics, and by 1688 James had more than 34,000 men under arms in his
   three kingdoms.

   In April 1688, James re-issued the Declaration of Indulgence and
   ordered all clergymen to read it in their churches. When the Archbishop
   of Canterbury, William Sancroft, and six other bishops (see the Seven
   Bishops) wrote to James asking him to reconsider his policies, they
   were arrested on charges of seditious libel, but at trial they were
   acquitted to the cheers of the London crowd.

   Matters came to a head in 1688, when James fathered a son; until then,
   the throne would have passed to his daughter, Mary, a Protestant. The
   prospect of a Catholic dynasty in the British Isles was now likely.
   Some leaders of the Tory Party united with members of the opposition
   Whigs and set out to solve the crisis.

Conspiracy

   William III King of England, Scotland and Ireland, stadtholder of
   Gueldres, Holland, Zealand, Utrecht and Overijssel.
   William III
   King of England, Scotland and Ireland, stadtholder of Gueldres,
   Holland, Zealand, Utrecht and Overijssel.

   In 1686, a group of conspirators met at Charborough House in Dorset to
   plan the overthrow of "the tyrant race of Stuarts". In June 1688, a
   further conspiracy was launched at Old Whittington, in Chesterfield,
   Derbyshire, to depose James and replace him with his daughter Mary and
   her husband, William Henry of Orange — both Protestants and both
   grandchildren of Charles I of England. Before the birth of James's son
   on June 10, Mary had been the heir to the throne and William was third
   in line. James however had only wanted to treat them as possible heirs
   on condition that they accepted his pro-Catholic position, which they
   had been unwilling to do for fear that French influence would become
   too great. William was also stadtholder of the main provinces of the
   Dutch Republic, then in the preliminary stages of joining the War of
   the Grand Alliance against France. He had already acquired the
   reputation of being the main champion in Europe of the Protestant cause
   against Catholicism and French absolutism. It is still a matter of
   controversy whether the initiative for the conspiracy was taken by the
   English or by the stadtholder and his wife. William had been trying to
   influence English politics for well over a year, letting Grand
   Pensionary Gaspar Fagel publish an open letter to the English people in
   November 1687 deploring the religious policy of James, which action had
   generally been interpreted as a covert bid for kingship. On December 18
   the Duke of Norfolk warned James of a conspiracy on the side of his
   son-in-law. After his envoy Everhard van Weede Dijkvelt in April 1687
   had approached the main Whig and Tory leaders William had maintained a
   close secret correspondence with them, using as a contact Frederik van
   Nassau. In it he had not committed himself to any definite action, but
   an understanding had been reached that if William should, for whatever
   reason, ascend, he would in accordance with his anti-absolutist
   reputation restrain the use of Royal power; in return William desired a
   full employment of English military resources against France. It has
   been suggested that the crisis caused by the prospect of a new Catholic
   heir made William decide to invade the next summer as early as November
   1687 , but this is disputed. It is certain however that in April 1688,
   when France and England concluded a naval agreement that stipulated
   that the French would finance an English squadron in The Channel, he
   seriously began to prepare for a military intervention and seek
   political and financial support for such an undertaking.

Planning for an invasion

   William and Mary laid careful plans over a number of months for an
   invasion, which they hoped to execute in September. Their first concern
   was to avoid any impression of foreign conquest and they asked already
   in April for a formal invitation to be issued by a group of worthies.
   Only after the Prince of Wales had been born however the Immortal
   Seven, consisting of one bishop and six nobles, decided to comply, the
   letter reaching William on June 30. It should be emphasized that this
   was not an invitation to become king but to "save the Protestant
   religion" and that the "seven" were not fully aware this would probably
   lead to a war with France. Also William's confidant Hans Willem
   Bentinck launched a propaganda campaign in England, presenting William
   as really a true Stuart but one blessedly free from the, according to
   the pamphlets, usual Stuart vices of cryptocatholicism, absolutism and
   debauchery. Much of the later "spontaneous" support for William had
   been carefully organised by him and his agents.

   In May William sent an envoy, Johann von Görtz, to Vienna to secretly
   ensure the support of the Holy Roman Emperor, Leopold I. Learning that
   William promised not to persecute the Catholics in England, the emperor
   approved, promising in turn to make peace with the Osmanic Empire to
   free his forces for a campaign in the West; on September 4 1688 he
   would join an alliance with the Republic against France. The Duke of
   Hanover, Ernest Augustus, and the Elector of Saxony, John George III,
   assured William that they would remain neutral.

   The next concern was to assemble a powerful invasion force — contrary
   to the wishes of the English conspirators, who predicted that a token
   force would be sufficient. William, financed by the city of Amsterdam
   after secret and difficult negotiations by Bentinck with the hesitant
   Amsterdam burgomasters during June, hired 400 transports; also Bentinck
   negotiated contracts for 13,616 German mercenaries from Brandenburg,
   Würtemberg, Hesse-Cassel and Celle, to man Dutch border fortresses in
   order to free an equal number of Dutch elite mercenary troops for use
   against England. Further financial support was obtained from the most
   disparate sources: the Jewish banker Francisco Lopes Suasso lent two
   million guilders; when asked what security he desired, Suasso anwered:
   "If you are victorious, you will surely repay me; if not, the loss is
   mine". Remarkably even Pope Innocent XI, an inveterate enemy of Louis
   XIV of France, provided a loan. Total costs were seven million
   guilders, four million of which would ultimately be paid for by a state
   loan. The Dutch navy was in the summer expanded with 9000 sailors on
   the pretext of fighting the Dunkirk Raiders.

   In August it became clear that William had surprisingly strong support
   within the English army, a situation brought about by James himself. In
   January 1688 he had forbidden any of his subjects to serve the Dutch
   and had demanded that the Republic dissolve its mercenary Scottish and
   English regiments. When this was refused, he asked that at least those
   willing would be released from their martial oath to be free to return
   to Britain. To this William consented as it would purify his army from
   Jacobite elements. In total 104 officers and 44 soldiers returned. The
   officers were enlisted within the British armies and so favoured that
   the established officer corps began to fear for its position. On August
   14 Lord Churchill wrote to William: "I owe it to God and my country to
   put my honour into the hands of Your Highness". Nothing comparable
   happened within the Royal Navy however.

   Still William had great trouble convincing the Dutch ruling elite, the
   regents, that such an expensive expedition was really necessary. Also
   he personally feared that the French might attack the Republic through
   Flanders, when its army was tied up in England. By early September he
   was on the brink of cancelling the entire expedition, when French
   policy played into his hand. On September 9 ( New Style) the French
   envoy Jean Antoine de Mesmes handed two letters from the French king,
   who had known of the invasion plans since May, to the States-General of
   the Netherlands. In the first they were warned not to attack James. In
   the second they were urged not to interfere with the French policy in
   Germany. James hurriedly distanced himself from the first message,
   trying to convince the States that there was no secret Anglo-French
   alliance against them. This however had precisely the opposite effect;
   many members became extremely suspicious. The second message proved
   that the main French effort was directed to the east, not the north, so
   there was no immediate danger of a French invasion for the Republic
   itself.

   From September 22 Louis XIV seized all Dutch ships present in French
   ports, seeming to prove that war with France was imminent, though Louis
   had meant it to be a mere warning. On September 26 the powerful city
   council of Amsterdam decided to officially support the invasion. On
   September 27 Louis crossed the Rhine into Germany and William began to
   move his army from the eastern borders to the coast. On September 29
   the States of Holland gathering in secret session and fearing a
   French-English alliance, approved the operation, agreeing to make the
   English "useful to their friends and allies, and especially to this
   state". They accepted William's argument that a preventive strike was
   necessary to avoid a repeat of the events of 1672, when England and
   France had jointly attacked the Republic, "an attempt to bring this
   state to its ultimate ruin and subjugation, as soon as they find the
   occasion". The States ordered a Dutch fleet of 53 warships to escort
   the troop transports. This fleet was in fact commanded by
   Lieutenant-Admiral Cornelis Evertsen the Youngest and Vice-Admiral
   Philips van Almonde but in consideration for English sensitivities on
   October 6 placed under nominal command of Rear-Admiral Arthur Herbert,
   the very messenger who, disguised as a common sailor, had brought the
   invitation to William in The Hague. Though William was himself
   Admiral-General of the Republic he abstained from operational command,
   sailing conspicuously on the yacht Den Briel, accompanied by
   Lieutenant-Admiral Willem Bastiaensz Schepers, the Rotterdam shipping
   magnate who had organised the transport fleet. The States-General
   allowed the core regiments of the Dutch field army to participate under
   command of Marshall Frederick Schomberg.

William's landing

   The Dutch preparations, though carried out with great speed, could not
   remain secret. The English envoy Ignatius White, the Marquess
   d'Albeville, warned his country: an absolute conquest is intended under
   the specious and ordinary pretences of religion, liberty, property and
   a free Parliament…. Louis XIV threatened the Dutch with an immediate
   declaration of war, should they carry out their plans. Embarkations,
   started on September 22 (Gregorian calendar), had been completed on
   October 8 and the expedition was that day openly approved by the States
   of Holland; the same day James issued a proclamation to the English
   nation that it should prepare for a Dutch invasion to ward off
   conquest. On October 10 William issued the Declaration of The Hague,
   60,000 copies of the English translation of which were distributed in
   England, in which he assured that his only aim was to maintain the
   Protestant religion, install a free parliament and investigate the
   legitimacy of the Prince of Wales. He would respect James's position.
   On October 14 he responded to the allegations by James in a second
   declaration, denying any intention to become king or conquer England.
   Whether he had any at that moment is still controversial.

   The swiftness of the embarkations surprised all foreign observers.
   Louis had in fact delayed his threats against the Dutch until early
   September because he assumed it then would be too late in the season to
   set the expedition in motion anyway, if their reaction would be
   negative; typically such an enterprise would take at least some months.
   Being ready after the first week of October would normally have meant
   that the Dutch could have profited from the last spell of good weather,
   as the autumn storms tend to begin in the third week of that month.
   This year they came early however. For three weeks the invasion fleet
   was prevented by adverse southwesterly gales to depart from the naval
   port of Hellevoetsluis and Catholics all over the Netherlands and the
   British Isles held prayer sessions that this "popish wind" might
   endure, but late October it became the famous " Protestant Wind" by
   turning to the east, allowing a departure on October 28. It had
   originally been intended that the Dutch navy defeat the English first
   to free the way for the transport fleet but because it was now so late
   in the season and conditions onboard deteriorated rapidly, it was
   decided to sail in convoy. Hardly had the fleet reached open sea or the
   wind changed again to the southwest forcing most ships to return to
   port, becoming a favourable easterly only on November 9. First the
   fleet, reassembled on November 11, four times larger than the Spanish
   Armada and having, including sailors and supply train, about 60,000 men
   and 5,000 horses aboard, sailed north in the direction of Harwich where
   Bentinck had a landing site prepared. It was forced south however when
   the wind turned to the north and sailed in an enormous square
   formation, 25 ships deep, into the English Channel on November 13,
   saluting Dover Castle and Calais simultaneously to show off its size.
   The English navy positioned in the Thames estuary saw the Dutch pass
   twice but was unable to intercept, first because because of the strong
   easterly wind, the second time due to an unfavourable tide. Landing
   with a large army in Torbay near Brixham, Devon on November 5 Old Style
   ( November 15 Gregorian calendar), 1688, William was greeted with much
   show of popular support (this was Bentinck's alternative landing site),
   and some local men joined his army. His personal disembarkation was
   delayed somewhat to make it coincide with the anniversary of the
   Gunpowder Plot. On his banners read the proclamation: "The Liberties of
   England and the Protestant Religion I will maintain." Je maintiendrai
   ("I will maintain") is the motto of the House of Orange. William's army
   totalled approximately 15,000–18,000 on foot and 3,000 cavalry. It was
   composed mainly of 14,352 regular Dutch mercenary troops (many of them
   actually Scots, Scandinavians, Germans and Swiss), and about 5,000
   English and Scottish volunteers with a substantial Huguenot element in
   the cavalry and Guards as well as 200 blacks from plantations in
   America. Many of the mercenaries were Catholic. On November 7 (
   November 17 Gregorian calendar), the wind turned southwest, preventing
   the pursuing English fleet commanded by George Legge from attacking the
   landing site. The French fleet was at the time concentrated in the
   Mediterranean, to assist a possible attack on the Papal State. Louis
   delayed his declaration of war until November 26 (New Style), hoping at
   first that their involvement in a protracted English civil war would
   keep the Dutch from interfering with his German campaign. The Dutch
   call their fleet action the Glorieuze Overtocht, the "Glorious
   Crossing".

   William considered his veteran army to be sufficient in size to defeat
   any forces (all rather inexperienced) James could throw against him,
   but it had been decided to avoid the hazards of battle and maintain a
   defensive attitude in the hope James's position might collapse by
   itself; thus he landed far away from James's army, expecting that his
   English allies would take the initiative in acting against James while
   he ensured his own protection against potential attacks. William was
   prepared to wait; he had paid his troops in advance for a three-month
   campaign. A slow advance had the added benefit of not over-extending
   the supply lines; the Dutch troops were under strict orders not even to
   forage, for fear that this would degenerate into plundering which would
   alienate the population. On November 9 William took Exeter after the
   magistrates had fled the city. From November 12, in the North, many
   nobles began to declare for William, as they had promised. However in
   the first weeks most people carefully avoided taking sides; as a whole
   the nation neither rallied behind its king, nor welcomed William, but
   passively awaited the outcome of events.

The collapse of James's regime

   James refused a French offer to send an expeditionary force. He tried
   to bring the Tories to his side by making concessions but failed
   because he still refused to endorse the Test Act. His forward forces
   had gathered at Salisbury, and James went to join them on November 19 (
   Old Style) with his main force, having a total strength of about
   19,000. Amid anti-Catholic rioting in London, it rapidly became
   apparent that the troops were not eager to fight, and the loyalty of
   many of James's commanders was doubtful; he had been informed of the
   conspiracy within the army as early as September but for unknown
   reasons had refused to arrest the officers involved. Some have argued
   however that, had James been more resolute, the army would have fought
   and fought well. The first blood was shed at about this time in a
   skirmish at Wincanton, Somerset, where Royalist troops retreated after
   defeating a small party of scouts; the total body count on both sides
   came to about fifteen. In Salisbury, after hearing that some officers
   had deserted, among them Lord Cornbury, a worried James was overcome by
   a serious nose-bleed that he took as an evil omen indicating that he
   should order his army to retreat, which the supreme army commander, the
   Earl of Feversham also advised on November 23. On November 24, Lord
   Churchill of Eyemouth, one of James's chief commanders, deserted to
   William. On November 26, James's own daughter, Princess Anne, did the
   same. Both were serious losses. James returned to London that same day.

   After Plymouth had been surrendered to him on November 18, William
   began to advance on the 21st. By November 24, William's forces were at
   Salisbury; by November 27 they had reached Hungerford, where they met
   on November 28 with the King's Commissioners to negotiate. James
   offered free elections and a general amnesty for the rebels. In
   reality, by that point James was simply playing for time, having
   already decided to flee the country. He feared that his English enemies
   would insist on his execution and that William would give in to their
   demands. Convinced that his army was unreliable, he sent orders to
   disband it. December 10 saw the second engagement between the two sides
   with the Battle of Reading, a defeat for the King's men. In December
   there was anti-Catholic rioting in Bristol, Bury St. Edmunds, Hereford,
   York, Cambridge and Shropshire. On December 9th a Protestant mob
   stormed Dover Castle, where the Catholic Sir Edward Hales was Governor,
   and seized it. On December 8 William met at last with James's
   representatives; he agreed to James's proposals but also demanded that
   all Catholics would be immediately dismissed from state functions and
   that England would pay for the Dutch military expenses. He received no
   reply, however.

   In the night of December 9- December 10, the Queen and the Prince of
   Wales fled for France. The next day saw James's attempt to escape, the
   king dropping The Great Seal in the Thames along the way. However, he
   was captured on December 11 by fishermen in Faversham near Sheerness on
   the Isle of Sheppey. On the 11th, 27 Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
   forming a provisional government, decided to ask William to restore
   order but at the same time asked the king to return to London to reach
   an agreement with his son-in-law. On the night of the 11th there were
   riots and lootings of the houses of Catholics and several foreign
   embassies of Catholic countries in London. The night of the 12th
   witnessed mass panic in London during what was later termed the Irish
   Night. False rumours of an impending Irish army attack on London
   gripped the capital, and a mob of over 100,000 assembled, ready to
   defend the city.

   Upon returning to London on the 16th, James was welcomed by cheering
   crowds. He took heart at this and attempted to recommence government,
   even presiding over a meeting of the Privy Council. He sent Lord
   Feversham to William to arrange for a personal meeting to continue
   negotiations. Now for the first time it became evident that William had
   no longer any desire to keep James in power in England. He was
   extremely dismayed by the arrival of Lord Feversham. He refused the
   suggestion that he simply arrest James because this would violate his
   own declarations and burden his relationship with his wife. In the end
   it was decided that he should exploit James's fears; the three original
   commissioners were sent back to James with the message that William
   felt he could no longer guarantee the king's wellbeing and that James
   for his own safety had better leave London for Ham. William at the same
   time ordered all English troops to depart from the capital; no local
   forces were allowed within a twenty mile radius until the spring of
   1689. Already the English navy had declared for William. James, by his
   own choice, went under Dutch protective guard to Rochester in Kent on
   December 18 (Julian calendar), just as William entered London, cheered
   by crowds dressed in orange. The Dutch officers had been ordered that
   "if he [James] wanted to leave, they should not prevent him, but allow
   him to gently slip through". James then left for France on December 23
   after having received a request from his wife to join her, even though
   his followers urged him to stay. The lax guard on James and the
   decision to allow him so near the coast indicate that William may have
   hoped that a successful flight would avoid the difficulty of deciding
   what to do with him, especially with the memory of the execution of
   Charles I still strong. By fleeing, James ultimately helped resolve the
   awkward question of whether he was still the legal king or not.

William made King

   On December 28, William took over the provisional government and, on
   the advice of his Whig allies, summoned an assembly of all the
   surviving MPs of Charles II's reign, thus bypassing the Tories of the
   Loyal Parliament of 1685. This assembly called for a chosen Convention,
   elected on January 5, which convened on January 22. The name
   "Convention" was chosen because only the King could call a Parliament.
   Although James had fled the country, he still had many followers, and
   William feared that the king might return, relegating William to the
   role of a mere regent, a solution that was unacceptable to him. On
   December 30, William (in a conversation with the Marquess of Halifax)
   threatened not to stay in England "if King James came again" and
   determined to go back to Holland "if they went about to make him
   [William] Regent".

   The Convention Parliament was very divided on the issue. The radical
   Whigs in the Lower House proposed to elect William as a king (meaning
   that his power would be derived from the people); the moderates wanted
   an acclamation of William and Mary together; the Tories wanted to make
   him regent or only acclaim Mary as Queen. The Lower House resolved that
   the throne was vacant as a result of James's desertion, amounting to
   abdication; the Lords voted that either James was still King or Mary
   already Queen, but that the Throne of England couldn't possibly be
   "vacant". Mary, however, opposed this position, and William made it
   known to the Tory leaders at this point that they could either accept
   him as king or deal with the Whigs without his military presence, for
   then he would leave for the Republic. Confronted with this choice, the
   Tory majority of Lords decided on February 6 that the throne was vacant
   after all.

   William and Mary were offered the throne as joint rulers, an
   arrangement which they accepted. On February 13, 1689 ( Old Style),
   February 23 (New Style} Mary II and William III jointly acceded to the
   throne of England. A commission had on February 2 formulated 23 Heads
   of Grievances which were renamed the Declaration of Rights; these were
   read aloud before William and Mary accepted the throne. They were
   crowned on April 11, swearing an oath to uphold the laws made by
   Parliament. Although their succession to the English throne was
   relatively peaceful, much blood would be shed before William's
   authority was accepted in Ireland and Scotland.

   In Scotland there had been no serious support for the rebellion, but
   when James fled for France, most members of the Scottish Privy Council
   went to London to offer their services to William; on January 7 they
   asked William to take over the responsibilities of government. On March
   14 a Convention convened in Edinburgh, dominated by the Presbyterians
   because the episcopalists continued to support James. There was
   nevertheless a strong Jacobite fraction, but a letter by James received
   on March 16, in which he threatened to punish all who rebelled against
   him, resulted in his followers' leaving the Convention, which then on
   April 4 decided that the throne of Scotland was vacant. The Convention
   formulated the Claim of Right and the Articles of Grievances. On May 11
   William and Mary accepted the Crown of Scotland; after their
   acceptance, the Claim and the Articles were read aloud, leading to an
   immediate debate over whether or not an endorsement of these documents
   was implicit in that acceptance.

Jacobite uprisings

   James had cultivated support on the fringes of his Three Kingdoms -- in
   Catholic Ireland and the Highlands of Scotland. Supporters of James,
   known as Jacobites, were prepared to resist what they saw as an illegal
   coup by force of arms. The first Jacobite rebellion, an uprising in
   support of James in Scotland, took place in 1689. It was led by John
   Graham of Claverhouse, 1st Viscount of Dundee, known as "Bonnie
   Dundee", who raised an army from Highland clans. In Ireland, Richard
   Talbot, 1st Earl of Tyrconnell led local Catholics, who had been
   discriminated against by previous English monarchs, in the conquest of
   all the fortified places in the kingdom except Derry,and so held the
   Kingdom for James. James himself landed in Ireland with 6000 French
   troops to try to regain the throne in the Williamite war in Ireland.
   The war raged from 1689– 1691. James fled Ireland following a
   humiliating defeat at the Battle of the Boyne, but Jacobite resistance
   was not ended until after the battle of Aughrim in 1691, when over half
   of their army was killed or taken prisoner. The Irish Jacobites
   surrendered under the conditions of the Treaty of Limerick on October
   3rd, 1691. England stayed relatively calm throughout, although some
   English Jacobites fought on James's side in Ireland. Despite the
   Jacobite victory at the Battle of Killiecrankie, the uprising in the
   Scottish Highlands was quelled due to death of its leader, Claverhouse.

   The events of 1688 and their aftermath can thus be seen as much more of
   a coup d'état, achieved by force of arms, than an authentic revolution.
   Many, particularly in Ireland and Scotland, continued to see the
   Stuarts as the legitimate monarchs of the Three Kingdoms, and there
   were further Jacobite rebellions in 1715 and 1745 in Scotland.

Anglo-Dutch Alliance

   Though he had carefully avoided making it public, William's main motive
   in organizing the expedition had been the opportunity to bring England
   into an alliance against France. On December 9 1688 he had already
   asked the States-General to send a delegation of three to negotiate the
   conditions. On February 18 (Old Style) he asked the Convention to
   support the Republic in its war against France, but it refused, only
   consenting to pay ₤600,000 for the continued presence of the Dutch army
   in England. On March 9 (New Style) the States-General responded to
   Louis's earlier declaration of war by declaring war on France in
   return. On April 19 (Old Style) the Dutch delegation signed a naval
   treaty with England. It stipulated that the combined Anglo-Dutch fleet
   would always be commanded by an Englishman, even when of lower rank;
   also it specified that the two parties would contribute in the ratio of
   five English vessels against three Dutch vessels, meaning in practice
   that the Dutch navy would in future remain smaller than the English.
   The Navigation Acts were not repealed. On May 18 the new Parliament
   allowed William to declare war on France. On September 9 (New Style)
   1689, William as King of England joined the League of Augsburg against
   France.

   Having England as an ally meant that the military situation of the
   Republic was strongly improved; but this very fact induced William to
   be uncompromising in his position towards France. This policy led to a
   large number of very expensive campaigns which were largely paid for
   with Dutch funds. In 1712 the Republic was financially exhausted; it
   withdrew from international politics and was forced to let its fleet
   deteriorate, making England the dominant maritime power of the world.
   The Dutch economy, already burdened by the high national debt and
   concommitant high taxation, suffered from the other European states'
   protectionist policies, which its weakened fleet was no longer able to
   resist. To make matters worse, the Dutch main trading and banking
   houses moved much of their activity from Amsterdam to London after
   1688. Between 1688 and 1720, world trade dominance shifted from the
   Republic to England.

Legacy

   The Revolution of 1688 is considered by some as being one of the most
   important events in the long evolution of the respective powers of
   Parliament and the Crown in England. With the passage of the Bill of
   Rights, it stamped out once and for all any possibility of a Catholic
   monarchy, and ended moves towards monarchical absolutism in the British
   Isles by circumscribing the monarch's powers. These powers were greatly
   restricted; he could no longer suspend laws, levy taxes, or maintain a
   standing army during peacetime without Parliament's permission. Since
   1689, government under a system of constitutional monarchy in England,
   and later the United Kingdom, has been uninterrupted. Since then,
   Parliament's power has steadily increased while the Crown's has
   steadily declined. Unlike in the civil war of the mid-seventeenth
   century, the "Glorious Revolution" did not involve the masses of
   ordinary people in England (the majority of the bloodshed occurred in
   Ireland). This fact has led many historians to suggest that in England
   at least the events more closely resemble a coup d'état than a social
   revolution.

   England's new king, William III, had been of the Dutch Reformed faith,
   as opposed to the Church of England, prior to his arrival.
   Consequently, the Revolution led to the Act of Toleration of 1689,
   which granted toleration to Nonconformist Protestants, but not to
   Catholics. The Williamite victory in Ireland is still commemorated by
   the Orange Order for preserving British and Protestant dominance in the
   country.

   The Glorious Revolution (or the Revolution of 1688) spurred a
   reexamination of many political beliefs. Long hoping to enhance the
   authority of Parliament at the expense of the monarchy, a dissenting
   group of politicians known as Whigs placed themselves in the service of
   the new regime.

   Lord Macaulay's account of the Revolution in "The History of England
   from the Accession of James the Second" exemplifies its semi-mystical
   significance to later generations.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glorious_Revolution"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
