   #copyright

Goa

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Asia

   Goa
   Map of India with the location of Goa highlighted.
   Capital
    -  Coordinates         Panaji
                            -  15.29° N 73.49° E
   Largest city            Vasco da Gama, Goa
   Population (2001)
    -  Density             1.4 million ( 25th)
                            - 363/km²
   Area
    -  Districts           3,702 km² ( 28th)
                            - 2
   Time zone               IST ( UTC+5:30)
   Establishment
    -  Governor
    -  Chief Minister
    -  Legislature (seats) 1987- 05-30
                            -  SC Jamir
                            -  Pratapsing Rane
                            -  Unicameral (40)
   Official language(s)    Konkani, Marathi
   Abbreviation (ISO)      IN-GA
   Website: goagovt.nic.in
   Seal of Goa

   Goa pronunciation  ( Konkani: गोंय goṃya; Marathi: गोवा govā) is
   India's second smallest state in terms of area (after Delhi) and the
   fourth smallest in terms of population (after Sikkim, Mizoram and
   Arunachal Pradesh). It is located on the west coast of India, in the
   region known as the Konkan, and is bounded by the state of Maharashtra
   to the north, and Karnataka to the east and south. The Arabian Sea
   bounds it to the west. Panaji (Panjim) is the state's capital, and
   Vasco-da-Gama (Vasco) its largest city. The second largest and most
   historic city is Margao with the most western Portuguese culture.
   Portuguese merchants first landed in Goa in the 15th century, and
   annexed it soon after. The Portuguese colony existed for about 450
   years, until it was successfully taken over by India in 1961 .

   Internationally renowned for its beaches, Goa is visited by hundreds of
   thousands of foreign and domestic tourists each year, and has become
   one of the most popular holiday destinations for European travellers.

   Besides beaches, Goa is also known for its world heritage architecture
   including the Bom Jesus Basilica. Goa also has rich flora and fauna,
   owing to its location on the Western Ghats range, which are classified
   as a biodiversity hotspot.

Origin of name

   Goa is famed for its sunny beaches.
   Enlarge
   Goa is famed for its sunny beaches.

   The name Goa came to European languages brought by the Portuguese
   colonisers, but its precise origin is unclear. The Indian epic
   Mahabharata refers to the area now known as Goa, as 'Goparashtra' or
   'Govarashtra"' which means a nation of cowherds. 'Gopakapuri' or
   'Gapakapattana' were used in some ancient Sanskrit texts, and these
   names were also mentioned in other sacred Hindu texts such as the
   Harivansa and the Skanda. In the latter, Goa is also known as
   "Gomanchala". Gove, Govapuri, Gopakpattan, and Gomant are some other
   names that the region is referred to in certain inscriptions and texts
   such as the Puranas. It has also been known as "Aprant" and "Dan's
   Yard".

History

   A chapel in Old Goa, an example of Portuguese architecture.
   Enlarge
   A chapel in Old Goa, an example of Portuguese architecture.

   Goa has a long history stretching back to the 3rd century BC, when it
   formed part of the Mauryan Empire. Goa was later ruled by the
   Satavahanas of Kolhapur (in Maharashtra) around two thousand years ago.
   It eventually passed to the Chalukyas of Badami, who controlled it
   between 580 to 750. Over the next few centuries Goa was successively
   ruled by the Silharas, the Kadambas and the Chalukyans of Kalyani,
   rulers of Deccan India.

   In 1312, Goa came under the governance of the Delhi Sultanate. However,
   the kingdom's grip on the region was weak, and by 1370 they were forced
   to surrender it to Harihara I of Vijayanagara. The Vijayanagara
   monarchs held on to the territory for the next hundred years until
   1469, when it was appropriated by the Bahmani sultans of Gulbarga.
   After the dynasty crumbled, the area came under the hands of the Adil
   Shahis of Bijapur who made Velha Goa their auxiliary capital.

   In 1498, Vasco da Gama became the first European to set foot in India
   through a sea route, landing in Kozhikode in Kerala, followed by an
   arrival in what is now known as Old Goa. The Portuguese arrived with
   the intention of setting up a colony and seizing complete control of
   the spice trade from other European powers after traditional land
   routes to India were closed by the Ottoman Turks. Later, in 1510,
   Portuguese admiral Afonso de Albuquerque defeated the ruling Bijapur
   kings on behalf of a local sovereign, Timayya, leading to the
   establishment of a permanent settlement in Velha Goa (or Old Goa). The
   Portuguese intended it to be a colony and a naval base, distinct from
   the fortified enclaves established elsewhere along India's coasts.
   Ruins of Fort Aguada in north Goa; one of the defences that the
   Portuguese built during their reign.
   Enlarge
   Ruins of Fort Aguada in north Goa; one of the defences that the
   Portuguese built during their reign.
   Chapora River boat
   Enlarge
   Chapora River boat

   With the imposition of the Inquisition (1560–1812), many of the local
   residents were forcibly converted to Christianity by missionaries,
   threatened by punishment or confiscation of land, titles or property.
   Many converted, however retaining parts of their Hindu heritage. To
   escape the Inquisition and harassment, thousands fled the state,
   settling down in the neighbouring towns of Mangalore and Karwar in
   Karnataka. With the arrival of the other European powers in India in
   the 16th century, most Portuguese possessions were surrounded by the
   British and the Dutch. Portuguese possessions in India were a few
   enclaves along India's west coast, with Goa being the largest of these
   holdings.

   An interesting development of the 18th century in Goa is the Conspiracy
   Of The Pintos in 1787 which was inspired by the French Revolution. This
   was the first ethnic rebellion against Portuguese rule in Goa. Goa soon
   became their most important possession in India, and was granted the
   same civic privileges as Lisbon. The Portuguese encouraged its citizens
   to marry local women, and to settle in Goa. However, among the local
   population (both Christian and Hindu) this was looked down upon.
   Progeny of these unions called the mestiço were favourably considered
   by the Portuguese rulers. Subsequently, a senate was created, which
   maintained direct communications with the king. In 1843 the capital was
   moved to Panjim from Velha Goa. By mid-18th century the area under
   occupation had expanded to most of Goa's present day state limits.

   After India gained independence from the British in 1947, Portugal
   refused to accede to India's demand to relinquish their control of its
   exclave. Resolution 1541 by the United Nations General Assembly in 1960
   noted that Goa was non-self-governing and essentially showed sympathy
   toward self determination. Finally, on 1961- 12-12, the Indian army
   with 40,000 troops moved in. After a brief skirmish lasting for
   twenty-six hours, Goa, along with Daman and Diu (enclaves lying to the
   north of Maharashtra), was made into a centrally administered Union
   Territory. India's takeover of Goa is commemorated annually on the 19th
   of December (Liberation Day). The UN Security Council considered a
   resolution condemning the invasion which was vetoed by the Soviet
   Union. Most nations later recognised India's action, and Portugal
   recognised it after its Carnation Revolution in 1974. On 1987- 05-30,
   the Union Territory was split, and Goa was elevated as India's
   twenty-fifth state, with Daman and Diu remaining Union Territories.
     * 1955 reclamation of Goa
          + Newsreel footage of Goa, 1955. (5.2 MB, ogg/ Theora format).
     * .

Geography and climate

   Goa encompasses an area of 3,702  km² (1,430  sq mile). It lies between
   the latitudes 14°53'54" N and 15°40'00" N and longitudes 73°40'33" E
   and 74°20'13" E. Most of Goa is a part of the coastal country known as
   the Konkan, which is an escarpment rising up to the Western Ghats range
   of mountains, which separate it from the Deccan Plateau. The highest
   point is the Sonsogor, with an altitude of 1,167  metres (3,827  feet).
   Goa has a coastline of 101  km (63  miles).

   Goa's main rivers are the Mandovi, the Zuari, the Terekhol, Chapora
   River and the Betul. The Mormugao harbour on the mouth of the river
   Zuari is one of the best natural harbours in South Asia. The Zuari and
   the Mandovi are the lifelines of Goa, with their tributaries draining
   69% of its geographic area. Goa has more than forty estuarine, eight
   marine and about ninety riverine islands. The total navigable length of
   Goa's rivers is 253 km (157 miles). Goa has more than three hundred
   ancient tanks built during the rule of the Kadamba dynasty and over a
   hundred medicinal springs.

   Most of Goa's soil cover is made up of laterites which are rich in
   ferric aluminium oxides and reddish in colour. Further inland and along
   the river banks, the soil is mostly alluvial and loamy. The soil is
   rich in minerals and humus, thus conducive to plantation. Some of the
   oldest rocks in the Indian subcontinent are found in Goa between Molem
   and Anmod on Goa's border with Karnataka. The rocks are classified as
   Trondjemeitic Gneiss estimated to be 3,600 million years old, dated by
   the Rubidium isotope dating method. A specimen of the rock is exhibited
   in the Goa University.

   Goa, being in the tropical zone and near the Arabian Sea, has a warm
   and humid climate for most of the year. The month of May is the
   hottest, seeing day temperatures of over 35° C (95° F) coupled with
   high humidity. The monsoon rains arrive by early June and provide a
   much needed respite from the heat. Most of Goa's annual rainfall is
   received through the monsoons which last till late September.

   Goa has a short cool season between mid-December and February. These
   months are marked by cool nights of around 20°C (68°F) and warm days of
   around 29°C (84°F) with moderate amounts of humidity. Further inland,
   due to altitudinal gradation, the nights are a few degrees cooler.

Subdivisions

   Talukas of Goa. Talukas in purple shades belong to North Goa district,
   and orange denote South Goa.
   Enlarge
   Talukas of Goa. Talukas in purple shades belong to North Goa district,
   and orange denote South Goa.

   The state is divided into two districts: North Goa and South Goa.
   Panaji is the headquarters of the north Goa district and Margao of the
   south district. Each district is governed by a district collector, an
   administrator appointed by the Indian government.

   The districts are further divided into eleven talukas – Talukas of
   North Goa are Bardez, Bicholim, Pernem, Ponda, Satari and Tiswadi, the
   talukas of South Goa are Canacona, Mormugao, Quepem, Salcete and
   Sanguem. Headquarters of the respective talukas are Mapusa, Bicholim,
   Pernem, Ponda, Valpoi, Panjim, Chaudi, Vasco, Quepem, Margao and
   Sanguem.

   In the Parliament of India, Goa has two seats in the Lok Sabha, one
   representing each district, and one seat in the Rajya Sabha.

Flora and fauna

   The Salim Ali Bird sanctuary is one of the best-known bird sanctuaries
   in India.
   Enlarge
   The Salim Ali Bird sanctuary is one of the best-known bird sanctuaries
   in India.

   Forest cover in Goa stands at 1,424  km², most of which is owned by the
   government. Most of the forests in the state are located in the
   interior eastern regions of the state. The Western Ghats, which form
   most of eastern Goa, have been internationally recognised as one of the
   biodiversity hotspots of the world. In the February 1999 issue of
   National Geographic Magazine, Goa was compared with the Amazon and
   Congo basins for its rich tropical biodiversity.

   The important forests products are bamboo canes, Maratha barks, chillar
   barks and the bhirand. Coconut trees are ubiquitous and are present in
   almost all areas of Goa barring the elevated regions. A large number of
   deciduous vegetation consisting of teak, sal, cashew and mango trees
   are present. Fruits include jackfruits, mangos, pineapples and
   blackberries.

   Foxes, wild boars and migratory birds are found in the jungles of Goa.
   The avifauna includes kingfishers, mynas and parrots. Numerous types of
   fish are also caught off the coast of Goa and in its rivers. Crabs,
   lobsters, shrimps, jellyfish, oysters and catfish form some of the
   piscine catch. Goa also has a high snake population, which keeps the
   rodent population in control. Goa has many famous National Parks,
   including the renowned Salim Ali bird sanctuary. Other wildlife
   sanctuaries include the Bondla Wildlife Sanctuary, Molem Wildlife
   Sanctuary, Cotigao Wildlife Sanctuary, Madei Wildlife Sanctuary,
   Netravali Wildlife Sanctuary Mahaveer Wildlife Sanctuaryand the Salim
   Ali Bird Sanctuary located on the island of Chorao.

   Goa has more than 33% of its geographic area under government forests
   (1224.38 km².) of which about 62% has been brought under Protected
   Areas (PA) of Wildlife Sanctuaries and National Park. Since there is a
   substantial area under private forests and a large tract under cashew,
   mango, coconut, etc. plantations, the total forest and tree cover
   constitutes 56.6% of the geographic area.

Economy

   Production of sisal in Goa (Salcete)
   Enlarge
   Production of sisal in Goa (Salcete)
   India rubber production in Goa (Salcete)
   Enlarge
   India rubber production in Goa (Salcete)
   Shipping is one of Goa's main industries
   Enlarge
   Shipping is one of Goa's main industries
   Fishing in the Chapora river.
   Enlarge
   Fishing in the Chapora river.

Macro-economic trend

   This is a chart of trend of gross state domestic product of Goa at
   market prices estimated by Ministry of Statistics and Programme
   Implementation with figures in millions of Indian Rupees.
   Year Gross State Domestic Product
   1980 3,980
   1985 6,550
   1990 12,570
   1995 33,190
   2000 76,980

   Goa's gross state domestic product for 2004 is estimated at $3 billion
   in current prices.

   Goa is India's richest state with a GDP per capita two and a half times
   that of the country as a whole, and one of its fastest growth rates:
   8.23% (yearly average 1990-2000).

Industry

   The land away from the coast is rich in minerals and ores and mining
   forms the second largest industry. Mining in Goa focuses on ores of
   iron, Bauxite, manganese, clays, limestone and silica. Agriculture,
   while of shrinking importance to the economy over the past four
   decades, offers part-time employment to a sizable portion of the
   populace. Rice is the main agricultural crop, followed by areca, cashew
   and coconut. The fishing industry provides employment for about forty
   thousand people, though recent official figures indicate a decline of
   the importance of this sector and also a fall in catch, perhaps coupled
   with the fact that traditional fishing has given way to large-scale
   mechanised trawling.

   Medium scale industries include the manufacturing of pesticides,
   fertilisers, tyres, tubes, footwear, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, wheat
   products, steel rolling, fruits and fish canning, cashew nuts,
   textiles, brewery products. Goa is also notable for its low liquor
   prices due to its very low excise duty on alcohol. Another source of
   cash inflow into the state comes from many of its citizens who work
   abroad and remit money to their families. Zuari Industries (2005 gross
   income Rs.36,302 million) and Sesa Goa (2005 gross income Rs.17,265
   million) are two S&P CNX 500 conglomerates which have corporate offices
   in Goa.

Services

   Tourism is Goa's primary industry: it handles 12% of all foreign
   tourist arrivals in India. Goa has two main tourist seasons: winter and
   summer. In the winter time, tourists from abroad (mainly Europe) come
   to Goa to enjoy the splendid climate. In the summertime (which, in Goa,
   is the rainy season), tourists from across India come to spend the
   holidays.

   Tourism is generally focused on the coastal areas of Goa, with
   decreased tourist activity inland. In 2004 there were more than 2
   million tourists reported to have visited Goa, 400,000 of which were
   from abroad. There are several reasons why tourists are visiting Goa in
   increasing numbers. First, because of the historical development of the
   area, the inhabitants of Goa are increasingly used to contact with
   foreigners. Additionally, a large portion (approx 35%) of the Goan
   people are Catholic. This cultural heritage from the time of the
   Portuguese colonization makes the state somewhat more intimate to
   European or American people than the rest of the Indian subcontinent.
   Goan culture incorporates a very nonproblematic mix of Christianity,
   Hinduism, and Islam.

   The food of Goa is a mixture of foods from Portugal, Western India and
   Arabia (and, in the tourist season, from Kashmir as well). Goa is one
   of the few places in India that you can go to a restaurant and order
   (beside fish and chicken) both beef and pork, which are usually served
   very lightly spiced; beer, wine and other alcoholic drinks are sold
   freely.

   These attributes, together with the fact that Goa’s economy is among
   the most prosperous in India, have won Goa the nickname "India for the
   beginners" – the great differences between Europe and India, very
   apparent in other parts of India due to large slums and other problems,
   are much less pronounced.

Transport

   Goa's main form of public transport largely consists of privately
   operated buses linking the major towns to rural areas. Government-run
   white-with-blue-and-red-stripes buses, maintained by a service called
   the Kadamba Transport Corporation, links both major routes (like the
   Panjim-Margao route) and also some of the more remote parts of the
   state and taluka headquarters. In large towns such as Panjim and
   Margao, intra-city buses serve its citizens. Public transport in Goa is
   not very efficient, and most buses stop plying on routes a little after
   dusk.

   Residents depend heavily on their own transport, usually motorised
   two-wheelers. Goa has two National Highways passing through it. NH-17
   runs along India's west coast and links Goa to Bombay in the north and
   Mangalore to the south. NH-4A running across the state connects the
   capital Panjim to Belgaum in east, linking Goa to cities in the Deccan.
   The NH-17A connects NH-17 to Mormugao Harbour from Cortalim, and the
   new NH-17B, once complete will be a four lane highway connecting
   Mormugao Harbour to NH-17 at another location, Verna, via Dabolim
   airport. Goa has a total of 224 km of National highway, 232 km of state
   highway and 815 km of district highway.

   Hired forms of transport include unmetered taxis, and, in urban areas,
   auto rickshaws. A unique form of transport in Goa is the
   yellow-and-black two-wheeler Motorcycle taxi, operated by drivers who
   are locally called "pilots". These vehicles transport a single pillion
   rider, at fares that are usually negotiated prior or after the journey.
   In some places in Goa, there are river crossings which are serviced by
   the ferry boats, operated by the river navigation departments. Goa has
   two rail lines – one run by the South Western Railway and the other by
   the Konkan Railway. The line run by the South Western Railway was built
   during the colonial era linking the port town of Vasco da Gama to Hubli
   in Karnataka and passing through Margaon. The line, earlier a metre
   gauge, was recently converted to broad gauge. The Konkan Railway line,
   which was built during the 1990s, runs parallel to the coast connecting
   Mumbai to the Malabar Coast.

   Goa's sole airport, the Dabolim Airport, is a military airport, though
   civilian flights are permitted when the fields can be spared from
   military uses. In addition to regular flights, the airport handles a
   large number of chartered flights. The Mormugao harbour near the city
   of Vasco handles mineral ore, petroleum, coal and international
   containers. Much of the shipments consist of minerals and ores from
   Goa's hinterland. Panjim, which is situated on the banks of the
   Mandovi, also has a minor port, which used to handle passenger steamers
   between Goa and Mumbai till the late 1980s.

Demographics

   A native of Goa is called a Goan in English, 'Goenkar' in Konkani,
   'Goês' (male) or 'Goesa' (female) in Portuguese, and a 'Govekar' in
   Marathi.

   Goa has at present a population of 1.344 million residents, making it
   India's fourth smallest (after Sikkim, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh).
   The population has a growth rate of 14.9% per annum. There are 363
   people for each square kilometre of the land. 49.77% of the population
   live in urban areas. The sex ratio is 960 females to 1000 males. Goa's
   literacy rate is 82.32%, broken down into: males 88.88% and females
   75.51%. Hinduism (65%), Catholicism (30%) and Islam are the three main
   religions in Goa. Roman Catholicism reached Goa during the period of
   European colonization, which began in 1498 when the Portuguese explorer
   Vasco da Gama arrived on the Malabar coast. Goa's major cities include
   Vasco, Margao, Marmagao (also known as Murgaon or Mormugão), Panjim and
   Mapusa. The region connecting the last four cities is considered a de
   facto conurbation, or a more or less continuous urban area.

   The official languages of Goa are Konkani and Marathi. Following the
   end of Portuguese rule, the most widely used languages are Konkani as
   the primary spoken language, and English for official, literary or
   educational purposes. Language is a controversial issue in Goa, over
   which an agitation was fought between two contending pro-Konkani and
   pro-Marathi camps between 1985-87. Majority of the Goans united and
   fought for Konkani as their mother tongue. After the agitation ended in
   1987, a complex formula grants 'official language' status to Konkani.
   Given the bitter rivalry between the two lobbies, clubbed with a
   maudlin issue has resulted in a stalemate over the actual
   implementation. Portuguese, the earlier language of the elite, has been
   hit by shrinking numbers, though a small section still prefer it as the
   medium for discourse at home, while even a few Portuguese books have
   been published in recent years. English, viewed as a language of
   opportunity and social mobility is widely understood by the many of the
   state residents. Hindi, India's national language, is also spoken as a
   second language. Whereas, in the past, most people spoke Konkani,
   nowadays Hindi is increasingly heard due to lots of immigrants from
   rest of India.

Ethnicity and Surnames

   The people of Goa are Indo-Aryan and are closely related to the
   neighbouring Marathi people. The majority of Goa's population comprises
   of the Aryan Marathas. The present chief minister of Goa, Pratapsinh
   Rane belongs to a royal clan of Maratha. The common surnames of
   Marathas are Rane, Sawant, Kadam, Porob and many others. For a listing
   of Goan Maratha surnames, see Maratha Clan System. Most of the Goan
   Marathas are closely related to the Maratha people of the neighbouring
   region of Sawantvadi, which was a former princely state and is often
   called the sister-region of Goa. The other major ethnic groups of Goa
   are Goud Saraswat Brahmins and Christians. The Goud Saraswats trace
   their lineage to the East Indian region of Bengal. They share similar
   surnames with Bengalis like Shenoy, Benegal, etc. Most of the
   Christians of Goa are of Dravidian descent. Many of them are Dalit
   converts. Due to the initial colonization of Goa, adopted Portuguese
   surnames such as Da Silva, D'Souza, Pereira and such like are very
   common despite the fact that most people are of no Portuguese descent
   what-so-ever. This is evident in the caste system used by the
   Catholics. These Portuguese surnames are also present further down the
   West Coast in the largely Catholic city of Mangalore, in Karnataka
   State. Similar surnames are also prevalent in the neighbouring country,
   Sri Lanka, but with some variations. Most of the Goan Hindus surnames
   end with "-Kar" suffix, similar to the surnames of Maharashtrian
   people. eg. Chandavarkar, Usgaonkar, etc. However, some Goan Hindus
   prefer the "-Car" suffix, under the influence of the Portuguese, eg.
   Salgaocar, Caro, Verlecar, Domotcar, Raiturcar, etc. The Portuguese
   influence goes beyond the "Kar" suffix as some traditional Maratha
   surnames are also influenced by Portuguese. eg. Parab turneed to Porob,
   Kadam turned to Kadoum, etc.

Culture

   An example of traditional Goan architecture.
   Enlarge
   An example of traditional Goan architecture.

   The most popular celebrations in Goa are Christmas, Easter Sunday
   Ganesh Chaturthi, New Year's Day, the Shigmo festival and the Carnival.
   However, since the 1960s, the celebrations of the Shigmo and carnival
   have shifted to the urban centres, and in recent times these festivals
   are seen more as a means of attracting tourists. Celebrations for all
   festivals usually last for a few days and include parties and balls.

   Western English songs have a large following in most parts of Goa.
   Traditional Konkani folk songs too have a sizable following. Manddo,
   the traditional Goan music which originated in the nineteenth century,
   is sung and danced on special occasions. Goa is also known for its Goa
   trance music.

   Rice with fish curry is the staple diet in Goa. Goa is renowned for its
   rich variety of fish dishes cooked with elaborate recipes. Coconut and
   coconut oil is widely used in Goan cooking along with chile peppers,
   spices and vinegar giving the food a unique flavour. Pork dishes such
   as Vindaloo, Xacuti and Sorpotel are cooked for major occasions among
   the Catholics. An exotic Goan vegetable stew, known as Khatkhate, is
   very popoular dish during the celebrations of festivals, Hindu and
   Christian alike. Khatkhate contains at least five vegetables, fresh
   coconut, and special Goan spices that add to the aroma of Khatkhate. A
   rich egg-based multi-layered sweet dish known as bebinca is a favourite
   at Christmas. The most popular alcoholic beverage in Goa is feni;
   Cashew feni is made from the fermentation of the fruit of the cashew
   tree, while coconut feni is made from the sap of toddy palms.

   Goa has two World Heritage Sites: the Bom Jesus Basilica and a few
   designated convents. The Basilica holds the mortal remains of St.
   Francis Xavier, regarded by many Catholics as the patron saint of Goa.
   Once every decade, the body is taken down for veneration and for public
   viewing. The last such event was conducted in 2004. The Velhas
   Conquistas regions are also known for its Goa-Portuguese style
   architecture.

   In many parts of Goa, mansions constructed in the Indo-Portuguese style
   architecture still stand, though in some villages, most of them are in
   a dilapidated condition. Fontainhas in Panjim, has been declared a
   cultural quarter, and are used as a living museum showcasing the life,
   architecture and culture of Goa. Some influences from the Portuguese
   era are visible in some of Goa's temples, notably the Mangueshi Temple,
   although after 1961, many of these were demolished and reconstructed in
   the indigenous Indian style.

   Football is widely popular in Goa, particularly around Margao where the
   main football stadium, located at the Fatorda, Margao. Football is also
   played in local fields, during the non-monsoon, non-planting season,
   particular in central coastal Goa. Many of the country's top NFL clubs
   such as the Vasco, Salgaocar, Dempo, Sporting Clube de Goa, Fransa-Pax
   Football Club and Churchill Brothers are based in Goa.

   In recent decades, a growing influence of cricket is visible, in large
   part fuelled by the massive coverage this sport gets on national
   television, thus making an impact even in a part of South Asia which
   hardly had any contact with the British Empire.

   The state's sole stadium is the Fatorda stadium, located near Margao.
   The stadium hosts both international football as well as cricket
   matches. Field Hockey is the third most popular sport.

Government and politics

   Panjim, or earlier called Pangim in Portuguese times, and known in the
   local language as Ponn'je is the administrative capital of Goa lying on
   the left bank of the Mandovi near Panjim. Goa's legislative capital is
   Porvorim – the seat of the Goa assembly, which lies across the Mandovi
   River. The state's judicial capital, however, is Mumbai (formerly known
   as Bombay, and not within the state's borders), as the state comes
   under the Bombay High Court. A bench of the High Court is present in
   Panaji. Goa contributes two seats to the Lok Sabha and one to the Rajya
   Sabha, in India's bicameral parliament.

   Goa has a unicameral legislature consisting of a forty member
   Legislative Assembly, headed by a Chief Minister who wields the
   executive power. The ruling government consists of the party or
   coalition garnering the most seats in the state elections and enjoying
   the support of a simple majority of the House. The governor is
   appointed by the President of India. The governor's role is largely
   ceremonial, but plays a crucial role when it comes to deciding who
   should form the next government or in suspending the legislature as has
   happened in the recent past. After having stable governance for nearly
   thirty years up to 1990, Goa is now notorious for its political
   instability having seen fourteen governments in the span of the fifteen
   years between 1990 and 2005. In March 2005 the assembly was dissolved
   by the governor and President's Rule was declared, which suspended the
   legislature. A recent by-election in June 2005 saw the Congress coming
   back to power after winning three of the five seats that went to polls.
   The Congress party and the BJP are the two largest parties in the
   state. Other parties include the United Goans Democratic Party, the
   Nationalist Congress Party and the Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party is
   the oldest in the state, though in recent times it has lost out much of
   its traditional electorate.

   Unlike other states which follows the British Indian model of civil
   laws framed for individual religions, the Portuguese Uniform Civil
   Code, based on the Napoleonic Codes, has been retained by the Goa
   government.

Education

   Each taluka is made up of villages, each having a school run by the
   government. However, many of the state's residents prefer to enroll in
   privately run schools, which offer better facilities. All schools come
   under the state SSC whose syllabus is prescribed by the state Education
   department. There are also a few schools run by the all-India ICSE
   board. Most students in Goa complete their high school using English as
   the medium of instruction. Primary schools, on the other hand is
   largely run in Konkani (in private, but government-aided schools). As
   is the case in most of India, enrollment for vernacular media has seen
   a fall in numbers in favour of English medium education. One of the
   best English medium private schools run by Jesuits is St Ignatius of
   Loyola High School based in Margao. Formed in the 19th Century it
   initially began for the elite of Margao but later the reserve was
   removed due to the growing urban population.

   After ten years of schooling, students join a Junior College which
   offers courses in popular streams such as Science, Arts, Law and
   Commerce. Additionally, many join three year diploma courses. Two years
   of college is followed by a professional degree. The Goa University is
   the sole university in the state located in Taleigao and all Goan
   colleges are affiliated to it. There are three engineering colleges and
   one medical college in the state. The Goa Engineering College and Goa
   Medical College are run by the state whereas the other two engineering
   colleges are run by private organisations.There are also colleges
   offering pharmacy, architecture and dentistry along with numerous
   private colleges offering law, arts, commerce and science.

   Many residents, however, choose to take up courses in other states as
   the demand for a course in Goa is more than that available. Goa is also
   well-known in India for courses in marine engineering, fisheries, hotel
   management and cuisine. The State also hosts a premier Business school
   Goa Institute of Management which is autonomous and was founded in 1993
   by Fr. Romuald D'souza.

   Portuguese is taught in part of the school curriculum as a third
   language in some schools. The Goa University also offers bachelor and
   Master's degrees in Portuguese.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goa"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
