   #copyright

Gordon Griffith

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Producers, directors and
media figures

   Gordon Griffith or Gordon S. Griffith ( July 4, 1907, Chicago – October
   12, 1958) was an American assistant director, film producer, and one of
   the first child actors. Griffith worked in the film industry for five
   decades, acting in over sixty films, and surviving the transition from
   silent films to talkies—films with sound. During his acting career, he
   worked with Charlie Chaplin, and was the first actor to portray both
   Tom Sawyer and Tarzan on film.

   Griffith was born on July 4, 1907 in Chicago, Illinois, to actors Harry
   Sutherland Griffith and Katherine Kiemar Griffith. He had two siblings,
   an older sister Gertrude, and a younger brother Graham—also an actor.
   Griffith was already an experienced actor when, at age seven, he got
   his first acting role as a regular character in the Little Billy
   serials. Mack Sennett of Keystone Studios cast Griffith in many of his
   slapstick features, including Tillie's Punctured Romance, where he
   eventually earned supporting roles in Charlie Chaplin films.

   His big break came with the role of young Tarzan, in the 1918 film
   Tarzan of the Apes. He was required to do his own stunts, such as
   climbing trees, swinging from vines, and interacting closely with a
   chimpanzee. Griffith also has several nude scenes in the first half of
   the film, making him one of the first pre-teens to appear on screen
   naked. Griffith appears before the actor portraying the adult Tarzan—
   Elmo Lincoln—making him the first actor to portray Tarzan in film.
   After seeing the film, a critic described Griffith as "a youthful actor
   of uncommon gifts."
   Gordon Griffith (bottom) and Florence Morrison (top) in a detail of a
   publicity picture for the 1922 film, Penrod. Enlarge
   Gordon Griffith (bottom) and Florence Morrison (top) in a detail of a
   publicity picture for the 1922 film, Penrod.

   Griffith received the role of Tom Sawyer in the 1920 film Huckleberry
   Finn. Later he was again cast in the first Tarzan serial as Tarzan's
   son, Korak, a role that has been described as "anticipating John
   Sheffield's 'boy' roles [in later Tarzan films]." Both of his parents
   died in the 1920s—his mother in 1921 and his father in 1926. At the
   time of the 1930 census, he and his brother were living with his sister
   and her family in Pasadena, California.

   Although his career survived the transition from silent films to sound,
   Griffith received smaller and smaller roles—occasionally not even being
   credited for his performances. As his acting career cooled, Griffith
   moved into other areas of the film industry. At the age of twenty-three
   he got his first job as an assistant director. His final acting credit
   came six years later in 1936's Bars of Hate.

   Griffith continued to work in the film industry until his death,
   working as an assistant director at Monogram Pictures, an associate
   producer under Robert Sherwood, and as a director and then as an
   associate producer for Gregory Ratoff Productions. In 1941, Griffith
   became production manager at Columbia Pictures, and later served as an
   associate producer for RKO, eventually becoming a producer for films
   such as 1956's Alexander the Great. In 1958, Griffith died of a heart
   attack in Hollywood, and was survived by his sister.

Selected filmography

     * Little Billy's Triumph (1914)
     * Little Billy's Strategy (1914)
     * Little Billy's City Cousin (1914)
     * Tillie's Punctured Romance (1914)
     * Kid Auto Races at Venice (1914)
     * Little Sunset (1915)
     * Billy's Cupidity (1915)
     * Tarzan of the Apes (1918)
     * The Romance of Tarzan (1918)
     * Cupid Forecloses (1919)
     * Son of Tarzan (1920)
     * Huckleberry Finn (1920)
     * The Adventures of Tarzan (1921)
     * Penrod (1922)
     * Little Annie Rooney (1925)
     * The Cat's Pajamas (1926)
     * Bars of Hate (1936)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gordon_Griffith"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
