   #copyright

Grand Forks, North Dakota

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: North American Geography

               Grand Forks, North Dakota

   Official flag of Grand Forks, North Dakota

   Flag

             Nickname: "The Sunflake City"
   "The Grand Cities"
              Motto: A Place of Excellence
   Location in North Dakota
   Location in North Dakota
           Coordinates: 47°54′44″N, 97°3′17″W
       Country      United States
        State       North Dakota
        County      Grand Forks County
       Founded      June 15, 1870
     Incorporated   February 22, 1881
        Mayor       Michael Brown
         Area
        - City      49.9 km²  (19.2  sq mi)
        - Land      49.9 km²  (19.2 sq mi)
        - Water     0.0 km² (0.0 sq mi)
      Elevation     257 m  (843 ft)
      Population
     - City (2000)  49,321
       - Density    989.8/km² (2,563.0/sq mi)
        - Metro     97,478
                    (2006 city proper estimate:53,000)
      Time zone     CST ( UTC-6)
    - Summer ( DST) CDT ( UTC-5)
         Website: http://www.grandforksgov.com

   Grand Forks is a city in Grand Forks County, North Dakota in the United
   States. It is the county seat of Grand Forks County^ GR6 and the third
   largest city in North Dakota. The population was 49,321 at the 2000
   census (2006 estimate: 53,000). Grand Forks was founded in 1870 and
   incorporated in 1881.

   Named after the forking of the Red River of the North with the Red Lake
   River near the downtown area, the city lies on the western bank of the
   Red River in the Red River Valley. It has a twin city, East Grand
   Forks, Minnesota, which lies on the east side of the Red River. The two
   communities make up the core urban area of the "Grand Forks, North
   Dakota, ND-MN Metropolitan Statistical Area". The metropolitan area is
   often called " Greater Grand Forks" or "The Grand Cities" (although
   that nickname is newer and not as generally accepted). The city of
   Grand Forks occasionally uses the nickname "The Sunflake City".

   Grand Forks is home to the University of North Dakota (UND) and the
   Grand Forks Air Force Base (located 13 miles west of town). These two
   entities are among the largest employers in the state. Historically
   dependent on local agriculture, the city's economy has moved towards
   one centered on higher education, health care, the retail and service
   sector, and some scientific research. The city is somewhat of a hybrid
   of an agricultural town and a college town.

   The city became known for its battle with the flooding Red River during
   April of 1997 in what is referred to as The Flood of 1997. Today, Grand
   Forks has mostly recovered from the flooding. The metropolitan area
   encompasses two counties and is seen as the retail, educational,
   healthcare, and entertainment centre of a large portion of northeastern
   North Dakota and northwestern Minnesota.

History

Early history

   Grand Forks is one of the oldest major cities in the Dakotas. Prior to
   settlement by Europeans, the area where the city now sits (at the forks
   of the Red River and Red Lake River) had been an important meeting and
   trading point for Native Americans. Early French explorers, fur
   trappers, and traders called the location "Les Grandes Fourches." The
   town was first settled by a steamboat captain named Alexander Griggs.
   His nine acre (36,000 m²) piece of property would become what is now
   known as downtown Grand Forks. The name "Grand Forks" was first applied
   in 1870 by the community's first postmaster and incorporation followed
   on February 22, 1881.

   Unlike most cities in North Dakota, the city of Grand Forks does not
   owe its existence to the arrival of the railroad. Instead, Grand Forks
   was first an important steamboat port on the Red River of the North.
   Grand Forks grew rapidly in its early years. Growth was spurred by
   waves of immigrants and Americans from the eastern portion of the
   country, the steamboat traffic on the river, and the coming of the
   railroad. The first settlers were farmers, but merchants and
   professional people from Minneapolis and other cities soon populated
   the city. In 1883, the University of North Dakota was founded by George
   H. Walsh before North Dakota was formally recognized as an independent
   state, born from the Dakota Territory. In 1893, The Diamond Milling
   Company of Grand Forks started making a new breakfast cereal they
   called Cream of Wheat, invented by mill employee Thomas Amidon. By the
   dawn of the 20th century, the city had become the centre of the region
   and boasted many amenities usually found in larger cities.

The 20th century

   The first half of the 1900s saw steady growth and the development of
   new neighborhoods farther south and west of downtown. The 1920s saw the
   construction of the state-owned North Dakota Mill and Elevator on the
   north side of the city. In 1954, Grand Forks was chosen as the site for
   an Air Force base. Grand Forks Air Force Base brought thousands of new
   jobs and residents to the community. The military base and the
   University of North Dakota would become the two most integral pieces of
   the city's economy.

   The later half of the century saw an increased shift away from downtown
   and towards the outskirts of the community. The coming of the
   Interstate Highway System revolutionized the way people traveled
   throughout the region. Several urban renewal projects tore down
   sections of the downtown area to make way for public buildings and
   transportation improvements. New public schools, a new hospital, and
   many commercial centers were built during this period. The opening of
   the Columbia Mall on the south side of town in 1978 forever changed the
   retail scene in the community.

The Flood of 1997

   Flood memorial in Grand Forks commemorating the 1997 flood
   Enlarge
   Flood memorial in Grand Forks commemorating the 1997 flood

   The city was struck by a severe flood in 1997, causing extensive
   damage. With Fargo upstream from the bulk of the waters, and Winnipeg
   with its flood control structures, Grand Forks became the hardest hit
   city in the Red River Valley. During the height of the flooding, a
   major fire also destroyed eleven buildings in the city's downtown area.
   One of the buildings destroyed by fire was the office of the Grand
   Forks Herald, the city's daily newspaper. National media attention and
   a large donation from McDonald's restaurant heiress Joan Kroc helped
   speed the city's recovery. Several neighborhoods had to be completely
   demolished to make way for a massive new dike system which, when
   completed in 2006, will protect the community from future flooding.
   This land bordering the Red River is now known as The Greenway, and is
   being developed as a system of parks.

Recent history

   Since the flood, growth and new development has taken place throughout
   the city. Major projects have included the Alerus Centre (concert venue
   and home of the UND Fighting Sioux football team), the $100+ million
   Ralph Engelstad Arena (home of the UND Fighting Sioux hockey team) on
   the UND campus, and a number of new commercial projects on the
   outskirts of town. The city is currently experiencing steady population
   growth. A large number of homes, townhouses, and apartment buildings
   have been constructed recently. Most commercial development has taken
   place around the Ralph Engelstad Arena and along the 32nd Avenue South
   commercial corridor.

   Current issues the city is facing include the construction of a $50
   million Canad Inns hotel and entertainment complex which will be
   located adjacent to the Alerus Centre, construction of a proposed
   tribal casino, attempts to rejuvenate the downtown area, and the impact
   of a realignment at Grand Forks Air Force Base.

Geography

   Grand Forks is located at 47°54′44″N, 97°3′17″W (47.912326,
   -97.054860)^GR1.

   Grand Forks sits on the western bank of the Red River of the North in
   an area known as the Red River Valley. The term "Forks" refers to the
   forking of the Red River with the Red Lake River. This junction is
   located near downtown Grand Forks.

   According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area
   of 49.9 km² (19.2 mi²), all land.

   Since it is in one of the flattest parts of the world, the city has
   very few differences in elevation. There are no lakes in or near Grand
   Forks. The meandering Red River and the English Coulee flow through the
   community and provide some break in the terrain. The Red River Valley
   is the result of an ancient glacier carving its way south during the
   most recent Ice Age. Once the glacier receded, it formed a glacial lake
   called Lake Agassiz. The ancient beaches can still be seen as rolling
   hills west of town.

Neighborhoods

Historic neighborhoods

   The Corporate Center in downtown Grand Forks
   Enlarge
   The Corporate Centre in downtown Grand Forks

   Grand Forks has a number of distinct neighborhoods. The area adjacent
   to the Red River developed first so this is where some of the oldest
   neighborhoods, including the downtown area, can be found. The area
   between downtown and the University of North Dakota campus was another
   early growth area and historic properties can be found here as well.

   The downtown area is the oldest part of the city and thus contains many
   historic buildings. It is the governmental centre of the city and
   county. It also sees use as a gathering place for large festivals and a
   weekly farmers' market during the summer months. There have been
   several attempts to bring back the major retail and office developments
   that once filled the downtown landscape, but it has been a hard
   process. There are now far fewer offices, shops, and restaurants in the
   area than there were before the push to develop the outskirts of the
   city. Recently, city leaders and developers have announced plans to
   convert several older buildings into high-end condos and apartments and
   to construct some new buildings for the same purpose. Bringing new
   residents to the downtown area is seen as essential for the
   revitalization of the area.

   Located directly south of downtown, the streets of the Near Southside
   Historic District are lined with classic houses. Reeves Drive used to
   be the most fashionable address in the city and, to this day, it is
   still the home of many old mansions exhibiting several unique
   architectural styles. Also located in this neighbourhood are areas of
   original granitoid paving, several historic churches (including the
   unusually styled Art Deco United Lutheran), and the newly-developed
   Lincoln Drive Park. Lincoln Drive was formerly a low-lying residential
   neighbourhood prior to the Flood of 1997. After the flood, the homes in
   the neighborhood were demolished and the area is now a park. The Near
   Southside neighbourhood was recently granted the "Historic District"
   designation by the National Register of Historic Places.

   University Avenue used to be a country road connecting the downtown
   area with the University if North Dakota campus which, at that time,
   was roughly two miles west of the city. Today, the University Avenue
   area is a middle-class neighborhood filled with older homes built on
   tree-lined streets. At the center of the neighbourhood sits University
   Park. In the past, a trolley used to run down the middle of University
   Avenue bringing students from the downtown area to the remote campus.

Modern neighborhoods

   Modern neighborhoods in Grand Forks are less defined and more spread
   out than their older counterparts. In general, the newer parts of the
   city are located in the southern and western parts of town.

   The 32nd Avenue South corridor has been the commercial centre of the
   city since the Columbia Mall opened in 1978. Many big box stores, as
   well as hotels and restaurants, are now located along the avenue. A
   large strip mall, called the Grand Forks Marketplace, opened in 2001
   near the Columbia Mall.

   University Village is a new commercial district that was built on
   formerly vacant lands owned by the University of North Dakota. The
   centerpiece of the Village is the imposing Ralph Engelstad Arena which
   is used by the University's Fighting Sioux hockey team. All of the
   buildings in the Village have been built in a similar style to
   buildings on the nearby UND campus. The area now includes several
   restaurants and stores, as well as the University bookstore. A new "
   Wellness Centre" for UND students has recently opened on the Village's
   west side.

Demographics

   Grand Forks City Hall
   Enlarge
   Grand Forks City Hall

   As of the census^ GR2 of 2000, there were 49,321 people, 19,677
   households, and 11,058 families residing in the city. The population
   density was 989.8/km² (2,563.0/mi²). There were 20,838 housing units at
   an average density of 418.2/km² (1,082.8/mi²).

   The racial makeup of the city was 93.35% White, 0.86% African American,
   2.75% Native American, 0.96% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 0.58% from
   other races, and 1.44% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of
   any race were 1.87% of the population. The top 6 ancestry groups in the
   city are Norwegian (36.4%), German (34.7%), Irish (10.6%), French
   (6.5%),Polish (6.2%), English (6.1%).

   There were 19,677 households out of which 28.7% had children under the
   age of 18 living with them, 43.2% were married couples living together,
   10.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 43.8% were
   non-families. 31.4% of all households were made up of individuals and
   8.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The
   average household size was 2.31 and the average family size was 2.96.

   In the city the population was spread out with 21.4% under the age of
   18, 22.9% from 18 to 24, 27.7% from 25 to 44, 18.3% from 45 to 64, and
   9.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 28 years.
   For every 100 females there were 102.0 males. For every 100 females age
   18 and over, there were 100.2 males.

   The median income for a household in the city was $34,194, and the
   median income for a family was $47,491. Males had a median income of
   $30,703 versus $21,573 for females. The per capita income for the city
   was $18,395. About 9.3% of families and 14.6% of the population were
   below the poverty line, including 14.6% of those under age 18 and 7.7%
   of those age 65 or over.

Law and government

                                                    Mayor    Michael Brown
                                                   Ward 1       Bob Brooks
                                                   Ward 2    Mike McNamara
                                                   Ward 3  Eliot Glassheim
                                                   Ward 4     Hal Gershman
                                                   Ward 5 Doug Christensen
                                                   Ward 6       Art Bakken
                                                   Ward 7       Curt Kreun

   Grand Forks uses the mayor-council model of municipal government. The
   mayor is elected to a four year term and receives a salary of $24,000
   per year. The mayor's primary job is to oversee the daily
   administration of city government and to work directly with department
   heads to ensure the proper provision of services. The current mayor of
   Grand Forks is obstetrician Dr. Michael Brown. He was first elected in
   2000 and was re-elected in 2004.

   The city is divided into seven wards with each ward electing a single
   city council representative for a four year term. Currently, the
   council consists of only men. The council meets twice each month as the
   council proper and twice each month as a committee of the whole. All
   council meetings are broadcast on a local cable channel.

   Council members in even-numbered wards were up for re-election June 13,
   2006. They included: Council President Hal Gershman, Gerald Hamerlik,
   and Dorette Kerian. Incumbent Gershman ran unopposed and retained
   control of Ward 4, while Mike McNamara (a local radio talk-show host
   and Marine serving in the Iraq War at the time of the election) took
   Ward 2 and Art Bakken won Ward 6. Odd-numbered ward council members and
   the mayor are up for re-election in 2008.

   The political climate in Grand Forks, on average, could best be
   described as being less conservative than the rest of North Dakota.
   Democratic-leaning neighborhoods include areas adjacent to downtown and
   the University of North Dakota while Republican-leaning sections can be
   found in the out-lying, suburban areas. In the 2004 presidential
   election, George W. Bush captured about 54 percent of the vote - the
   lowest of any major city in North Dakota. The presence of the
   University of North Dakota may be one reason why Grand Forks is
   traditionally less conservative than other places in North Dakota.

Economy

   The economy of Grand Forks has historically been dependent on the
   surrounding agricultural lands. However, since the middle part of the
   20th century, Grand Forks' economy has become more diversified. Now,
   government (federal, state, and civic) and the health care industry
   dominate the employment scene in the city.

   The University of North Dakota is the largest employer in the
   metropolitan area. Nearby Grand Forks Air Force Base employs a large
   number of civilian workers in addition to its enlisted personnel. Altru
   Health System is the largest private employer.

   Other major employers include manufacturing firms ( LM Glasfiber,
   Cirrus Design), call centers ( Amazon.com, SEI Information
   Technologies), and food producers ( J. R. Simplot Company and the
   state-owned North Dakota Mill and Elevator). A substantial number of
   people are also employed in the city's retail and services sectors.

   The city is actively involved in the economic development process,
   helping existing firms grow and attracting new ones. A portion of sales
   tax revenues is set aside for this, some of it going into the Grand
   Forks Growth Fund. Companies can request low-interest loans or grants
   from this fund provided they meet certain criteria, such as paying a
   relatively high wage and doing most of their business outside the
   city's trade region. Cirrus Design and Amazon.com have dealt with the
   Growth Fund.

   The city also contributes to the Grand Forks Region Economic
   Development Corporation (EDC), a public-private organization that also
   receives funding from banks and other major businesses. The EDC plays a
   consulting role for businesses, such as identifying suitable sites for
   expansion or assembling public funding packages. Its other key role is
   to vet businesses to see if they're suitable for funding by the Growth
   Fund.

   UND has long been seen by community leaders as an "economic engine" for
   the city. Besides its regular faculty, it also has business-like
   components such as the Energy and Environmental Research Centre, which
   has contracts all over the world. UND hosts a technology incubator
   called the Centre for Innovation. More recently, the University has
   been working to commercialize its research. A major thrust in that
   direction is an effort to build a technology park in the southwestern
   part of the city, through the affiliated UND Research Foundation. The
   tech park, as proposed, would house two germ labs and would feature
   high levels of security, allowing for defense-related research.

   Another economic opportunity for the city is the addition of the
   unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) mission to Grand Forks Air Force Base.
   Economic development officials hope the huge emphasis the Air Force is
   putting on UAVs will attract new businesses to Grand Forks. The base
   currently hosts KC-135 Stratotankers, which will gradually be
   transferred to other bases around the country.

   Depending on the relative strength of the Canadian dollar versus its
   American counterpart, the Greater Grand Forks area may also attract
   significant numbers of tourist shoppers from Manitoba and especially
   from Winnipeg (about 140 miles north of Grand Forks). Grand Forks is a
   popular weekend getaway destination for many Manitobans. This is
   reflected in the large number of hotels built over the last 20 years
   near major retail nodes on the south side of Grand Forks.

Notable local companies

     * Alerus Financial - major local financial institution
     * Altru Health System - major local healthcare provider
     * Amazon.com - has local offices and a call centre in Grand Forks
     * Cirrus Design
     * Hugo's - local chain of supermarkets
     * LM Glasfiber - Danish wind turbine company with a factory in Grand
       Forks
     * Meridian Environmental Technology - national leader in 511 and road
       weather forecasting services
     * North Dakota Mill and Elevator - largest flour mill in the United
       States
     * SEI Information Technologies
     * J. R. Simplot Company

Education

K-12

   Grand Forks Public Schools includes both the school district of Grand
   Forks and the school district of the Grand Forks Air Force Base. 7,600
   students attend schools in the school system. There are twelve
   elementary schools, four middle schools, and two high schools. The
   Grand Forks Public Schools system also operates an alternative high
   school and an adult education program. Grand Forks Public Schools is
   governed by a nine member board of elected representatives, separate
   from the city and county governments. The 2005 budget of the school
   system was approximately $45.5 million.

   There are also several primary schools operating in the community that
   are not a part of the public schools system. Grand Forks is the home of
   the state-operated North Dakota School for the Blind. There are two
   Catholic schools in Grand Forks, both offering classes from
   kindergarten through 6th grade. The only private high school in the
   metropolitan area is Sacred Heart High School, a Catholic school, which
   is in East Grand Forks. There is a non-denominational Christian
   elementary school operating in East Grand Forks.

Higher education

   Clifford Hall on the UND campus
   Enlarge
   Clifford Hall on the UND campus

   Grand Forks is the home of the University of North Dakota (UND), the
   largest and oldest university in the region. UND has over 13,000
   enrolled students and is the home of the only schools of medicine and
   law in the state. UND is also known for its top-ranked John D. Odegard
   School of Aerospace Sciences.

   The athletic teams of the University of North Dakota are known as the
   Fighting Sioux. The men's hockey team is the most popular team at UND.
   They play in the $100+ million Ralph Engelstad Arena. Most of the
   facilities that the Fighting Sioux teams use are quite new. These
   include the city-owned Alerus Centre (football) and the Betty Engelstad
   Sioux Centre (basketball and volleyball).

   Across the river in East Grand Forks is located Northland Community and
   Technical College, a 2-year school. Northland has been experiencing
   steady growth in recent years, with the addition of a sister campus in
   Thief River Falls, Minnesota and increasing distance education
   programs.

Culture

   The presence of the University of North Dakota has brought the
   community several cultural venues and has helped to foster an array of
   cultural offerings. The North Dakota Museum of Art, located on the UND
   campus, brings many nationally touring exhibits to Grand Forks as well
   as the work of many regional artists. In addition to the Museum of Art,
   UND offers other gallery space for student art. UND also has active
   Theater Arts and Music departments. Students stage several theatre
   productions each year at the Burtness Theatre on campus. UND's Chester
   Fritz Auditorium also brings many music and theatre events to Grand
   Forks including national touring companies of Broadway musicals.

   The Greater Grand Forks Symphony Orchestra has been performing for over
   ninety years. The Grand Forks Master Chorale was formed in 1983. Both
   groups stage several productions each year at various locations in the
   community. The newly formed Grand Cities Children's Choir also performs
   throughout the year. The North Dakota Ballet Company is headquartered
   in Grand Forks and often performs at the Chester Fritz Auditorium. The
   Grand Forks City Band was formed in 1886 and still stages popular shows
   year round.

   The Empire Arts Centre, located in downtown Grand Forks, is home to
   several cultural events throughout the year. The Empire, an old movie
   theatre, was restored after the Flood of 1997 and now includes
   performance space, a large movie screen, a gallery, and space for
   artists. The Fire Hall Theatre, also located downtown, is used by
   community members to put on several theatre productions each year. The
   Crimson Creek Collegiate Players recreate popular musicals at several
   shows each year. The Summer Performing Arts Company (SPA) is a popular
   summer arts program for area students. SPA stages one or two major
   musicals and one or two smaller shows each summer.

   Grand Forks is home to several local bands with independent labels
   which perform fairly often at local bars, the Empire Arts Centre, or at
   the Town Square in downtown. Many of the bands are in the emo and
   hardcore punk genres.

Recreation

   The Grand Forks Park District, established in 1905, operates fourteen
   neighbourhood parks, twenty-eight tennis courts, and a swimming pool.
   The parks include various features like playgrounds, baseball fields,
   softball fields, soccer fields, basketball courts, and picnic areas.
   Sertoma Park includes a Japanese garden. The Park District also
   operates eleven outdoor skating rinks and several indoor ice arenas:
   Purpur Arena, Eagles Arena, Blueline Club Arena, and Gambucci Arena.
   The district also owns the Centre Court Fitness Club.

   There are several golf courses located in the city. The Park District
   operates King's Walk Golf Course (18-hole, Arnold Palmer-designed,
   links style course) and Lincoln Golf Course (historic 18-hole course
   which was recently converted to a smaller 9-hole course). The
   University of North Dakota operates the 9-hole Ray Richards Golf
   Course. The 18-hole Grand Forks Country Club is located directly south
   of the city. There are also golf courses in nearby East Grand Forks,
   Minnesota and Manvel, North Dakota.

   The Greenway is a huge park that runs the length of the Red River in
   the city. It includes an extensive path system, large festival grounds,
   ski trails, and wildflower gardens. Grand Forks has a large bike path
   system. These paths are located in The Greenway, adjacent to major
   streets, and on the banks of the English Coulee. Two walking/biking
   bridges that span the Red River are being built.

   Some residents of Grand Forks also own cabins along lakes in Minnesota.
   Maple Lake, Union Lake, and Lake Sarah in Minnesota, along with Golden
   Lake in North Dakota are all within an hour of driving from Grand
   Forks.

Sister cities

   Grand Forks' sister cities include:
   United States Dickinson, North Dakota, USA
   Norway        Sarpsborg, Norway
   Japan         Awano, Japan (defunct)
   Russia        Ishim, Russia (inactive)

   Grand Forks has an active sister city program designed to encourage
   cultural and economic exchanges. In the case of Dickinson, North
   Dakota, the relationship is also a kind of political alliance.

   Grand Forks' first sister city was Ishim in the Soviet Union. The
   relationship with the Siberian city formally began in 1984 during the
   Cold War, but progressed slowly due to red tape. In fact, the first
   in-person exchanges didn't happen until 1990, following glasnost. More
   exchanges followed despite the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991.
   Sometime in the late 1990s, though, political and economic turmoil in
   Russia put the relationship in deep freeze from which it has yet to
   recover.

   While the relationship with Ishim faded, Grand Forks found a new sister
   in Awano, Japan. An informal relationship began in 1994 when the school
   districts of both cities began exchanging students. The bond
   strengthened after the 1997 flood devastated Grand Forks. Awano, a city
   of 10,000, sent $26,000 to help Grand Forks. In 1998, the two formally
   proclaimed themselves sisters. The most concrete evidence of the warm
   relationship between the two is a Japanese rock garden in Grand Forks'
   Sertoma Park and a sculpture of an American bison in an Awano park.
   They're gifts the sister cities gave one another.

   Awano is no longer a sister city, however, because it is no longer a
   city. The nearby city of Kanuma recently annexed Awano, a smaller city.
   Kanuma city leaders say they already have a sister city in Australia
   and can't afford another one. The student exchange is expected to
   continue, though every other year instead of annually.

   Grand Forks' relationship with Dickinson, North Dakota began in 2002,
   when delegations from each city visited the other. The Greater Grand
   Forks Convention and Visitors Bureau organized the exchange with its
   counterpart in Dickinson to showcase tourist attractions and improve
   cooperation in promoting statewide tourism. There's also a political
   component. Grand Forks Mayor Michael Brown has said he thinks having
   friends in western North Dakota, which typically has diverging
   interests from eastern cities, would help at the state legislature.

   Sarpsborg, Norway became a sister city in 2005 following several
   exchanges among leaders from both cities. Located southeast of Oslo,
   Sarpsborg is a city with a similar sized population to Grand Forks.
   Mayor Brown has said he values sisterhood with Sarpsborg because his
   city is home to so many descendants of Norwegian immigrants. The Grand
   Forks School District has announced plans to teach Norwegian language
   classes in the high schools though no exchange programs have been
   announced.

Sites of interest

Arenas and auditoriums

     * Alerus Centre - (1200 South 42nd Street) Recently opened events
       centre that is the largest arena between Minneapolis and Seattle.
       Plays host to a variety of events including major concerts, UND's
       Fighting Sioux football games, and exhibitions.
     * Ralph Engelstad Arena - (UND Campus - "University Village") A $100
       million hockey arena that opened in 2001 and now houses the UND
       Fighting Sioux hockey team. Also hosts major concerts and an annual
       circus.
     * Chester Fritz Auditorium - (UND Campus - University Avenue and Yale
       Street) A fine arts centre that features Broadway musicals,
       concerts, and UND events.
     * Betty Engelstad Sioux Centre - (UND Campus - "University Village"
       connected to Ralph Engelstad Arena) A sports arena that houses the
       UND Fighting Sioux volleyball and basketball teams.

Museums

     * North Dakota Museum of Art - (UND Campus) Three galleries that
       house exhibitions of regional, national, and international art.
       Located in a historic building.
     * Myra Museum and Campbell House - (2405 Belmont Road) A historical
       complex containing the 1879 Campbell House, a one-room schoolhouse,
       the original Grand Forks log cabin post office, a carriage house,
       and a pavilion as well as the Myra Museum of local history.

Shopping

     * Columbia Mall - (intersection of Columbia Road and 32nd Avenue
       South) This is Grand Forks's largest shopping centre with about 80
       stores. The mall's anchor stores include Macy's, Sears, and J.C.
       Penney. Dakota Cafe, a new food court, opened in the fall of 2005.
       A Target store used to be an anchor of the mall, but the retailer
       moved to a new location down the road in 2001. Columbia Mall is a
       favorite destination for the steady flow of Canadian visitors to
       the Grand Forks area.
     * Downtown - Located in the centre of the Greater Grand Forks
       metropolitan area, downtown offers several unique shops,
       restaurants, and galleries. The Town Square is located at the
       corner of South Third Street and DeMers Avenue and is a popular
       gathering place and the site of several festivals and concerts
       throughout the year. The Town Square is home to the weekly Farmers
       Market during the Spring and Summer months and the popular Grand
       Cities Art Fest which is held each June.
     * Grand Forks Marketplace - (intersection of Interstate 29 and 32nd
       Avenue South) This large, outdoor shopping centre is the newest
       mall in the city. It is located just down the road from Columbia
       Mall. It includes a SuperTarget, Best Buy, Lowe's, Old Navy,
       Michaels, Bed Bath & Beyond, Gordman's, and several smaller stores.
       A large Menards home improvement store is located across the street
       from the Marketplace and a new Kohl's store is under construction
       in the vicinity of the mall.
     * Grand Cities Mall - (intersection of South Washington Street and
       17th Avenue South) Formerly called South Forks Plaza, Grand Forks'
       oldest mall is home to Kmart, Big Lots, Ace Hardware, Family
       Dollar, a furniture store, and many smaller stores and a few
       restaurants. Unlike the chain stores that populate Columbia Mall,
       the Grand Cities Mall is home to many local, independent stores.
       Partially because of this, the mall has lost customer traffic over
       the years and there has been a high turnover rate of stores.
     * Cabela's - (Downtown East Grand Forks) A large hunting and fishing
       store in the downtown neighbourhood of East Grand Forks. Known for
       its dioramas and large indoor waterfalls.
     * University Village - (intersection of Columbia Road and Gateway
       Drive) This is a new development located on the campus of the
       University of North Dakota. It's anchored by the Ralph Engelstad
       Arena and the Betty Engelstad Sioux Centre. In addition, the area
       now is home to a Barnes and Noble, a gas station, an upscale
       restaurant/bar, and a strip mall.

Theaters

     * Empire Arts Centre - (415 Demers Avenue) A restored 1919 theatre
       that hosts performances, movies, and other events. Includes a small
       gallery.
     * Burtness Theatre - (UND Campus - Centennial Drive) Theatre that
       features several productions by UND students each year.
     * Fire Hall Theatre - (412 2nd Avenue North) A small theatre
       featuring local productions.

Transportation

   Grand Forks International Airport (GFK, KGFK) is served by Northwest
   Airlines with several daily round trips to Minneapolis-St. Paul
   International Airport. The airport is a major distribution centre for
   FedEx, which conducts flights daily with Boeing 727 and Cessna Caravan
   aircraft (the latter of which transport packages to outlying areas of
   the state). The airport is also one of the busiest airports in the
   country, due mainly to the presence of the John D. Odegard School of
   Aerospace Sciences of the University of North Dakota.

   The BNSF Railway runs track in several directions in and around the
   city. Amtrak passenger service on the Empire Builder line heads
   westbound daily at 5:00 am and eastbound daily at midnight.

   Three federal highways pass through Grand Forks: U.S. Highway 2,
   Interstate 29, and U.S. Highway 81. U.S. Highway 2 runs east to west
   through the northern part of town and is a four lane highway. In the
   city limits, the highway is called Gateway Drive. The highway is the
   primary connection between Grand Forks, East Grand Forks, the Grand
   Forks Air Force Base, Grand Forks International Airport, and nearby
   Crookston, Minnesota. Its business route, Demers Avenue, runs through
   the downtown areas of both Grand Forks and East Grand Forks. Interstate
   29 runs north to south along the western part of the city, officially
   multiplexed with U.S. Highway 81 in the Grand Forks area. The U.S.
   Highway 81 business route, Washington Street, runs through many of the
   city's major commercial districts.

   The city maintains a bus system called Cities Area Transit (or CAT).
   The system has operated since 1926 when it was introduced to replace an
   earlier trolley system (in homage to which, the city now operates a bus
   that looks like a trolley). There are currently eleven bus routes
   including night service and service in the community of East Grand
   Forks. The Metro Area Transit Centre is located downtown on Kittson
   Avenue. It is essentially the "depot" and main connecting point of the
   system. CAT is considered to be the best fixed-route public transit
   service in the state of North Dakota, and was used as a model when
   Bismarck-Mandan launched a "Capital Area Transit" service in 2004.
   Grand Forks is served by two taxi companies: Grand Forks Taxi and Nodak
   Radio Cab Company.

   The older sections of Grand Forks are structured in the classic grid
   street system. In Grand Forks, roads that run from north to south are
   traditionally called "streets" and roads that run from east to west are
   traditionally called "avenues." Streets are numbered in blocks west of
   the Red River. Avenues are numbered in blocks north or south of Demers
   Avenue (the city's historic dividing route adjacent to the rail yards).

Notable residents and associated people

     * Lynn Anderson - country music artist
     * Brooks Bollinger - Minnesota Vikings football quarterback
     * Ronald Davies - federal judge, ordered the integration of Little
       Rock Central High School
     * Ralph Engelstad - Las Vegas casino owner, philanthropist
     * Phil Jackson - NBA basketball coach
     * Nicole Linkletter - winner of reality show America's Next Top Model
       fifth season
     * Roger Maris - baseball player
     * Pat Owens - Grand Forks mayor during the 1997 flood
     * James Rosenquist - artist
     * Dru Sjodin - murder and rape victim
     * Era Bell Thompson - former editor of Ebony magazine

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grand_Forks%2C_North_Dakota"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
