   #copyright

Grape seed oil

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Food and agriculture

   Grape oil (also grapeseed oil) is a vegetable oil pressed from the
   seeds of various varieties of Vitis vinifera grapes, an abundant
   by-product of wine making. Grape seed oil is used for: salad dressings,
   marinades, deep frying, flavored oils, baking, massage oil, sunburn
   repair lotion, hair products, body hygiene creams, lip balm and hand
   creams. Most grapeseed oil is produced in Italy, with other producing
   nations including France, Spain, and Switzerland. Although known to
   Europeans for centuries, grape seed oil was not produced or used on a
   large scale until the 20th century, largely due to the fact that grape
   seeds contain a lower percentage of oil as compared to other
   oil-producing seeds, nuts, or beans.
   Grape seeds in Nr. 7 and 8 and grapes
   Enlarge
   Grape seeds in Nr. 7 and 8 and grapes

Culinary uses

   Grape seed oil is extracted from grape seeds and has a relatively high
   smoke point, approximately 420 °F (216 °C), so it can be safely used to
   cook at high temperatures. Grape seed oil can be used for stir-fries,
   sautéing and fondue. In addition to its high smoking point, grape seed
   oil has other positive attributes in relation to cooking. It has a
   clean, light taste that has been described as 'nutty'. Because of its
   'neutral' taste, grape seed oil is often used as an ingredient in salad
   dressings or as a base for infusing or flavoring with garlic, rosemary,
   or other herbs or spices. It is also used as an ingredient in homemade
   mayonnaise. One is able to use less grape seed oil for precisely the
   same reasons that the cosmetics industry likes it, the emollient and
   film-forming virtues.

   The metabolic energy density of grape seed oil is comparable to that of
   other oils: about 120 kcal per tablespoon (34 kJ/ ml). However, because
   less oil is needed for cooking it can be used within low-fat diet,
   especially when combined with good frying techniques (such as using
   enough oil, not overcrowding the pan, and having the oil at the correct
   temperature) which reduce the amount of absorbed oil.

Cosmetics

   In all products grape seed oil is a preferred cosmetic ingredient for
   damaged and stressed tissues, possessing regenerative and restructuring
   qualities which allow a better control of skin moisturization. It can
   help skin retain the normal structure of epithelium cells and nerve
   cells via supporting the cell membranes. It is noted to be especially
   effective for repair of the skin around the eyes. Used as an all-over
   skin moisturizer, grape seed oil is known to reduce the look of stretch
   marks. A light, thin oil, grapeseed oil leaves a glossy film over the
   skin when used as a carrier oil for essential oils in aromatherapy. It
   contains more linoleic acid than many other carrier oils. Grapeseed oil
   is also usable as a lubricant for shaving your face.

Current medical information

   Grape seed oil is reputed to contain plentiful antioxidants, as well as
   to lower cholesterol levels. In a study presented in 1993 at the
   American College of Cardiology Scientific Session, Nash and colleagues
   showed in 56 men and women using up to 1.5 ounces (43 g) per day, an
   amount that one can cook with, that grape seed oil raised HDL levels by
   13% and reduced LDL levels by 7% in three weeks. The total
   cholesterol/HDL ratio fell 15.6%, and the total LDL/HDL ratio fell
   15.3%, which could be significant for those at risk of heart attack.

Vitamins in grape seed oil

   Vitamin E (0.8 to 1.2 g/kg), Vitamin C and Beta-Carotene.
   There is unconfirmed information that grape seed oil also contains
   Vitamin D.
   Average composition of Grape Seed Oil fatty acids
   Common Name Acid Name Average Percentage Range
   Omega-6 Linoleic acid 69 to 78%
   Omega-9 Oleic acid 15 to 20%
   Palmitic acid Hexadecanoic acid 5 to 11%
   Stearic acid Octadecanoic acid 3 to 6%
   Omega-3 A-Linolenic Acid 0.3 to 1%
   Palmitoleic acid 9-Hexadecenoic acid 0.5 to 0.70%

   Grape seed oil also contains 0.8 to 1.5% unsaponifiables rich in
   phenols
   (tocopherols) and steroids (campesterol, beta-sitosterol,
   stigmasterol).

Oligomeric proanthocyanidins

   Some sources claim that grape seed oil is also high in procyanidolic
   oligomers (also known as oligomeric proanthocyanidins, OPCs or PCOs).
   However other sources dispute this. Because proanthocyanidins are polar
   molecules which are insoluble in nonpolar liquids such as oils, grape
   seed oil is unlikely to contain as much PCO as other grape products
   like fresh grapes, grape juice or red wine. Some published independent
   analyses show that grape seed oil typically contains almost no PCO at
   all . It has been claimed that many distributors of pycnogenol and
   related products are involved in pyramid schemes . This in no way
   impacts its possible health benefits, of course.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grape_seed_oil"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
