   #copyright

Gray reef shark

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Insects, Reptiles and
Fish

                 iGray reef shark

                             Conservation status

   Near Threatened (LR/nt)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Animalia
   Phylum:   Chordata
   Class:    Chondrichthyes
   Subclass: Elasmobranchii
   Order:    Carcharhiniformes
   Family:   Carcharhinidae
   Genus:    Carcharhinus
   Species:  C. amblyrhynchos

                                Binomial name

   Carcharhinus amblyrhynchos
   ( Bleeker, 1856)
   Range of gray reef shark
   Range of gray reef shark

   The grey reef shark, Carcharhinus amblyrhynchos, is one of the most
   common sharks in Indo-Pacific waters, from the Red Sea to Easter
   Island. It is found at depths down to about 250 m in lagoons and close
   to islands and coral reefs.

   As its name suggests, the shark is grey overall, with a white
   underside. The tips of most fins, except the first dorsal fin, are
   darker, and the trailing edge of the caudal fin has a prominent black
   margin. Some individuals have a white pattern on the leading edge of
   the dorsal fin. It has been recorded at up to 2.55 m. The blacktip reef
   shark looks similar, and is also common, but it is distinguished by a
   black tip on the first dorsal fin.

Behaviour

   Grey reef shark.
   Enlarge
   Grey reef shark.

   They are active during the day, but more so at night, feeding on reef
   fishes, squids, octopus, and various crustaceans such as crabs and
   shrimp.

   This species is social, aggregating in favored areas, often near
   dropoffs at the edge of a reef, or in atoll passes where there is a
   strong current. They are often curious, will investigate scuba divers,
   and have been implicated in attacks, although there is some debate as
   to whether the sharks are fundamentally aggressive or have simply
   reacted badly to perceived threats by divers. When threatened they
   exhibit a distinctive threat behaviour, adopting a hunched posture with
   the body bent into an "S" shape.

   Reproduction is viviparous, with 1 – 6 pups in a litter.

   The numbers of grey reef sharks have declined in recent years.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gray_reef_shark"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
