   #copyright

Greater Cane Rat

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mammals

                iGreater Cane Rat

                             Conservation status

   Least Concern (LC)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Animalia
   Phylum:   Chordata
   Class:    Mammalia
   Order:    Rodentia
   Suborder: Hystricomorpha
   Family:   Thryonomyidae
   Genus:    Thryonomys
   Species:  T. swinderianus

                                Binomial name

   Thryonomys swinderianus
   (Temminck, 1827)

   The Greater Cane Rat (Thryonomys swinderianus) is a close relative of
   porcupines and guinea pigs that inhabits Africa, south of the Saharan
   Desert. The cane rat lives by reedbeds and riverbanks. As humans move
   into such territories, the cane rats accepted plantations and
   cultivated areas. Cane rats can grow about two feet long in the longest
   individuals and weighs a little less than 19 pounds. It has rounded
   ears, short nose, and coarse bristly hair. Its forefeet are smaller
   than its hindfeet and supports its weight on only three toes. Cane rats
   live in small groups led by a single male. They are nocturnal and make
   nests from grasses or burrow underground. The oldest cane rat can live
   more than four years. If frightened, they grunt and run towards water.
   They eat grasses and cane and since they have tastes for cultivated
   foods, they make serious agricultural pests. So far, their conservation
   status is lower risk.

   In the country of Ghana and other regions of West Africa, the Greater
   Cane Rat, usually called a "grasscutter" or "cutting grass", is
   considered a delicacy. As a consequence, "grasscutters" are beginning
   to be raised in cages for sale.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greater_Cane_Rat"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
