   #copyright

Great Crested Grebe

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

               iGreat Crested Grebe

                             Conservation status

   Least Concern (LC)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Aves
   Order:   Podicipediformes
   Family:  Podicipedidae
   Genus:   Podiceps
   Species: P. cristatus

                                Binomial name

   Podiceps cristatus
   Linnaeus, 1758

   The Great Crested Grebe, Podiceps cristatus is a member of the grebe
   family of water birds.

Description

   The Great Crested Grebe is 46-51 cm long with a 59-73 cm wingspan. It
   is an excellent swimmer and diver, and pursues its fish prey
   underwater. The adults are unmistakable in summer with head and neck
   decorations. In winter, this is whiter than most grebes, with white
   above the eye, and a pink bill. It is the largest European grebe.

Distribution

   The Great Crested Grebe breeds in vegetated areas of freshwater lakes.
   The subspecies P. c. cristatus is found across Europe and Asia. It is
   resident in the milder west of its range, but migrates from the colder
   regions. It winters on freshwater lakes and reservoirs or the coast.
   The African subspecies P. c. infuscatus and the Australasian subspecies
   P. c. australis are mainly sedentary.

Behaviour

   The Great Crested Grebe has an elaborate mating display. Like all
   grebes, it nests on the water's edge, since its legs are set very far
   back and it cannot walk well. Usually two eggs are laid, and the
   striped young are sometimes carried on the adult's back. Young grebes
   are capable of swimming and diving almost at hatching. The Crested
   Grebe feeds mainly on fish, but also little crustaceans, insects and
   little frogs.

   This species was hunted almost to extinction in the United Kingdom in
   the 19th century for its head plumes, which were used to decorate hats.
   The RSPB was set up to help protect this species, which is again
   common.

Gallery

   Great Crested Grebe

                      Great Crested Grebe

                                         Great Crested Grebe

   Great Crested Grebe

                      Great Crested Grebe

                                         Great Crested Grebe
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Crested_Grebe"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
