   #copyright

Great Bustard

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

                  iGreat Bustard

                             Conservation status

   Vulnerable (VU)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Aves
   Order:   Gruiformes
   Family:  Otidae
   Genus:   Otis
            Linnaeus, 1758
   Species: O. tarda

                                Binomial name

   Otis tarda
   Linnaeus, 1758

   The Great Bustard, Otis tarda, is in the bustard family, the only
   member of the genus Otis. It breeds in southern and central Europe and
   across temperate Asia. European populations are mainly resident, but
   Asian birds move further south in winter. It is the national bird of
   Hungary.

   This species is declining due to habitat loss throughout its range. It
   used to breed more widely and was extinct in the British Isles between
   1832 and an artificial reintroduction to Salisbury Plain in 2004. It
   was also found in the Bărăgan region of Romania, but went extinct in
   1967.

   The male of this huge bird is possibly the heaviest extant bird capable
   of flight, alongside the similarly-sized Kori Bustard. An adult male is
   normally 1.1 meters (3.7 feet) long with a 2.4 meter (7.9 foot)
   wingspan and an average weight of 13.5 kg (30 lb). The heaviest known
   bird was about 21 kg (46 lb), although larger specimens have been
   reported but not verified. An adult male is brown above and white
   below, with a long grey neck and head. The breast and lower neck sides
   are chestnut. In the breeding season, the male has long white neck
   bristles. In flight, the long wings show large areas of white.

   The female is 30% smaller and half the weight, averaging 6.5 kg (14.3
   lb). The breast and neck are buff. Both sexes are usually silent.
   Immature birds resemble the female.

   The Great bustards breed in March, and a single male may mate with up
   to 5 females. Before mating, the male bustards moult into their
   breeding plumage around January. All breeding bustards moult from June
   to September as well. Males put on elaborate shows for the females;
   flashing their white under plumage and dancing around is the usual
   behaviour in attracting a female.

   This species is omnivorous, taking seeds, insects and other small
   creatures, including frogs and beetles. Like other bustards, the male
   Great Bustard has a flamboyant display showing much white, mainly from
   the undertail, and withdrawing the head. 2-3 olive or tan coloured,
   glossy eggs are laid in a small scrape in the dirt. The female
   incubates the eggs by herself for around 4 weeks. The chicks almost
   immediately leave the nest after they hatch, although they don't move
   very far from their mother until they're at least 1 year old. Males
   usually start to mate from about 5 years old. Great bustards typically
   live for around 10 years, but some have been known to live up to 15
   years or more.

   This bird's habitat is open grassland, although it can be found on
   undisturbed cultivation. It has a stately slow walk, and tends to run
   when disturbed rather than fly. It is gregarious, especially in winter.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Bustard"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
