   #copyright

Grevy's Zebra

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mammals

                  iGrevy's Zebra

                             Conservation status

   Endangered (EN)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Animalia
   Phylum:   Chordata
   Class:    Mammalia
   Order:    Perissodactyla
   Family:   Equidae
   Genus:    Equus
   Subgenus:
   Species:  E. grevyi

                                Binomial name

   Equus grevyi
   Oustalet, 1882
   Distribution of Equus grevyi
   Enlarge
   Distribution of Equus grevyi

   The Grevy's Zebra (Equus grevyi), sometimes known as the Imperial
   Zebra, is the largest species of zebra. It is found in the wild in
   Kenya, Somalia, and Ethiopia, and is considered endangered, partly due
   to hunting for its skin, which fetches a high price on the world
   market. Compared to other zebras, it is tall, has large ears, and its
   stripes are narrower. The species is named after Jules Grévy, a
   president of France, who, in the 1880s, was given one by the government
   of Abyssinia.

   The Grevy's Zebra differs from all other zebras in its primitive
   characteristics and different behaviour. In fact, "zebra" does not
   describe any specific taxon and is used only to refer to black and
   white striped members of the family Equidae. All members of the family
   are of the genus Equus, but the genus is commonly subdivided into four
   subgenera; Equus, Asinus, Hippotigris and Dolichohippus. The plains and
   mountain zebras belong to Hippotigris, but the Grevy's is the sole
   species of Dolichohippus. In many respects the Grevy's zebra is more
   akin to the asses (Asinus) while the other zebras are more closely
   related to the horses (Equus). In certain regions of Kenya, the Plains
   and Grevy's Zebras coexist.

   Grevy's zebra is the largest of all wild equines. It is 2.5-3 m from
   head to tail with a 38-75 cm tail, and stands 1.25-1.6 m high at the
   shoulder. Males weigh 380-450 kg, and females 350-400 kg. The stripes
   are narrow and close-set, being broader on the neck, and they extend to
   the hooves. The belly and the area around the base of the tail lack
   stripes. With all of the stripes closer together and thinner than most
   of the other zebras, it is easier to make a good escape and to hide
   from predators. The ears are very large, rounded, and conical. The head
   is large, long, and narrow, particularly mule-like in appearance. The
   mane is tall and erect; juveniles having a mane extending the length of
   the back.

   Grevy's Zebra is similar to the asses in many ways. Behaviourally, for
   example, it has a social system characterised by small groups of adults
   associated for short time periods of a few months. Adult males spend
   their time mostly alone in territories of 2-12 km², which is
   considerably smaller than the territories of the wild asses. The
   territories are marked by dung piles and females within the territory
   mate solely with the resident male. Small bachelor herds are known.
   This social structure is well-adapted for the dry and arid scrubland
   and plains that Grevy's Zebra primarily inhabits, less for the more
   lush habitats used by the other zebras. Like all zebras and asses,
   Grevy's Zebra males fight amongst themselves over territory and
   females. The Grevy's is vocal during fights (an asinine
   characteristic), braying loudly. Otherwise, the Grevy's communicates
   over long distances.

   The Grevy's Zebra lives 10-25 years and eats grasses and other plants.
   Gestation lasts 350-400 days, with a single foal being born. Predators
   of Grevy's Zebra include hunters and wild dogs native to the area. Most
   captive zebras in zoos are Grevy's Zebras .

Gallery

   Grevy's Zebra at Hogle Zoo in Salt Lake City, Utah

                                                     At the Henry Doorly Zoo
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grevy%27s_Zebra"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
