   #copyright

Guernsey

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

   Bailiwick of Guernsey
   Bailliage de Guernesey

   Flag of Guernsey Coat of arms of Guernsey
   Flag             Coat of arms
   Anthem: God Save the Queen (official)
   Sarnia Cherie (official for occasions when distinguishing anthem
   required)
   Location of Guernsey
   Capital St Peter Port
   Official languages English (predominant)
   French (legislative)
   Dgèrnésiais recognised as regional language.
   Government British crown dependency
    - Head of state Queen Elizabeth II
    - Lt. Governor Sir Fabian Malbon
    - Bailiff Geoffrey Rowland
    - Chief Minister Laurie Morgan
   Independence British crown dependency
    - Separation from
      mainland Normandy 1204
    - Liberation from
      Nazi Germany 9 May 1945
   Area
    - Total 78 km² ( 223rd)
   30.1 sq mi
    - Water (%) 0
   Population
    - July 2005 estimate 65,228 ( 208th)
    - Density 836.3/km² ( 12th^2)
   2,166/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2003 estimate
    - Total $2.59 billion ( 176th)
    - Per capita $40,000 ( 5th (2003 estimate))
   HDI  (n/a) n/a (n/a) ( n/a)
   Currency Pound sterling^1 ( GBP)
   Time zone GMT ( UTC)
    - Summer ( DST) ( UTC+1)
   Internet TLD .gg
   Calling code +44-1481
   ^1 The States of Guernsey issue their own sterling coins and banknotes
   (see Guernsey pound).
   ^2 Rank based on population density of Channel Islands including
   Jersey.

   The Bailiwick of Guernsey (French: Bailliage de Guernesey) is a British
   crown dependency in the English Channel off the coast of Normandy.

   As well as the island of Guernsey itself, it also includes Alderney,
   Sark, Herm, Jethou, Brecqhou, Burhou, Lihou and other islets. The
   island of Guernsey is divided into 10 parishes. Together with the
   Bailiwick of Jersey, it is included in the collective grouping known as
   the Channel Islands. Guernsey belongs to the Common Travel Area.

History

   Rising sea levels transformed Guernsey into the tip of a peninsula
   jutting out into the emergent English Channel until about 6000 BC, when
   Guernsey and other promontories were cut off from continental Europe,
   becoming islands. At this time, Neolithic farmers settled the coasts
   and created the dolmens and menhirs that dot the islands. The island of
   Guernsey contains three sculpted menhirs of great archaeological
   interest; the dolmen known as L'Autel du Dehus also contains a dolmen
   deity.

   During their migration to Brittany, the Britons occupied the Lenur
   Islands (former name of the Channel Islands) including Sarnia or Lisia
   (Guernsey) and Angia (Jersey). It was formerly thought that the
   Island's original name was Sarnia, but recent research indicates that
   may have been the Latin name for Sark; though Sarnia remains the
   island's traditional designation. Coming from the kingdom of Gwent,
   Saint Sampson (abbot of Dol, in Brittany) is credited with the
   introduction of Christianity to Guernsey.

   In 933 the islands, formerly under the control of the kingdom, then
   Duchy of Brittany were annexed by the Duchy of Normandy. The island of
   Guernsey and the other Channel Islands represent the last remnants of
   the medieval Duchy of Normandy. In the islands, Elizabeth II's
   traditional title as head of state is Duke of Normandy.
   Castle Cornet seen at night over the boat harbour of St Peter Port
   Enlarge
   Castle Cornet seen at night over the boat harbour of St Peter Port

   During the English Civil War, Guernsey sided with Parliament, while
   Jersey remained Royalist. Guernsey's decision was mainly related to the
   higher proportion of Calvinists and other Reformed churches, as well as
   Charles I's refusal to take up the case of some Guernsey seamen who had
   been captured by the Barbary corsairs. The allegiance was not total,
   however, there were a few Royalist uprisings in the Southwest of the
   island, while Castle Cornet was occupied by the then Governor, Sir
   Peter Osbourne, and Royalist troops. Castle Cornet was the last
   Royalist stronghold to capitulate, in 1651.

   During the wars with France and Spain during the 17th and 18th
   centuries, Guernsey shipowners and sea captains exploited their
   proximity to mainland Europe, applying for Letters of Marque and
   turning their trading vessels into privateers.

   The 19th century saw a dramatic increase in prosperity of the island,
   due to its success in the global maritime trade, and the rise of the
   stone industry. One notable Guernseyman, William Le Lacheur,
   established the Costa Rican coffee trade with Europe.

   During World War I approximately 3,000 island men served in the British
   Expeditionary Force. Of these, about 1,000 served in the Royal Guernsey
   Light Infantry regiment which was formed from the Royal Guernsey
   Militia in 1916.

   The Bailiwick of Guernsey was occupied by German troops in World War
   II. Before the occupation, many Guernsey children were evacuated to
   England to live with relatives or strangers during the war. Some
   children were never re-united with their families. During the
   occupation, some people from Guernsey were deported by the Germans to
   camps in the southwest of Germany, notably to Biberach an der Riss and
   interned in the Lindele Camp ("Lager Lindele"). There was also a
   concentration camp built in Alderney where forced labourers,
   predominantly from Eastern Europe, were kept. It was the only
   concentration camp built on British soil and is commemorated on
   memorials under the Alderney's name in French: 'Aurigny'.

   According to some reports, Guernsey was the second most heavily
   fortified island in occupied Europe during WWII with German defences
   dotted all round the coast and German additions to Castle Cornet.
   Certainly, the Channel Islands as a whole were the most fortified area
   in occupied Europe. Most of the German fortifications still remain
   intact and the majority of them are open for the public to explore
   (some having been renovated) with the exception of the Mirus Battery
   and some privately owned bunkers.

Politics

   The States of Guernsey, officially called the States of Deliberation,
   consists of 45 People's Deputies, elected from multi- or single-member
   districts every four years. There are also two representatives from
   Alderney, a self-governing dependency of the Bailiwick, but Sark sends
   no representative. There are also two non-voting members - the Attorney
   General and the Solicitor General both appointed by the monarch.

   Laws made the States are known as Projet(s) de Loi before they are
   passed and Loi or Law(s) afterwards (e.g. The Human Rights (Bailiwick
   of Guernsey) Law 2000.

   A Projet de Loi is the equivalent of an English Bill , and a Law is the
   equivalent of an English Act of Parliament. Laws have no effect until
   promulgated as Orders-in-Council of the Crown. They are given the Royal
   Sanction at regular meetings of the Privy Council in London after,
   which they are returned to the Islands for formal registration at the
   Royal Court.

   The States also make delegated legislation known as 'Ordinances
   (Ordonnances)' and 'Orders (Ordres)' which do not require Royal Assent.
   Commencement orders are usually in the form or Ordinances.

   The Lieutenant Governor is the representative of the Crown. The
   official residence of the Lieutenant Governor is Government House.
   Since 18 October 2005 the incumbent is Vice-Admiral Sir Fabian Malbon,
   born in Southsea, Portsmouth in 1946 and a serving naval officer
   1965-2002. His last naval posting before retirement from the Royal Navy
   was deputy commander-in-chief of fleet.

   Each parish is administered by a Douzaine. Douzeniers are elected for a
   six year mandate, two Douzeniers being elected by parishioners at a
   Parish Meeting in November each year. The senior Douzenier is known as
   the Doyen. Two elected Constables carry out the decisions of the
   Douzaine, serving for between one and three years. The longest serving
   Constable is known as the Senior Constable and his or her colleague as
   the Junior Constable.

   The legal system is Guernsey customary derived from Norman French
   customary law, heavily influenced and overlaid by English common law,
   justice being administered through a combination of Magistrates Court
   and the Royal Court. The legal profession is fused - there is no
   difference between solicitors and barristers as in England: Guernsey
   Advocates fulfil both roles. The Royal Court is presided over by the
   Bailiff and 12 Jurats (a permanent elected jury), the ultimate court of
   appeal being the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.

   Several European countries have consulate presence in the island. The
   French Consulate is based at Victor Hugo's former residence at
   Hauteville House. The German and Swiss Consulates are based in offshore
   bank branches of Credit Suisse and Fortis MeesPierson.

Geography

   Map of the Bailiwick of Guernsey
   Enlarge
   Map of the Bailiwick of Guernsey

   At 49°28′N 2°35′W, Alderney, Guernsey, Herm, Sark, and some other
   smaller islands have a total area of 30  square miles (78 km²) and a
   coastline of about 30 miles (50   km). By itself, the island of
   Guernsey has a total area of 25 square miles (63 km²). Guernsey is
   situated 30 statute miles (48 km) west of France's Normandy coast and
   75 statute miles (121 km) south of Weymouth in England and lies in the
   Gulf of St Malo. Lihou, a tidal island, is attached to Guernsey by a
   causeway at low tide. The terrain is mostly level with low hills in
   southwest.

   Elevation varies from sea level to 375 feet (114  m) at Le Moulin on
   Sark. The highest point in mainland Guernsey is Hautnez (363 ft;
   110 m), in Alderney at Le Rond But (306 ft; 93 m), in Jethou (248 ft;
   75.6 m) and Herm (322 ft; 98 m). Natural resources include cropland.

   Guernsey itself contains two main geographical regions, the Haut Pas, a
   high southern plateau, and the Bas Pas, a low-lying and sandy northern
   region. In general terms, the Haut Pas is the more rural of the two,
   and the Bas Pas is more residential and industrialised.

   There is a large, deepwater harbour at St Peter Port.

   The climate is temperate with mild winters and cool sunnier summers.
   The hottest months are August and September where temperatures are
   generally around 26 °C (79 °F). On average, the coldest month is
   February with an average weekly mean air temperature of 6°C. Average
   weekly mean air temperature reaches 16°C in August. Snow rarely falls
   and is unlikely to settle, but is most likely to fall in February. The
   temperature rarely drops below freezing, although strong wind-chill
   from Arctic winds can sometimes make it feel like it. The wettest
   months in terms of rainfall are on average December (average 108mm),
   November (average 98mm) and January (average 89mm). July is on average
   the sunniest month with 250 hours recorded sunshine; December the least
   with 50 hours recorded sunshine. 50% of the days are overcast.

   The Casquets, a group of islets, are notable for the lighthouse
   facility constructed there.

   The island of Guernsey is divided into ten parishes (the parish of St
   Anne, Alderney is not generally included in the enumeration of parishes
   in the Bailiwick):
   Map of the parishes of Guernsey
   Enlarge
   Map of the parishes of Guernsey

   Map      Parish       Population
                         (2001)       area
                                   ( vergees)  area
                                              (km²)    area
                                                     ( sq. mi)
   1   Castel            8,975     6,224      10.200 3.938
   2   Forest            1,549     2,508      4.110  1.587
   3   St Andrew         2,409     2,752      4.510  1.741
   4   St Martin         6,267     4,479      7.340  2.834
   5   St Peter Port     16,488    4,074      6.677  2.578
   6   St Pierre du Bois 2,188     3,818      6.257  2.416
   7   St Sampson        8,592     3,687      6.042  2.333
   8   St Saviour        2,696     3,892      6.378  2.463
   9   Torteval          973       1,901      3.115  1.203
   10  Vale              9,573     5,462      8.951  3.456
   Relief map of Guernsey from SRTM data
   Enlarge
   Relief map of Guernsey from SRTM data

Economy

   Unlike many countries Guernsey has not delegated money-creation to the
   central bank and has instead issued interest-free money since 1816. As
   a result the government has not had to use increasing amounts of tax
   revenue to repay debt to the central bank, which has led to low income
   tax rates, no goods and services tax and no capital gains tax.

   Financial services - banking, fund management, insurance, etc. -
   account for about 55% of total income in this tiny Channel Island
   economy. Tourism, manufacturing, and horticulture, mainly tomatoes and
   cut flowers especially freesias have been declining. Light tax and
   death duties make Guernsey a popular offshore finance centre. However,
   the evolving economic integration of the European Union nations is
   changing the rules under which Guernsey operates. Guernsey is currently
   changing the way its tax system works in order to remain
   internationally competitive, and is confronting what it terms a
   financial "black hole" of just over forty five million pounds accoding
   to some estmates. Guernsey now has the official ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 code
   GG and the official ISO 3166-1 alpha-3 code GGY; market data vendors,
   such as Bloomberg, will report products related to Guernsey using the
   alpha-3 code.

   Guernsey issues its own sterling coinage and banknotes. UK coinage and
   English and Scottish banknotes also circulate freely and
   interchangeably.
   A Guernsey Post pillar box.
   Enlarge
   A Guernsey Post pillar box.
   A Guernsey Telecom (now owned by Cable and Wireless Guernsey) phone
   box.
   Enlarge
   A Guernsey Telecom (now owned by Cable and Wireless Guernsey) phone
   box.

   Public services, such as electricity, telecommunications and postal
   services have been privatised by the States and are now operated by
   companies. The Post Office (Guernsey Post Limited) and Electricity
   Board (Guernsey Electricity Limited) are wholly owned by the States
   whilst telecommunications are operated by independent companies, Cable
   & Wireless Guernsey and Wave Telecom. Gas is suppplied by an
   independent private company. Both the Guernsey Post post boxes and the
   telephone boxes are painted blue, but otherwise are identical to their
   British counterparts, the red pillar box and red telephone box.

   Ports and harbours exist at St Peter Port and St Sampson's. There are
   two paved airports in the bailiwick ( Guernsey Airport and Alderney
   Airport), and 3 miles (5 km) of railways in Alderney.

   The Guernsey Railway, which was virtually an electric tramway, and
   which began working on 20 February 1892, was abandoned on 9 June 1934.
   It replaced an earlier transport system which was worked by steam, and
   was named the Guernsey Steam Tramway. The latter began service on 6
   June 1879 with six locomotives. This leaves Alderney as the only
   Channel Island with a working railway.
     * [Notes on the Railway taken from The Railway Magazine, September
       1934 edition]

Demographics

   The population is 65,031, as of 2004. The median age for males is 39.6
   years and for females is 41.5 years. The population growth rate is
   0.31% with 9.16 births/1,000 population, 9.87 deaths/1,000 population,
   and 3.84 migrant(s)/1,000 population. The life expectancy is 77.17
   years for males and for females. 1.38 children are born per woman.
   Ethnic groups consist of British and Norman-French descent, Portuguese
   and increasingly, Latvian. The Anglican, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian,
   Baptist, Congregational, and Methodist religions are practised, the
   most common being the Anglicans and Methodists.

   For immigration and nationality purposes the United Kingdom generally
   treats Guernsey as though it were part of the UK; however, Guernsey is
   constitutionally entitled to restrict immigration by non-Guernsey
   residents and maintains its own immigration and border controls.

   The housing market is split between local market properties and a small
   number of open market properties. Anyone may live in an open market
   property, but local market properties can only be lived in by those who
   qualify - either through being born in Guernsey, by obtaining a housing
   licence, or by virtue of sharing a property with someone who does
   qualify.

   Housing licences are for fixed periods, and are usually only valid for
   as long as the individual remains employed by a specified Guernsey
   employer.

   These restrictions apply equally regardless of whether the property is
   owned or rented, and only applies to occupation of the property. Thus a
   person whose housing licence expires may continue to own a Guernsey
   property, but will no longer be able to live in it.

   There are a number of routes to qualifying as a "local" for housing
   purposes. Generally it is sufficient to be born in Guernsey, or to at
   least one Guernsey parent, and to live in the island for ten years in a
   twenty year period. Once "local" status has been achieved it remains in
   place for life. Even a lengthy period of residence outside Guernsey
   does not invalidate "local" housing status. More details may be
   obtained from the States Housing Control Department.

   Although Guernsey's inhabitants are full British citizens, an
   endorsement restricting the right of establishment in other European
   Union states is placed in the passport of British citizens connected
   solely with the Channel Islands and Isle of Man. Those who have a
   parent or grandparent born in the United Kingdom itself (England,
   Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland), or who have lived in the United
   Kingdom for 5 years, are not subject to this restriction.

Education

   Guernsey adopts mainly the United Kingdom's National Curriculum,
   including the use of the GCSE and A Level system, in terms of content
   and structure of teaching. Children are allocated a primary school on a
   basis of catchement area, or are allowed to attend either two Catholic
   primary schools. In terms of admissions however the island continues to
   use the 11 plus exam to decide on whether a child should receive
   education at the Grammar School, or receive state funded places at the
   independent schools Elizabeth College for boys, and The Ladies College
   for girls or Blanchelande Girls College for Roman Catholics. Parent
   have the choice to send children to independent schools as fee payers.
   For children who are not selected for the Grammar School or colleges,
   they attend the secondary schools of La Mare de Carteret Secondary
   School, Les Beaucamps School, St Peter Port School and St Sampson's
   School.

   In 2001 along with planned redevelopment of secondary schools the then
   Education Council tried unsuccessfully abolish this system.
   Nevertheless the there is now a planned redevelopment of state schools
   across the island, however most of the plan is subjected to securing
   state funding.

   Post GCSE students have a choice of transferring to the state run The
   Grammar School and Sixth Form Centre, or to the independent colleges
   for academic AS/A Levels. Or subjects more vocationally at the islands
   Guernsey College of Further Education.

   There are no established universities on the island. Instead students
   have to go to the United Kingdom to receive state support towards
   maintenance and tuition fees. Recently however, the States of Guernsey
   Education Department has proposed the introducion of student loans due
   to the black hole deficit in state spending in 2008, for middle and
   upper income earners. This has meet with some opposition by local
   politicians and students who argue that it will deter future students
   from going and returning from university, due to high housing and
   living costs. The department argues that it had no choice but introduce
   them. It is to be decided by November. However the decision has been
   deffered until 2009, with postgraduate funding being restored.

Culture

   Little Chapel, Les Vauxbelets, Guernsey.
   Enlarge
   Little Chapel, Les Vauxbelets, Guernsey.

   English is the only language spoken by a majority of the population,
   while Dgèrnésiais, the Norman language of the island, is currently
   spoken fluently by 2% of the population (according to 2001 census).
   However, 14% of the population claim some understanding of the language
   and it is taught in a few Island schools. Until the early 20th century
   French was the only official language. Family and place names reflect
   this linguistic heritage. Portuguese is taught in a few schools and is
   spoken by around 2% of the population.

   Victor Hugo wrote some of his best-known works while in exile in
   Guernsey, including Les Misérables. His home in St Peter Port,
   Hauteville House, is now a museum administered by the city of Paris. In
   1866, he published a novel set in the island, Travailleurs de la Mer (
   Toilers of the Sea), which he dedicated to the island of Guernsey.

   The most well-known novel by a Guernseyman is The Book of Ebenezer Le
   Page, by GB Edwards which, in addition to being a critically-acclaimed
   work of literature, it also contains a wealth of insights into life in
   Guernsey during the 20th century.

   The national animals of the island of Guernsey are the donkey and the
   Guernsey cow. The traditional explanation for the donkey (âne in French
   and Dgèrnésiais) is the steepness of St Peter Port streets that
   necessitated beasts of burden for transport (in contrast to the flat
   terrain of the rival capital of St Helier in Jersey), although it is
   also used in reference to Guernsey inhabitants' stubbornness. The
   Guernsey cow is a more internationally famous icon of the island. There
   is also a breed of goat known as the Guernsey goat, which is
   distinguished by its golden-coloured coat .

   Guernsey people are traditionally nicknamed donkeys or ânes, especially
   by Jersey people (who in turn are nicknamed crapauds - toads).
   Inhabitants of each of the parishes of Guernsey also have traditional
   nicknames, although these have generally dropped out of use among the
   English-speaking population.

   The Guernsey Lily Nerine sarniensis (Sarnia is the traditional name of
   the island of Guernsey in Latin) is also used as a symbol of the
   island.

   A local delicacy is the ormer (Haliotis tuberculata) - a variety of
   abalone harvested from the beach at low spring tides.

   In July 2006 smoking in enclosed public places was banned, a law put in
   place to protect workers' right to a healthy working environment.

Sport in Guernsey

   Guernsey participates in its own right in the Commonwealth Games.

   Guernsey participates in the Island Games, which it hosted in 2003. In
   sporting events in which Guernsey does not have international
   representation, when the British Home Nations are competing separately,
   islanders that do have high athletic skill may choose to compete for
   any of the Home Nations - there are, however, restrictions on
   subsequent transfers to represent another Home Nation. The football
   player Matt Le Tissier for example, tried out for the Scotland national
   football team but ended up playing for England.

   The island's traditional colour (e.g. for sporting events) is green.

   Guernsey has recently been declared an affiliate member by the
   International Cricket Council (ICC).

Famous Guernsey people

   The following famous people were born in Guernsey:
     * James Saumarez (1757-1836), Vice Admiral of the Blue and first
       Baron de Saumarez.
     * Sir Isaac Brock (1769-1812), hero of Upper Canada.
     * Thomas de la Rue (1793-1866), printer and stationer.
     * Warren de la Rue (1815-1889), astronomer and chemist.
     * William Le Lacheur (1802-1863), sea captain and merchant.
     * Arthur Maurice Hocart (1883-1939), anthropologist.
     * Wilfred Hansford Gallienne (1897-1956), British Ambassador to Cuba.
     * Gerald Basil Edwards (1899-1976), author of The Book of Ebenezer Le
       Page.
     * Roy Dotrice (born 1923), actor; and his daughters, actresses
       Michele Dotrice (born 1948) and Karen Dotrice (born 1955).
     * John Savident (born 1938), actor in Coronation Street.
     * Andrew Lawrence-King (born 1959), baroque harpist, director of The
       Harp Consort.
     * Sarah Montague (born 1966), BBC journalist and news presenter.
     * Matt Le Tissier (born 1968), retired Southampton FC and England
       footballer.
     * Andy Priaulx (born 1974), motor racing driver and reigning World
       Touring Car Champion for BMW Team UK.
     * Dave Higgs (born 1985), Trials Bike Champion 2000, 2001, 2002

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guernsey"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
