   #copyright

Burr-Hamilton duel

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: North American History

   A contemporary artistic rendering of the 11 July 1804 duel between
   Aaron Burr and Alexander Hamilton by J. Mund.
   Enlarge
   A contemporary artistic rendering of the 11 July 1804 duel between
   Aaron Burr and Alexander Hamilton by J. Mund.

   The Burr-Hamilton duel was a duel between two prominent American
   politicians, former Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton and
   sitting Vice President Aaron Burr. In the early morning hours of 11
   July 1804, Burr and Hamilton departed by separate boats from Manhattan
   and rowed across the Hudson River to a spot known as the Heights of
   Weehawken in New Jersey, a popular duelling ground below the towering
   cliffs of the Palisades. Burr shot and wounded Hamilton, who died the
   following day from his wounds at his home, The Grange, in northern
   Manhattan.

   Arguably the most famous duel in American history, it arose from a
   long-standing political and personal rivalry that developed between
   both men that came to a point with Hamilton's journalistic defamation
   of Burr's character during the 1804 New York gubernatorial race in
   which Burr was a candidate. Fought at a time when the practice of
   dueling was being outlawed in the northern United States, the duel had
   immense political ramifications. Burr, who survived the duel, would be
   indicted for murder in both New York and New Jersey (though these
   charges were either later dismissed or resulted in acquittal), and the
   harsh criticism and animosity directed towards him would bring about an
   end to his political career and force him into a self-imposed exile.
   Further, Hamilton's untimely death would fatally weaken the fledging
   remnants of the Federalist Party, which combined with the death of
   George Washington (1732-1799) five years earlier, was left without a
   strong leader.

Background

   The duel was the final skirmish of a long conflict between
   Democratic-Republicans and Federalists. The conflict began in 1791,
   when Burr captured a Senate seat from Philip Schuyler, Hamilton's
   father-in-law, who would have supported his Federalist policies.
   (Hamilton was Secretary of the Treasury at the time). When the
   electoral college deadlocked in the election of 1800, Hamilton's
   maneuvering in the House of Representatives caused Thomas Jefferson to
   be named President and Burr Vice President. In 1800, Burr published
   "The Public Conduct and Character of John Adams, Esq., President of the
   United States," a document highly critical of Adams, which had actually
   been authored by Hamilton but intended only for private circulation.
   When it became clear that Jefferson would drop Burr from his ticket in
   the 1804 election, the Vice President ran for the governorship of New
   York instead. Hamilton campaigned viciously against Burr, who was
   running as an independent, causing him to lose to Morgan Lewis, a
   Democratic-Republican endorsed by Hamilton.

   Both men had been involved in duels in the past. Hamilton had been a
   principal in 10 shot-less duels prior to his fatal encounter with Burr,
   including duels with William Gordon (1779), Aedanus Burke (1790), John
   Francis Mercer (1792-1793), James Nicholson (1795), James Monroe
   (1797), John Adams (1800), Ebenezer Purdy/ George Clinton (1804). He
   also served as a second to John Laurens in a 1779 duel with General
   Charles Lee and legal client John Auldjo in a 1787 duel with William
   Pierce. In addition, Hamilton claimed to have had one previous honour
   dispute with Burr; Burr claimed there were two.

   Additionally, Hamilton's son, Philip, was killed in a November 23, 1801
   duel with George I. Eacker initiated after Philip and his friend
   Richard Price partook in "hooliganish" behaviour in Eacker's box at the
   Park Theatre. This was in response to a speech, critical of Hamilton,
   that Eacker had made on July 4, 1801. Philip and his friend both
   challenged Eacker to duels when he called them "damned rascals." After
   Price's duel (also at Weehawken) resulted in nothing more than four
   missed shots, Hamilton advised his son to delope, and throw away his
   fire. However, after both Philip and Eacker stood shotless for a minute
   after the command "present", Philip levelled his pistol, causing Eacker
   to fire, mortally wounding Philip and sending his shot awry. This duel
   is often cited as having a tremendous psychological impact on Hamilton
   in the context of the Hamilton-Burr duel.

Charles Cooper's Letter

   On April 24, 1804, a vitriolic letter originally from Dr. Charles D.
   Cooper to Philip Schuyler, Hamilton's father-in-law was published in
   the Albany Register in the context of opposing Burr's candidacy. It
   claimed to describe "a still more despicable opinion which General
   Hamilton has expressed of Mr. Burr" at a political dinner. In a letter
   delivered by William P. Van Ness, Burr demanded "a prompt and
   unqualified acknowledgement or denial of the use of any expression
   which would warrant the assertion of Dr. Cooper". Hamilton's reply on
   June 20 indicated that he could not be held responsible for Cooper's
   interpretation of his words. Burr's reply on June 21, also delivered by
   Van Ness, stated that "political opposition can never absolve gentlemen
   from the necessity of a rigid adherence to the laws of honour and the
   rules of decorum". Hamilton replied that he had "no other answer to
   give than that which has already been given". This letter was delivered
   to Nathaniel Pendleton on June 22 but did not reach Burr until June 25.
   The delay was due to negotiation between Pendleton and Van Ness in
   which Pendleton submitted the following paper:


   Burr-Hamilton duel

      General Hamilton says he cannot imagine what Dr. Cooper may have
    alluded, unless it were to a conversation at Mr. Taylor's, in Albany,
    last winter (at which he and General Hamilton were present). General
        Hamilton cannot recollect distinctly the particulars of that
    conversation, so as to undertake to repeat them, without running the
         risk of varying or omitting what might be deemed important
   circumstances. The expressions are entirely forgotten, and the specific
    ideas imperfectly remembered; but to the best of his recollection it
   consisted of comments on the political principles and views of Colonel
   Burr, and the results that might be expected from them in the event of
   his election as Governor, without reference to any particular instance
                    of past conduct or private character.


   Burr-Hamilton duel

   After the delivery of Hamilton's second letter, a second paper
   submitted by Pendleton further offered "in relation to any other
   language or conversation or language of General Hamilton which Colonel
   Burr will specify, a prompt or frank avowal or denial will be given."
   This offer was not accepted and a challenge was formally offered by
   Burr and accepted by Hamilton.

   Many subsequent historians have considered the causes of the duel to be
   flimsy and have thus either characterized Hamilton as "suicidal", Burr
   as "malicious and murderous," or both.

The duel

   The pistols used in the duel
   Enlarge
   The pistols used in the duel

   Hamilton and Burr agreed to cross the Hudson River at dawn to take the
   duel to a rocky ledge in Weehawken, New Jersey, because dueling had
   been outlawed in New York. The same site had been used for 18 known
   duels between 1700 and 1845. In an attempt to prevent the participants
   from being prosecuted, procedures were implemented to give all
   witnesses plausible deniability. For example, the pistols were
   transported to the island in a portmanteau, enabling the rowers (who
   also stood with their backs to the duelists) to say under oath that
   they had not seen any pistols.

   Burr, William P. Van Ness (his second), Matthew L. Davis, and another
   (often identified as Swartwout) plus their rowers reached the site
   first at half past six, wherupon Burr and Van Ness started to clear the
   underbrush from the duelling ground. Hamilton, Judge Nathaniel
   Pendleton (his second), and Dr. David Hosack arrived a few minutes
   before seven. Lots were cast for the choice of position and which
   second should start the duel, both of which were won by Hamilton's
   second who chose the upper edge of the ledge (which faced the city) for
   Hamilton.

   All first-hand accounts of the duel agree that two shots were fired;
   however, Hamilton and Burr's seconds disagreed on the intervening time
   between the shots. Hamilton fired first without hitting Burr. Burr's
   shot hit Hamilton in the lower abdomen above the right hip. The bullet
   ricocheted off Hamilton's second or third false rib—fracturing it—and
   caused considerable damage to his internal organs, particularly his
   liver and diaphragm before becoming lodged in his first or second
   lumbar vertebra. According to Pendleton's account, Hamilton collapsed
   immediately, dropping the pistol involuntarily, and Burr moved toward
   Hamilton in a speechless manner (which Pendleton deemed to be
   indicative of regret) before being hustled away behind an umbrella by
   Van Ness because Hosack and the rowers were already approaching. Burr
   returned on his barge and had breakfast in the city.

Dr. David Hosack's Account

   Dr. David Hosack, the physician, testified that he had only seen
   Hamilton and the two seconds disappear "into the wood", heard two
   shots, and rushed to find a wounded Hamilton when his name was called.
   Hosack also testified that he had not seen Burr, who had been hidden
   behind an umbrella by Van Ness, his second. In a letter to William
   Coleman, Dr. Hosack gives a very clear picture of the events:


   Burr-Hamilton duel

   When called to him upon his receiving the fatal wound, I found him half
     sitting on the ground, supported in the arms of Mr. Pendleton. His
   countenance of death I shall never forget. He had at that instant just
    strength to say, 'This is a mortal wound, doctor;' when he sunk away,
    and became to all appearance lifeless. I immediately stripped up his
    clothes, and soon, alas I ascertained that the direction of the ball
   must have been through some vital part. His pulses were not to be felt,
   his respiration was entirely suspended, and, upon laying my hand on his
   heart and perceiving no motion there, I considered him as irrecoverably
    gone. I, however, observed to Mr. Pendleton, that the only chance for
    his reviving was immediately to get him upon the water. We therefore
     lifted him up, and carried him out of the wood to the margin of the
   bank, where the bargemen aided us in conveying him into the boat, which
     immediately put off. During all this time I could not discover the
      least symptom of returning life. I now rubbed his face, lips, and
    temples with spirits of hartshorn, applied it to his neck and breast,
   and to the wrists and palms of his hands, and endeavoured to pour some
                               into his mouth.


   Burr-Hamilton duel

   Dr. Hosack goes on to say that in a few minutes Hamilton had revived,
   either from the hartshorn or fresh air. Hosack finishes his letter:


   Burr-Hamilton duel

    Soon after recovering his sight, he happened to cast his eye upon the
     case of pistols, and observing the one that he had had in his hand
       lying on the outside, he said, "Take care of that pistol; it is
    undischarged, and still cocked; it may go off and do harm. Pendleton
      knows " (attempting to turn his head towards him) 'that I did not
    intend to fire at him.' 'Yes,' said Mr. Pendleton, understanding his
         wish, 'I have already made Dr. Hosack acquainted with your
    determination as to that' He then closed his eyes and remained calm,
   without any disposition to speak; nor did he say much afterward, except
     in reply to my questions. He asked me once or twice how I found his
      pulse; and he informed me that his lower extremities had lost all
   feeling, manifesting to me that he entertained no hopes that he should
                                long survive.


   Burr-Hamilton duel

   Dr. Hosack wrote his account on August 17, about one month after the
   duel had taken place.

Statement to the Press

   Pendleton and Van Ness issued a press statement about the events of the
   duel. The statement printed out the agreed upon dueling rules and
   events that transpired. Pendleton and Van Ness agreed that Hamilton
   fired first and that both men had fired "within a few seconds of each
   other."

   In Pendleton's amended version of the statement, he and a friend went
   to the site of the duel the day after Hamilton's death to discover
   where Hamilton's shot went. The statement reads:


   Burr-Hamilton duel

   They [Mr. Pendleton and an accomplice] ascertained that the ball passed
   through the limb of a cedar tree, at an elevation of about twelve feet
      and a half, perpendicularly from the ground, between thirteen and
   fourteen feet from the mark on which General Hamilton stood, and about
     four feet wide of the direct line between him and Col. Burr, on the
                  right side; he having fallen on the left.


   Burr-Hamilton duel

Hamilton's intentions

   In Statement on Impending Duel with Aaron Burr, a letter that Hamilton
   wrote the night before the duel, Hamilton stated that he was "strongly
   opposed to the practice of dueling" for both religious and practical
   reasons and continued to state:


   Burr-Hamilton duel

   I have resolved, if our interview is conducted in the usual manner, and
   it pleases God to give me the opportunity, to reserve and throw away my
      first fire, and I have thoughts even of reserving my second fire.


   Burr-Hamilton duel

   When Burr later learned of this, he responded: "Contemptible, if true."

   In addition, after being mortally wounded, Hamilton's first words on
   regaining consciousness were “Pendleton knows I did not mean to fire at
   Col. Burr the first time.” indicating he intended to throw his shot.

Burr's intentions

   Burr was reputed as a good shot. The afternoon after the duel, he was
   quoted as saying that had his vision not been impaired by the morning
   mist, he would have shot Hamilton in the heart. According to the
   account of Jeremy Bentham, who met with Burr in 1808 in England, Burr
   claimed to have been certain of his ability to kill Hamilton, and
   Bentham concluded that Burr was "little better than a murderer."

The Pistols

   Others have attributed Hamilton's apparent misfire to the
   hair-triggered design of one of the Wogdon dueling pistols, both of
   which survive today. One of the pistols has a flint-lock firing
   mechanism and the other has been converted from the original flint to a
   percussion firing mechanism. When asked by Pendleton before the duel if
   he would have the "hair-spring" pistol, Hamilton reportedly replied
   "not this time."

   The pistols belonged to Hamilton's brother-in-law, John Barker Church,
   who was a business partner of both Hamilton and Burr. He purchased the
   pistols in London in 1797. They had previously been used in a 1799 duel
   between Church and Burr, in which neither man was injured. In 1801,
   Hamilton's son, Philip, used them in a duel in which he died. In 1930
   the pistols were sold to the Chase Manhattan Bank, now preserved by
   JPMorgan Chase & Co.

Aftermath

   A mortally wounded Hamilton died the following day and was buried in
   the Trinity Churchyard Cemetery in Manhattan (Hamilton was nominally
   Episcopalian). Governor Morris, a political ally of Hamilton's, gave
   the eulogy at his funeral and secretly established a fund to support
   his widow and children.

   Burr was charged with murder in New York and New Jersey, but neither
   charge reached trial. In Bergen County, New Jersey, a grand jury
   indicted Burr for murder in November 1804, but the New Jersey Supreme
   Court quashed the indictment on a motion from Colonel Ogden.

   Burr fled to South Carolina, where his daughter lived with her family,
   but soon returned to Washington, D.C. to complete his term of service
   as Vice President. He presided over the Samuel Chase impeachment trial
   "with the dignity and impartiality of an angel and the rigor of a
   devil." Burr's heartfelt farewell speech in March 1805 moved some of
   his harshest critics in the Senate to tears.
   An 1841 map showing the location of a Hamilton Monument (Larger)
   Enlarge
   An 1841 map showing the location of a Hamilton Monument (Larger)

   With his political career over, Burr went west, where he allegedly had
   plans to establish a new empire carved out of the Louisiana territory.
   However, after General James Wilkinson refused to support Burr and
   William Eaton informed President Jefferson of Burr's duplicitous
   intentions, Burr was charged with treason after being detained in
   Missouri in the process of recruiting for his coup. He was later
   acquitted due to lack of physical evidence.

   Years later, he returned to New York City to practice law and was tried
   and acquitted for his role in the duel. He died in 1836 in Staten
   Island, New York, never having apologized to Hamilton's family or shown
   any remorse for ending Hamilton's life, though he once remarked "Had I
   read Sterne more and Voltaire less, I should have known the world was
   wide enough for Hamilton and me."

Monuments

   The first memorial to the duel was constructed in 1806 by the Saint
   Andrew Society, of which Hamilton was formerly a member. A 14 foot
   marble cenotaph, consisting of an obelisk topped by a flaming urn and a
   plaque with a quote from Horace surrounded by an iron fence,
   constructed approximately where Hamilton was believed to have fallen.
   Duels continued to be fought at the site and the marble was slowly
   vandalized and removed for souvenirs, leaving nothing remaining by
   1820. The tablet itself did survive, turning up in a junk store and
   finding its way to the New York Historical Society in Manhattan, where
   it still resides.

   From 1820 to 1857, the site was marked by two stones with the names
   Hamilton and Burr placed where they were thought to have stood during
   the duel. When a road from Hoboken to Fort Lee was built through the
   site in 1858, an inscription on a boulder where a mortally wounded
   Hamilton was thought to have rested—one of the many pieces of graffiti
   left by visitors—was all that remained. No primary accounts of the duel
   confirm the boulder anecdote. In 1870, railroad tracks were built
   directly through the site, and the boulder was hauled to the top of the
   Palisades, where it remains today. In 1894, an iron fence was built
   around the boulder, supplemented by a bust of Hamilton and a plaque.
   The bust was thrown over the cliff on October 14, 1934 by vandals and
   the head was never recovered; a new bust was installed on July 12,
   1935.

   The plaque was stolen by vandals in the 1980s and an abbreviated
   version of the text was inscribed on the indentation left in the
   boulder, which remained until the 1990s when a granite pedestal was
   added in front of the boulder and the bust was moved to the top of the
   pedestal. New markers were added on July 11, 2004, the 200th
   anniversary of the duel.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Burr-Hamilton_duel"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
