   #copyright

Hanoi

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Asia

                                 The Temple of Literature - Logo of Hanoi
                                                                     Name
                                  Name:                             Hà Nội
                               Meaning:                     River Interior
                         Founding Year:                               1010
                                                                Geography
                                Region:                     Southeast Asia
                           Coordinates: 21°2'N, 105°51'E (21.0333, 105.85)
                             Time Zone:                             UTC +7
                                  Area:                            921 km²
                                          image:LocationVietnamHaNoi.png
                                                                   People
                            Population:            3,145,300 (As of 2005 )
                               Density:                          3,348/km²
                           Ethnicities:                          Kinh, Hoa
                          Calling Code:                               +844
                       ISO 3166-2 Code:                              VN-64
                               Website:                   www.hanoi.gov.vn
                                                               Governance
                   Administration Type:                       Municipality
                         Council Chair:
                       Committee Chair:

   Hanoi ( Vietnamese: Hà Nội) pronunciation , estimated population
   3,083,800 (2004), is the capital of Vietnam. From 1010 until 1802, it
   was the political centre of an independent Vietnam with a few brief
   interruptions. It was eclipsed by Huế during the Nguyen Dynasty as the
   capital of Vietnam, but served as the capital of French Indochina from
   1887 to 1945. From 1945 to 1976, it was the capital of North Vietnam.

   The city is located on the right bank of the Red River. Hanoi is
   located at 21°2' North, 105°51' East (21.0333, 105.85), 1,760 km (1,094
   mi) north of Ho Chi Minh City (formerly Saigon).

History

   Hoàn Kiếm Lake in the center of Hanoi, with the streets of the old town
   in the background (1999)
   Enlarge
   Hoàn Kiếm Lake in the centre of Hanoi, with the streets of the old town
   in the background (1999)

   The area around modern Hanoi has been inhabited for at least 3000 years
   BC, one the first known permanent settlements is the Co Loa citadel at
   around 200 BC.

   Through history, Hanoi was known by many names. During Chinese
   domination of Vietnam, it was known as Long Bien, Tống Bình and later
   Long Đỗ. In 866, it was turned into a citadel and was named Đại La.

   In 1010, Lý Thái Tổ, the first ruler of the Lý Dynasty (Triều Lý),
   moved the capital of Đại Việt (the Great Viet, then the name of
   Vietnam) to the site of the Đại La Citadel. Claiming to have seen a
   dragon ascending the Red River, he renamed it Thăng Long (Ascending
   dragon)—a name still used poetically to this day. It remained the
   capital of Vietnam until 1397, when the capital was moved to Thanh Hóa,
   also known as Tây Đô (Western Capital). Thăng Long then became Đông Đô
   (Eastern Capital).

   In 1408, Vietnam was invaded by Chinese troops from the Ming Dynasty
   and Đông Đô was renamed Đông Quan (Eastern Gateway) by the Chinese. In
   1428, Vietnam was liberated from Chinese rule by Lê Lợi, the founder of
   the Le Dynasty (Triều Lê ) and Dông Quan was renamed Đông Kinh (Eastern
   Capital—the name known to Europeans as Tonkin; and the same characters
   used for Tokyo). During the Tây Son Dynasty, it was named Bắc Thành
   (Northern Citadel).

   In 1802, when the Nguyễn Dynasty (Triều Nguyễn) was established and
   then moved the capital down to present-day Huế, it was renamed Thăng
   Long. However, the second syllable of the toponym is actually a homonym
   of the word long, and so, actually suggests "to flourish" as opposed to
   "dragon". Therefore the name would be translated roughly to to ascend
   and flourish. In 1831 the Nguyen Dynasty renamed it Hà Nội (which can
   be translated as around the bend of the river or River Interior) .
   Hanoi was occupied by the French in 1873 and passed to them ten years
   later. It became the capital of French Indochina after 1887.

   The city was occupied by the Japanese in 1940, and liberated in 1945,
   when it became the seat of Vietnam's government. From late 1946 to
   early 1947, it was the scene of heavy fighting between the French and
   Viet Minh forces. At that point, the city became the capital of an
   independent North Vietnam.

   During the Vietnam War Hanoi's transportation facilities were disrupted
   by the bombing of bridges and railways, which were, however, promptly
   repaired. Following the end of the war, Hanoi became the capital of all
   Vietnam when North and South Vietnam were reunited on July 2, 1976.

   In 2004, during site surveys for construction of a new parliament
   house, the remnant of a massive 900 years old citadel was discovered in
   central Hanoi, near the site of Ba Dinh square.

Geography

Districts

   Hanoi comprises of eight inner districts of Ba Đình, Cầu Giấy, Đống Đa,
   Hoàn Kiếm, Hai Bà Trưng, Hoàng Mai, Long Biên, Tây Hồ and Thanh Xuân,
   and five outer districts of Đông Anh, Gia Lâm, Từ Liêm, Thanh Trì and
   Sóc Sơn.

Climate

   Hanoi experiences the typical climate of northern Vietnam, where
   summers are hot and humid, and winters are relatively cool and dry. The
   summer months from May to September receive the majority of rainfall in
   the year (1,682 mm rainfall/ year). The winter months from November to
   March are relatively dry, although spring then often brings light
   rains. The minimum winter temperature in Hanoi can dip as low as 6–7°C
   an get as hot as 38–40 (100-104°F). Central heating is not common in
   Hanoi, and wind chills may make one feel rather cold in winter.

Education

   Hanoi, as the capital of Indochina, was home to the first western-style
   universities in Indochina, including: Hanoi Medical College (1902),
   Indochina University (1904), and École Supérieure des Beaux-Arts de
   L'Indochine (1925).

   Hanoi is the largest centre of education in Vietnam. Admissions to
   undergraduate study are through entrance examinations, which are
   conducted annually and open for everyone in the country. The majority
   of universities in Hanoi are public, although in recent years a few
   private universities have started their operation.

   Because most of the national universities are located in Hanoi (and Ho
   Chi Minh City), students from other provinces wishing to enter
   university often travel to Hanoi for the annual entrance examination.
   Such events often take place in June/July, when a large number of
   students and their families converge on the city for a few weeks around
   the examimation period. In recent years, these entrant exams have been
   centrally set by the ministry of education, but the passmarks are
   decided independently by each university.

   Pre-tertiary schools in Hanoi mainly serve their local districts.
   Education is equivalent to the K–12 system in the US, with elementary
   school between grades 1 and 5, middle school (or junior high) between
   grades 6 and 9, and high school from grades 10 to 12.

   Some pre-tertiary schools might have a few selective classes for
   students with higher entry scores, with a stronger emphasis on subjects
   such as mathematics or sciences. In addition, some schools are
   designated as selective where admissions are also by entrant
   examination on the subjects of specialization. A few major universities
   in Hanoi also run a limited number of high-school and middle-school
   classes out of their Hanoi campuses for gifted students in subjects
   such as mathematics, chemistry, physics, information technology,
   linguistics, biology, and other social science and humanity subjects.

Places of interest

   As the capital of Vietnam for almost a thousand years, Hanoi is
   considered to be the cultural centre of Vietnam, where every dynasty
   has left behind their imprint. Even though some relics have not
   survived through wars and time, the city still has many interesting
   cultural and historic monuments for visitors and residents alike.
   Hanoi opera house
   Enlarge
   Hanoi opera house

   Some of the prominent places are: The Temple of Literature (Văn Miếu),
   site of the oldest university in Vietnam; One Pillar Pagoda (Chùa Một
   Cột); Flag Tower of Hanoi (Cột cờ Hà Nội); The Old Quarter and Hoàn
   Kiếm

   Hanoi is also home to a number of museums, including the Vietnamese
   National History Museum, the National Museum of Ethnology, the National
   Museum of Fine Arts and the Revolution Museum .
   The Temple of Literature , main entry
   Enlarge
   The Temple of Literature , main entry

   The Old Quarter, near the scenic Hoan Kiem lake, has the original
   street layout and architecture of the old Hanoi. At the beginning of
   20th century, the city consisted of only about 36 streets, most of
   which are now part of the old quarter. Each street then comprised of
   merchant and household specialized in a particular trade, such as silk
   traders, jewellery, etc. The street names nowadays still reflect these
   specializations, although few of them remain exclusively in their
   original commerce. The area is in general famous for its small artisans
   and merchants, including many silk shops. Local cuisine specialties as
   well as several clubs and bars can be found here also. A night market
   in the heart of the district opens for business every Friday, Saturday,
   and Sunday evening with a variety of clothing, souvenirs, and food.

   West Lake (Ho>! Tay) is a popular place for people to hang out. It is
   the largest lake in Hanoi, and there are many temples to visit in the
   area. There are small boats for hire, and a floating restaurant which
   has been operating for a couple of decades.

Population

   Hanoi's population is constantly growing, a reflection of the fact that
   the city is both a major metropolitan area of Northern Vietnam, and
   also the country's political centre. This population growth also puts a
   lot of pressure onto the infrastructure, some of which is antiquated
   and dates back from the early 20th century.

   When you talk to Hanoians, they will concede that most people you meet
   in Hanoi these days are from somewhere else. If you define a native
   Hanoian as someone who has been here for three generations or more,
   that number is likely to be very small as compared to the overall
   population of the city. Even in the Old Quarter, where commerce started
   hundreds years ago and was mostly a family business, many of the
   street-front stores nowadays are owned by merchants and retailers from
   other provinces. The original owner family may have either rented out
   the store and moved to live further inside the house, or just moved out
   of the neighbourhood altogether. The pace of change has especially
   escalated after the abandonment of central-planing economic policies,
   and the loosening of the district-based household registrar system.

   The considerate and genteel nature of Hanoians is occasionally quoted
   in idioms and literature, which may appear as annoyingly snobbish. In
   reality, they are a reflection of a past where Hanoi is the convergent
   point for much of the country's talents in arts and education. They are
   also a reflection of a system heavily entrenched in Confucian values
   where modesty and consideration of others were regarded with a higher
   priority than one's self. As the opening up of the economy has brought
   in other pressures on people's daily life, advocates for traditional
   social and family values are in many ways helping to counter an
   "everyone for himself" mentality.

Transportation

   Motor scooters dominate the roads in the Old Quarter
   Enlarge
   Motor scooters dominate the roads in the Old Quarter

   Hanoi is served by Noi Bai International Airport, located in the Soc
   Son District, approximately 40 km (25 miles) north of Hanoi. Noi Bai is
   the only international airport for the northern regions of Vietnam.
   Direct daily flights are available to other cities in Vietnam, Asia,
   Australia, and Europe. Flights to and from the Americas usually involve
   a transit. The airport has recently been rebuilt with modern
   facilities.

   There are two main highways linking the airport and city. The route to
   the city via Thang Long Bridge is more direct than Highway 1, which
   runs along the outskirts of the city. The main highways are shared by
   cars, motor scooters, with separate lanes by the side for bicycles.
   Taxis are plentiful and usually have trip meters, although it is also
   common to agree on the trip price before taking a taxi from airport to
   the city centre. Tourists also sometimes tour the city on Cyclos
   especially in the Old Quarter.

   Hanoi is also the origin departure point for many train routes in the
   country. The Union Express (tàu Thống Nhất) runs from Hanoi to Ho Chi
   Minh City from Hanoi station(formerly Hang Co station), with stops at
   cities and provinces along the line. Trains also depart Hanoi
   frequently for Hai Phong and other northern cities.

   The main means of transport within the city are motobikes, buses,
   taxis, and bicycles. Motobikes remain the most common way to move
   around the city, due to their flexibility in navigating small streets,
   lack of parking spaces for cars, and also being more fuel economic than
   automobiles. The number of private cars are however rising every year,
   and traffic at peak hours can be very heavy at main intersections.

   Public buses run on many routes and fare can be purchased on the bus.
   For short trips, "xe ôm" (literally, "hug vehicle") motorcycle taxis
   are available where the passenger sits at the rear of a motobike and
   the driver will take you to your destination. A taxi is more convenient
   for longer trips, and if you do not wish to travel in open air.

Economy

   Though representing only 3.6 percent of the country's population and
   0.3 percent of the national territory, Hanoi contributes 8 percent to
   the national GDP and 45 percent of the Red River Delta's economy.

   Industrial production in the city has experienced a rapid boom since
   the 1990s, with average annual growth of 19.1 percent from 1991–95,
   15.9 percent from 1996–2000, and 20.9 percent during 2001–2003. In
   addition to eight existing industrial parks, Hanoi is building five new
   large-scale industrial parks and 16 small- and medium-sized industrial
   clusters. The non-state economic sector is expanding fast, with more
   than 25,000 businesses currently operating under the Enterprise Law.

   Trade is another strong sector of the city. In 2003, Hanoi had 2,000
   businesses engaged in foreign trade, having established ties with 161
   countries and territories. The city's export value grew by an average
   11.6 percent each year from 1996–2000 and 9.1 percent during 2001–2003.
   The economic structure also underwent important shifts, with tourism,
   finance, and banking now playing an increasingly important role.

   Agriculture, previously a pillar in Hanoi's economy, has striven to
   reform itself, introducing new high-yield plant varieties and
   livestock, and applying modern farming techniques.

   Together with economic growth, Hanoi's appearance has also changed
   significantly, especially in recent years. Infrastructure is constantly
   being upgraded, with new roads and an improved public transportation
   system. The rate of telephone users was 30 per 100 people in 2003. New
   urban areas are growing rapidly, with 1.5 million square metres of
   housing constructed during 1996–2000 and 1.3 million square metres
   built in 2003 alone.

   Social services have been developed in both scale and quality. The
   public healthcare network has been strengthened, ensuring at least one
   doctor for each commune and ward. Thanks to these accomplishments,
   Hanoi has the highest development index in the country. Movements such
   as raising donations for poor people or promoting a "cultural
   lifestyle", have received support from local people and been
   maintained.

Health care and other facilities

   The following medical facilities are located in Hanoi:
     * Bach Mai Hospital
     * Viet Duc Hospital
     * Saint Paul Hospital
     * 108 Hospital
     * L'Hôpital Français De Hanoï
     * Hanoi Dental Clinic
     * Hanoi Family Medical Practice
     * International SOS Clinic
     * 19-8 Hospital

Photos of Hanoi

   The Temple of Literature

   The Temple of Literature, second court yard

   The Temple of Literature, steles with names of those successful at the
   imperial exams

   The Temple of Literature, third court yard

   The Temple of Literature, third court yard

   The Temple of Literature, main hall

   The Temple of Literature, main hall

   The Temple of Literature

   One Pillar Pagoda

   Grand Opera House

   President Place (formerly Place of The Governor-General of French
   Indochina)

   State Guest House (formerly Residence of Resident - Superior of Tonkin)

   Historic hotel Sofitel Metropole Hanoi

   Flag Tower of Hanoi

   Tran Quoc pagoda

   The cathédrale St-Joseph

   Statue of Ly Thai To, founder of Hanoi

   Hoan Kiem lake

   The Huc bridge and Hoan Kiem lake

   The Old Quarter

   Kham Thien street, old days

   Phan Dinh Phung street

   National Museum of Fine Art

   National Museum of History

   Hanoi tower (built on the land of the famous prison Hanoi Hilton)

   Long Bien bridge

   West Lake

   Trang Tien street

   A busy street

   Ho Chi Minh mausoleum

   A new street

   A new quarter

   Park of Reunification (former Lenin park)

   Selling flower in the street

   A French colonial-style house

   An old house (Pho Hang Hom)

   Old street—A photo of a painting by Bui Xuan Phai—a famous Vietnamese
   painter

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hanoi"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
