   #copyright

Hassium

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Chemical elements


              108              bohrium ← hassium → meitnerium
              Os
             ↑
             Hs
             ↓
             (Upo)

                                  Periodic Table - Extended Periodic Table

                                                                   General
                                     Name, Symbol, Number hassium, Hs, 108
                                         Chemical series transition metals
                                              Group, Period, Block 8, 7, d
                                      Appearance unknown, probably silvery
                                                    white or metallic gray
                                                   Atomic mass (278) g/mol
                       Electron configuration perhaps [Rn] 5f^14 6d^6 7s^2
                                                   (guess based on osmium)
                               Electrons per shell 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 14, 2
                                                  Phase presumably a solid
                                            CAS registry number 54037-57-9
                                                                References

   Hassium ( IPA: /ˈhasiəm/), also called eka-osmium, is a synthetic
   element in the periodic table that has the symbol Hs and atomic number
   108. It is predicted that hassium will be the densest element yet
   known, with a density exceeding two and a half times that of lead. This
   assumes that a measurable quantity of the element can be made, which is
   not possible at this time.

History

   Hassium was first synthesized in 1984 by a German research team led by
   Peter Armbruster and Gottfried Münzenberg at the Institute for Heavy
   Ion Research (Gesellschaft für Schwerionenforschung) in Darmstadt. The
   name hassium was proposed by them, derived from the Latin (language)
   name for the German state of Hessen where the institute is located.

   There was an element naming controversy as to what the elements from
   101 to 109 were to be called; thus IUPAC adopted unniloctium ( IPA:
   /ˌjuːnɪlˈɒktiəm/, symbol Uno) as a temporary, systematic element name
   for this element. In 1994 a committee of IUPAC recommended that element
   108 be named hahnium. The name hassium was adopted internationally in
   1997.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hassium"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
