   #copyright

Hawfinch

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

                    iHawfinch

                             Conservation status

   Least Concern (LC)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Aves
   Order:   Passeriformes
   Family:  Fringillidae
   Genus:   Coccothraustes
   Species: C. coccothraustes

                                Binomial name

   Coccothraustes coccothraustes
   (Linnaeus, 1758)

   The Hawfinch, Coccothraustes coccothraustes, is a passenger bird in the
   finch family Fringillidae.

   This bird breeds across Europe and temperate Asia. It is mainly
   resident in Europe, but many Asian birds migrate further south in the
   winter. It is a rare vagrant to the western islands of Alaska.

   Deciduous or mixed woodland with large trees, especially Hornbeam, is
   favoured for breeding, including parkland. It builds its nest in a bush
   or tree, laying 2-7 eggs. The food is mainly seeds and fruit kernels,
   especially those of cherries, which it cracks with its powerful bill.

   This large finch species does not form large flocks outside the
   breeding season, and is usually seen as a pair or small group.

   The 16.5-18 cm long Hawfinch is a bulky bull-headed bird, which appears
   very short-tailed in flight. Its head is orange-brown with a black
   eyestripe and bib, and a massive bill, which is black in summer but
   paler in winter. The upper parts are dark brown and the underparts
   orange.

   The white wing bars and tail tip are striking in flight. The sexes are
   similar. The call is a hard chick. The song of this unobtrusive bird is
   quiet and mumbled.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hawfinch"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
