   #copyright

Henry Ford

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Engineers and inventors

   Henry Ford (1919)
   Enlarge
   Henry Ford (1919)

   Henry Ford ( July 30, 1863 – April 7, 1947) was the founder of the Ford
   Motor Company and father of modern assembly lines used in mass
   production. His introduction of the Model T automobile revolutionized
   transportation and American industry. He was a prolific inventor and
   was awarded 161 U.S. patents. As sole owner of the Ford Company he
   became one of the richest and best-known people in the world. He is
   credited with " Fordism", that is, the mass production of large numbers
   of inexpensive automobiles using the assembly line, coupled with high
   wages for his workers—notably the $5 a day pay scale adopted in 1914.
   Ford, though poorly educated, had a global vision, with consumerism as
   the key to peace. His intense commitment to lowering costs resulted in
   many technical and business innovations, including a franchise system
   that put a dealership in every city in North America, and in major
   cities on six continents. Ford left most of his vast wealth to the Ford
   Foundation, but arranged for his family to control the company
   permanently.

Early life

   Henry Ford, 1888
   Henry Ford, 1888

   Ford was born on a farm in a rural township west of Detroit (the area
   is now part of Dearborn, Michigan). His parents were William Ford
   (1826-1905) and Mary Litogot (c1839-1876). They were of distant English
   descent but had lived in County Cork, Ireland. His siblings include:
   Margaret Ford (1867-1868); Jane Ford (c1868-1945); William Ford
   (1871-1917) and Robert Ford (1873-1934).

   During the summer of 1873, Henry saw his first self-propelled road
   machine, a stationary steam engine that could be used for threshing or
   to power a saw mill. The operator, Fred Reden, had mounted it on wheels
   connected with a drive chain. Henry was fascinated with the machine and
   Reden over the next year taught Henry how to fire and operate the
   engine. Ford later said, it was this experience "that showed me that I
   was by instinct an engineer."

   Henry took this passion about mechanics into his home. His father had
   given him a pocket watch in his early teens. At fifteen, he had a
   reputation as a watch repairman, having dismantled and reassembled
   timepieces of friends and neighbors dozens of times.

   His mother died in 1876. It was a blow that devastated little Henry.
   His father expected Henry to eventually take over the family farm, but
   Henry despised farm work. And with his mother dead, little remained to
   keep him on the farm. He later said, "I never had any particular love
   for the farm. It was the mother on the farm I loved."

   In 1879, he left home for the nearby city of Detroit to work as an
   apprentice machinist, first with James F. Flower & Bros., and later
   with the Detroit Dry Dock Co. In 1882, he returned to Dearborn to work
   on the family farm and became adept at operating the Westinghouse
   portable steam engine. This led to his being hired by Westinghouse
   company to service their steam engines.

   Upon his marriage to Clara Bryant in 1888, Ford supported himself by
   farming and running a sawmill. They had a single child: Edsel Bryant
   Ford (1893-1943).

   In 1891, Ford became an engineer with the Edison Illuminating Company,
   and after his promotion to Chief Engineer in 1893, he had enough time
   and money to devote attention to his personal experiments on gasoline
   engines. These experiments culminated in 1896 with the completion of
   his own self-propelled vehicle named the Quadricycle, which he
   test-drove on June 4 of that year. After various test-drives, Henry
   Ford brainstormed ways to improve the Quadricycle.

   In 1894, Ford also became a Freemason, joining Palestine Lodge #357 in
   Detroit.

Detroit Automobile Company and The Henry Ford Company

   After this initial success, Ford came to Edison Illuminating in 1899
   with other investors, and they formed the Detroit Automobile Company.
   The Company soon went bankrupt because Ford continued to improve the
   design, instead of selling cars. He raced his car against those of
   other manufacturers to show the superiority of his designs. With his
   interest in race cars, he formed the Henry Ford Company.

   During this period, he personally drove one of his cars to victory in a
   race against Alexander Winton on October 10, 1901. In 1902, Ford
   continued to work on his race car to the dismay of the investors. They
   wanted a high-end production model and brought in Henry M. Leland to do
   it. Ford resigned over this usurpation of his authority. He said later
   that "I resigned, determined never again to put myself under orders."
   The company was reorganized as Cadillac.

Ford Motor Company

   Ford, with 11 other investors and $28,000 in capital, incorporated the
   Ford Motor Company in 1903. In a newly-designed car, Ford drove an
   exhibition in which the car covered the distance of a mile on the ice
   of Lake St. Clair in 39.4 seconds, which was a new land speed record.
   Convinced by this success, the famous race driver Barney Oldfield, who
   named this new Ford model "999" in honour of a racing locomotive of the
   day, took the car around the country and thereby made the Ford brand
   known throughout the United States. Ford was also one of the early
   backers of the Indianapolis 500.

   Ford astonished the world in 1914 by offering a $5 a day wage that more
   than doubled the rate of most of his workers. The move proved hugely
   profitable. Instead of constant turnover of employees, the best
   mechanics in Detroit flocked to Ford, bringing in their human capital
   and expertise, raising productivity, and lowering training costs. Ford
   called it "wage motive." The company's use of vertical integration also
   proved successful, as Ford built a gigantic factory that shipped in raw
   materials and shipped out finished automobiles.

The Model T

   The Model T was introduced on October 01, 1908. It had many important
   innovations—such as the steering wheel on the left, which every other
   company soon copied. The entire engine and transmission were enclosed;
   the 4 cylinders were cast in a solid block; the suspension used two
   semi-elliptic springs. The car was very simple to drive, and—more
   important—easy and cheap to repair. It was so cheap at $825 in 1908
   (the price fell every year) that by the 1920s a majority of American
   drivers learned to drive on the Model T, leaving fond memories for
   millions. Ford created a massive publicity machine in Detroit to ensure
   every newspaper carried stories and ads about the new product. Ford's
   network of local dealers made the car ubiquitous in virtually every
   city in North America. As independent dealers the franchises grew rich
   and publicized not just the Ford but the very concept of automobiling;
   local motor clubs sprang up to help new drivers and to explore the
   countryside. Ford was always eager to sell to farmers, who looked on
   the vehicle as a commercial device to help their business. Sales
   skyrocketed—several years posted 100+% gains on the previous year.
   Always on the hunt for more efficiency and lower costs, in 1913 Ford
   introduced the moving assembly belts into his plants, which enabled an
   enormous increase in production. Sales passed 250,000 in 1914. Although
   Henry Ford is often credited with the idea, contemporary sources
   indicate that the concept and its development came from employees
   Clarence Avery, Peter E. Martin, Charles E. Sorensen, and C.H. Wills.
   (See Piquette Plant) By 1916, as the price dropped to $360 for the
   basic touring car, sales reached 472,000.
   Ford Assembly Line, 1913
   Enlarge
   Ford Assembly Line, 1913

   By 1918, half of all cars in America were Model T's. As Ford wrote in
   his autobiography, "Any customer can have a car painted any colour that
   he wants so long as it is black". Until the development of the assembly
   line which mandated black because of its quicker drying time, Model Ts
   were available in other colors including red. The design was fervently
   promoted and defended by Henry Ford, and production continued as late
   as 1927; the final total production was 15,007,034. This was a record
   which stood for the next 45 years.

   In 1918 President Woodrow Wilson personally asked Ford to run for the
   Senate from Michigan as a Democrat. Although the nation was at war Ford
   ran as a peace candidate and a strong supporter of the proposed League
   of Nations. In December 1918 Henry Ford turned the presidency of Ford
   Motor Company over to his son Edsel Ford. Henry, however, retained
   final decision authority and sometimes reversed his son. Henry and
   Edsel purchased all remaining stock from other investors, thus giving
   the family sole ownership of the company.

   By the mid-1920s, sales of the Model T began to decline due to rising
   competition. Other auto makers offered payment plans through which
   consumers could buy their cars, which usually included more modern
   mechanical features and styling not available with the Model T. Despite
   urgings from Edsel, Henry steadfastly refused to incorporate new
   features into the Model T or to form a customer credit plan.

The "Model A" and Ford's Later Career

   By 1926, flagging sales of the Model T finally convinced Henry to make
   a new model car. Henry pursued the project with a great deal of
   technical expertise in design of the engine, chassis, and other
   mechanical necessities, while leaving the body design to his son. Edsel
   also managed to prevail over his father's initial objections in the
   inclusion of a sliding-shift transmission. The result was the
   successful Ford Model A, introduced in December, 1927 and produced
   through 1931, with a total output of over four million automobiles.
   Subsequently, the company adopted an annual model change system similar
   to that in use by automakers today. Not until the 1930s did Ford
   overcome his objection to finance companies, and the Ford-owned
   Universal Credit Company became a major car financing operation.

Death of Edsel Ford

   In May 1943, Edsel Ford died, leaving a vacancy in the company
   presidency. Henry Ford advocated long-time associate Harry Bennett to
   take the spot. Edsel's widow Eleanor, who had inherited Edsel's voting
   stock, wanted her son Henry Ford II to take over the position. The
   issue was settled for a period when Henry himself, at age 79, took over
   the presidency personally. Henry Ford II was released from the Navy and
   became an executive vice president, while Harry Bennett had a seat on
   the board and was responsible for personnel, labor relations, and
   public relations.

   The company saw hard times during the next two years, losing $10
   million a month. By 1945, Henry Ford's senility was quite evident, and
   his wife and daughter-in-law forced his resignation in favour of his
   grandson, Henry Ford II.

Ford's labor philosophy

   Henry Ford was a pioneer of " welfare capitalism" designed to improve
   the lot of his workers and especially to reduce the heavy turnover that
   had many departments hiring 300 men a year to fill 100 slots.
   Efficiency meant hiring and keeping the best workers. On January 5,
   1914, Ford announced his five-dollar a day program. The revolutionary
   program called for a reduction in length of the workday from 9 to 8
   hours, a 5 day work week, and a raise in minimum daily pay from $2.34
   to $5 for qualifying workers.

   Ford had been criticized by Wall Street for starting the 40 hour work
   week and a minimum wage. He proved, however, that paying people more
   would enable Ford workers to afford the cars they were producing, and
   therefore be good for the economy. Ford labeled the increased
   compensation as profit-sharing rather than wages. The wage was offered
   to men over age 22, who had worked at the company for 6 months or more,
   and, importantly, conducted their lives in a manner of which Ford's
   "Sociological Department" approved. They frowned on heavy drinking and
   gambling. The Sociological Department used 150 investigators and
   support staff to maintain employee standards; a large percentage of
   workers were able to qualify for the profit-sharing.

   Ford was adamantly against labor unions in his plants. To forestall
   union activity, he promoted Harry Bennett, a former Navy boxer, to be
   the head of the Service Department. Bennett employed various
   intimidation tactics to squash union organizing. The most famous
   incident, in 1937, was a bloody brawl between company security men and
   organizers that became known as The Battle of the Overpass.

   Ford was the last Detroit automaker to recognize the United Auto
   Workers union (UAW). A sit-down strike by the UAW union in April 1941
   closed the River Rouge Plant. Under pressure from Edsel and his wife,
   Clara, Henry Ford finally agreed to collective bargaining at Ford
   plants, and the first contract with the UAW was signed in June 1941.

Ford Airplane Company

   Ford, like other automobile companies, entered the aviation business
   during World War I, building Liberty engines. After the war, it
   returned to auto manufacturing until 1925, when Henry Ford acquired the
   Stout Metal Airplane Company.
   Ford 4-AT-F (EC-RRA) de L.A.P.E.
   Enlarge
   Ford 4-AT-F (EC-RRA) de L.A.P.E.

   Ford's most successful aircraft was the Ford 4AT Trimotor—called the
   “Tin Goose” because of its corrugated metal construction. It used a new
   alloy called Alclad that combined the corrosion resistance of aluminium
   with the strength of duralumin. The plane was similar to Fokker's
   V.VII-3m, and some say that Ford's engineers surreptitiously measured
   the Fokker plane and then copied it. The Trimotor first flew on June
   11, 1926, and was the first successful U.S. passenger airliner,
   accommodating about 12 passengers in a rather uncomfortable fashion.
   Several variants were also used by the U.S. Army. About 200 Trimotors
   were built before it was discontinued in 1933, when the Ford Airplane
   Division shut down because of poor sales due to the Depression.

Peace ship

   In 1915, he funded a trip to Europe, where World War I was raging, for
   himself and about 170 other prominent peace leaders. He talked to
   President Wilson about the trip but had no government support. His
   group went to neutral Sweden and the Netherlands to meet with peace
   activists there. Ford, the target of much ridicule, left the ship as
   soon as it reached Sweden.

   An article G. K. Chesterton wrote for the December 11, 1915 issue of
   Illustrated London News, shows why Ford's effort was ridiculed.
   Referring to Ford as "the celebrated American comedian," Chesterton
   noted that Ford had been quoted claiming, "I believe that the sinking
   of the Lusitania was deliberately planned to get this country America
   into war. It was planned by the financiers of war." Chesterton
   expressed "difficulty in believing that bankers swim under the sea to
   cut holes in the bottoms of ships," and asked why, if what Ford said
   was true, Germany took responsibility for the sinking and "defended
   what it did not do." Mr. Ford's efforts, he concluded, "queer the
   pitch" of "more plausible and presentable" pacifists.

   On the other hand H.G. Wells, in The Shape of Things to Come, devoted
   an entire chapter to the Ford Peace Ship, stating that "despite its
   failure, this effort to stop the war will be remembered when the
   generals and their battles and senseless slaughter are forgotten".
   Wells claimed that the American armaments industry and banks, who made
   enormous profits from selling munitions to the warring European
   nations, deliberately spread lies in order to cause the failure of
   Ford´s peace efforts. He notes, however, that when the US entered the
   war in 1917 Ford himself took part in and made considerable profits
   from the sale of munitions.

Anti-Semitism and The Dearborn Independent

   The International Jew, the World's Foremost Problem. Articles from The
   Dearborn Independent, 1920
   Enlarge
   The International Jew, the World's Foremost Problem. Articles from The
   Dearborn Independent, 1920

   In 1918, Ford's closest aide and private secretary Ernest G. Liebold
   purchased an obscure weekly newspaper, The Dearborn Independent, so
   that Ford could spread his views. By 1920 Ford had become virulently
   anti-Semitic and in March of that year began an anti-Jewish crusade in
   the pages of his newspaper. The Independent ran for eight years, from
   1920 until 1927, during which Liebold was editor. The newspaper
   published " Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion," which was
   discredited as a forgery during the Independent's publishing run by The
   Times of London. The American Jewish Historical Society describes the
   ideas presented in the magazine as " anti-immigrant, anti-labor,
   anti-liquor, and anti-Semitic". In February 1921, the New York World
   published an interview with Ford, in which he said "The only statement
   I care to make about the Protocols is that they fit in with what is
   going on". During this period Ford emerged as "a respected spokesman
   for right-wing extremism and religious prejudice," reaching around
   700,000 readers through his newspaper.

   Along with the Protocols, anti-Jewish articles published by The
   Dearborn Independent were also released, in the early 1920s, as a set
   of four bound volumes, cumulatively titled The International Jew, the
   World's Foremost Problem. Vincent Curcio writes of these publications
   that "they were widely distributed and had great influence,
   particularly in Nazi Germany, where no less a personage than Adolph
   Hitler read and admired them. Hitler hung Ford's picture on the wall,
   and based several sections of Mein Kampf on his writings: indeed, Ford
   is the only American mentioned in Hitler's book. It can probably be
   said, as Lacey does, that "no American contributed as much to the evils
   of Nazism as Henry Ford." Steven Watts writes that Hitler "revered"
   Ford, proclaiming that "I shall do my best to put his theories into
   practice in Germany," and modelling the Volkswagen, the people's car,
   on the model T." In Mein Kampf (written in the mid-1920s) Hitler
   expressed the opinion that, "It is Jews who govern the stock exchange
   forces of the American Union. Every year makes them more and more the
   controlling masters of the producers in a nation of one hundred and
   twenty millions; only a single great man, Ford, to their fury, still
   maintains full independence."

   Denounced by the Anti-Defamation League (ADL), the articles
   nevertheless explicitly condemned pogroms and violence against Jews
   (Volume 4, Chapter 80), preferring to blame incidents of mass violence
   on the Jews themselves. None of this work was actually written by Ford,
   who wrote almost nothing according to trial testimony. Friends and
   business associates say they warned Ford about the contents of the
   Independent, and that Ford probably never read them. (He claimed he
   only read headlines.) However, court testimony in a libel suit, brought
   by one of the targets of the newspaper, stated that Ford did indeed
   know about the contents of the Independent in advance of publication.

   A libel lawsuit brought by San Francisco lawyer and Jewish farm
   cooperative organizer Aaron Sapiro in response to anti-Semitic remarks
   led Ford to close the Independent in December 1927. News reports at the
   time quoted him as being shocked by the content and having been unaware
   of its nature. During the trial, the editor of Ford's "Own Page",
   William Cameron, testified that Ford had nothing to do with the
   editorials even though they were under his byline. Cameron testified at
   the libel trial that he never discussed the content of the pages or
   sent them to Ford for his approval. Investigative journalist Max
   Wallace noted that "whatever credibility this absurd claim may have had
   was soon undermined when James M. Miller, a former Dearborn Independent
   employee, swore under oath that Ford had told him he intended to expose
   Sapiro.

   Michael Barkun observed, 'That Cameron would have continued to publish
   such controversial material without Ford's explicit instructions seemed
   unthinkable to those who knew both men. Mrs. Stanley Ruddiman, a Ford
   family intimate, remarked that "I don't think Mr. Cameron ever wrote
   anything for publication without Mr. Ford's approval"'. According to
   Spencer Blakeslee,

          The ADL mobilized prominent Jews and non-Jews to publicly oppose
          Ford's message. They formed a coalition of Jewish groups for the
          same purpose, and raised constant objections in the Detroit
          press. Before leaving his presidency early in 1921, Woodrow
          Wilson joined other leading Americans in a statement that
          rebuked Ford and others for their antisemitic campaign. A
          boycott against Ford products by Jews and liberal Christians
          also had an impact, and Ford shut down the paper in 1927,
          recanting his views in a public letter to Sigmund Livingston,
          ADL.

   Grand Cross of the German Eagle
   Enlarge
   Grand Cross of the German Eagle

   Ford subsequently became associated with the notorious anti-Semite
   Gerald L.K. Smith, who commented upon meeting Ford in the 1930s that he
   "was less anti-Semitic than Ford." Smith also remarked that, in 1940,
   Ford showed "no regret" for the Independent's anti-Semitic views, and
   "hoped to publish The International Jew again some time." In the same
   year Ford told The Manchester Guardian that "international Jewish
   bankers" were responsible for World War II.

   In 1938, the German consul at Cleveland gave Ford the award of the
   Grand Cross of the German Eagle, the highest medal that Nazi Germany
   could bestow on a foreigner, while James D. Mooney, vice-president of
   overseas operations for General Motors, received a similar medal, the
   Merit Cross of the German Eagle, First Class.

   Distribution of International Jew was halted in 1942, but extremist
   groups often recycle the material; it still appears on anti-Semitic and
   neo-Nazi websites.

Ford does business with the world

   Ford's philosophy was one of economic independence for the United
   States. Ford's River Rouge Plant would become the world's largest
   industrial complex even able to produce its own steel. Ford's goal was
   to produce a vehicle from scratch without reliance on foreign trade.
   Ford believed in the global expansion of his company. He believed that
   international trade and cooperation led to international peace, and
   used the assembly line process and production of the Model T to
   demonstrate it He opened Ford assembly plants in Britain and Canada in
   1911, and soon became the biggest automotive producer in those
   countries. In 1912 Ford cooperated with Agnelli of Fiat to launch the
   first Italian automotive assembly plants. The first plants in Germany
   were built in the 1920s with the encouragement of Herbert Hoover and
   the Commerce department, which agreed with Ford's theory that
   international trade was essential to world peace . In the 1920s Ford
   also opened plants in Australia, India, and France, and by 1929 he had
   successful dealerships on six continents. Ford experimented with a
   commercial rubber plantation in the Amazon jungle called Fordlândia; it
   was one of the few failures. In 1929 Ford accepted Stalin's invitation
   to build a model plant (NNAZ, today GAZ) at Gorky, a city later renamed
   to Nizhny Novgorod, and he sent American engineers and technicians to
   help set it up, including future labor leader Walter Reuther.
   Edsel Ford, Charles Lindbergh, and Henry Ford pose in the Ford hangar
   during Lindbergh's August 1927 visit.
   Edsel Ford, Charles Lindbergh, and Henry Ford pose in the Ford hangar
   during Lindbergh's August 1927 visit.

   The technical assistance agreement between Ford Motor Company, VSNH and
   Amtorg (as purchasing agent) was concluded for nine years and signed on
   May 31, 1929, by Ford, FMC vice-president Peter E. Martin, V. I.
   Mezhlauk, and the president of Amtorg, Saul G. Bron. Any nation where
   the United States had peaceful diplomatic relations, Ford Motor Company
   worked to conduct business. By 1932, Ford was manufacturing one third
   of all the world’s automobiles.

   Ford's image transfixed Europeans, especially the Germans, arousing the
   "fear of some, the infatuation of others, and the fascination among
   all" . Germans who discussed "Fordism" often believed that it
   represented something quintessentially American. They saw the size,
   tempo, standardization, and philosophy of production demonstrated at
   the Ford Works as a national service - an "American thing" that
   represented the culture of United States. Both supporters and critics
   insisted that Fordism epitomized American capitalist development, and
   that the auto industry was the key to understanding economic and social
   relations in the United States. As one German explained, "Automobiles
   have so completely changed the American's mode of life that today one
   can hardly imagine being without a car. It is difficult to remember
   what life was like before Mr. Ford began preaching his doctrine of
   salvation" For many Germans Henry Ford himself embodied the essence of
   successful Americanism.

Racing

   Ford (standing) launched Barney Oldfield's career in 1902
   Enlarge
   Ford (standing) launched Barney Oldfield's career in 1902

   Ford began his career as a racing car driver and maintained his
   interest. From 1909 to 1913, Ford entered stripped-down Model Ts in
   races, finishing first (although later disqualified) in an
   "ocean-to-ocean" (across the United States) race in 1909, and setting a
   one-mile oval speed record at Detroit Fairgrounds in 1911 with driver
   Frank Kulick. In 1913, Ford attempted to enter a reworked Model T in
   the Indianapolis 500, but was told rules required the addition of
   another 1,000 pounds (450 kg) to the car before it could qualify. Ford
   dropped out of the race, and soon thereafter dropped out of racing
   permanently, citing dissatisfaction with the sport's rules and the
   demands on his time by the now-booming production of the Model Ts.

   He was inducted in the Motorsports Hall of Fame of America in 1996.

The Ford Foundation

   Henry Ford, with his son Edsel, founded the Ford Foundation in 1936
   with a broad charter to promote human welfare. Ford split his stock
   into a small number of voting shares, which he gave his family, and a
   large number of nonvoting shares he gave the Foundation. The Foundation
   grew immensely and, by 1950, had become international in scope. It
   gradually sold all its shares on the stock market from 1955 through
   1974 , and dropped all connections with the Ford Motor Company and the
   Ford family.

Death

   Ford suffered an initial stroke in 1938, after which he turned over the
   running of his company to Edsel. Edsel's 1943 death brought Henry Ford
   out of retirement. In ill health, he ceded the presidency to his
   grandson Henry Ford II in September 1945, and went into retirement. He
   died in 1947 of a cerebral hemorrhage at the age of 83 in Fair Lane,
   his Dearborn estate, and is buried in the Ford Cemetery in Detroit.
   Henry Ford took that last ride to Ford Cemetery in a Packard.

   On the night of his death the River Rouge had flooded the local power
   station and had left Ford's house without electricity. Before going to
   sleep Henry and his wife lit candles and oil lamps to light the house.
   Later that evening, just before dawn, Henry Ford, father of mass
   production and creator of the modern era, died in the same atmosphere
   as he had been born 83 years earlier, surrounded by candlelight.

Quotations

     * "History is more or less bunk"
     * "The only history worth a tinker's damn is the history we make
       today"
     * "If you think you can, you can. And if you think you can't, you're
       right."
     * "You can paint it any colour, so long as it's black."

Sidelights

   Henry Ford long had an interest in plastics developed from agricultural
   products, especially soybeans. He cultivated a relationship with George
   Washington Carver for this purpose. Soybean-based plastics were used in
   Ford automobiles throughout the 1930s in plastic parts such as car
   horns, in paint, etc. This project culminated in 1942, when Ford
   patented an automobile made almost entirely of plastic, attached to a
   tubular welded frame. It weighed 30% less than a steel car, and was
   said to be able to withstand blows ten times greater than could steel.
   Furthermore, it ran on grain alcohol (ethanol) instead of gasoline. The
   design never caught on. [Lewis 1995]

   Ford was instrumental in developing charcoal briquets, under the brand
   name " Kingsford". Along with his brother in law, E.G. Kingsford used
   wood scraps from the Ford factory to make the briquets, adding backyard
   grilling as a pastime.

   Ford maintained a vacation residence (known as the "Ford Plantation")
   in Richmond Hill, Georgia. He contributed substantially to the
   community, building a chapel and schoolhouse and employing a large
   number of local residents.

   Ford had an interest in " Americana". In the 1920s, Ford began work to
   turn Sudbury, Massachusetts into a themed historical village. He moved
   the schoolhouse (supposedly) referred to in the nursery rhyme, Mary had
   a little lamb from Sterling, Massachusetts and purchased the historical
   Wayside Inn. This plan never saw fruition, but Ford repeated it with
   the creation of Greenfield Village in Dearborn, Michigan. It may have
   inspired the creation of Old Sturbridge Village as well. About the same
   time, he began collecting materials for his museum, which had a theme
   of practical technology. It was opened in 1929 as the Edison Institute
   and, although greatly modernized, remains open today.

   Henry Ford is sometimes credited with the invention of the automobile,
   generally attributed to Karl Benz, and the assembly line, invented by
   Ransom E. Olds. Ford's employees did develop the first moving assembly
   line based on conveyor belts.

   Ford was the winner of the award of Car Entrepreneur of the Century in
   1999.

Ford in culture

     * In Aldous Huxley's Brave New World, society is organized on
       'Fordist' lines and the years are dated A.F. (After Ford). In the
       book, it is used also, the expression 'My Ford' instead of 'My
       God'.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_Ford"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
