   #copyright

Heraldry

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Recreation

   Heraldry in its most general sense encompasses all matters relating to
   the duties and responsibilities of officers of arms. To most, though,
   heraldry is the practice of designing, displaying, describing and
   recording coats of arms and badges. The origins of heraldry lie in the
   need to distinguish participants in combat when their faces were hidden
   by iron and steel helmets. Eventually a structured system of rules
   developed into the modern form of heraldry.
   The German Hyghalmen Roll was made in the late fifteenth century and
   illustrates the German practice of repeating themes from the arms in
   the crest
   Enlarge
   The German Hyghalmen Roll was made in the late fifteenth century and
   illustrates the German practice of repeating themes from the arms in
   the crest

   The system of blazoning arms that is used today was developed by the
   officers of arms since the dawn of the science. This includes a
   description of the shield, the crest, and, if present, supporters,
   mottoes, and other insignia. An understanding of these rules is one of
   the keys to sound practice of heraldry. The rules do differ from
   country to country, but there are some aspects that carry over in each
   jurisdiction.

   Though heraldry is nearly 900 years old, it is still very much in use.
   Many cities and towns in Europe and around the world still make use of
   arms. Personal heraldry, both legally protected and lawfully assumed,
   has continued to be used around the world. Heraldic societies thrive to
   promote understanding of and education about the subject.

Origins and history

   Three soldiers on the Bayeux Tapestry bearing pre-heraldic shields.
   Enlarge
   Three soldiers on the Bayeux Tapestry bearing pre-heraldic shields.

   At the time of the Norman Conquest of England, modern heraldry had not
   yet been developed. The knights in the Bayeux Tapestry carry shields,
   but there appears to have been no system of hereditary coats of arms.
   The beginnings of modern heraldic structure were in place, but would
   not become standard until the middle of the twelfth century. By this
   time, coats of arms were being inherited by the children of armigers
   across Europe. Between 1135 and 1155 seals show the general adoption of
   heraldic devices in England, France, Germany, Spain, and Italy. In
   Britain the practice of using marks of cadency arose to distinguish one
   son from another, and was institutionalized and standardized by John
   Writhe in the fifteenth century.
   The tomb of Geoffrey of Anjou is one of the first recorded examples of
   hereditary armory in Europe. The same shield shown here is found on the
   tomb effigy of his grandson, William Longespee.
   Enlarge
   The tomb of Geoffrey of Anjou is one of the first recorded examples of
   hereditary armory in Europe. The same shield shown here is found on the
   tomb effigy of his grandson, William Longespee.

   In the late Middle Ages and the Renaissance, heraldry became a highly
   developed discipline, regulated by professional officers of arms. As
   its use in jousts became obsolete coats of arms remained popular for
   visually identifying a person in other ways—impressed in sealing wax on
   documents, carved on family tombs, and flown as a banner on country
   homes. The first work of heraldic jurisprudence, De Insigniis et
   Armiis, was written in the 1350s by Bartolus de Saxoferrato, a
   professor of law at the University of Padua.

   From the beginning of heraldry, coats of arms have been executed in a
   wide variety of media, including on paper, painted wood, embroidery,
   enamel, stonework and stained glass. For the purpose of quick
   identification in all of these, heraldry distinguishes only seven basic
   colors and makes no fine distinctions in the precise size or placement
   of charges on the field. Coats of arms and their accessories are
   described in a concise jargon called blazon. This technical description
   of a coat of arms is the standard that must be adhered to no matter
   what artistic interpretations may be made in a particular depiction of
   the arms.

   The idea that each element of a coat of arms has some specific meaning
   is unfounded. Though the original armiger may have placed particular
   meaning on a charge, these meanings are not necessarily retained from
   generation to generation. Unless the arms incorporate an obvious pun on
   the bearer's name, it is difficult to find meaning in them.

   Changes in military technology and tactics made plate armor obsolete
   and heraldry became detached from its original function. This brought
   about the development of "paper heraldry" that only existed in
   paintings. Designs and shields became more elaborate at the expense of
   clarity. The 20th century's taste for stark iconic emblems made the
   simple styles of early heraldry fashionable again.

The rules of heraldry

Shield and lozenge

   The main focus of modern heraldry is the armorial achievement, or coat
   of arms. The central element of a coat of arms is the shield. In
   general the shape of shield employed in a coat of arms is irrelevant.
   The fashion for shield shapes employed in heraldic art has generally
   evolved over the centuries. There are times when a particular shield
   shape is specified in a blazon. These almost invariably occur in
   non-European contexts such as the coat of arms of Nunavut and the
   former Republic of Bophuthatswana.

   Traditionally, as women did not go to war, they did not use a shield.
   Instead their coats of arms were shown on a lozenge—a rhombus standing
   on one of its acute corners. This continues to hold true in much of the
   world, though some heraldic authorities make exceptions. In Canada the
   restriction against women bearing arms on a shield has been completely
   eliminated. Noncombatant clergy have also made use of the lozenge as
   well as the cartouche – an oval – for their display.

Tinctures

   Enlarge

   Tinctures are the colors used in heraldry. Since heraldry is
   essentially a system of identification, the most important convention
   of heraldry is the rule of tincture. To provide for contrast and
   visibility metals (generally lighter tinctures) must never be placed on
   metals, and colors (generally darker tinctures) must never be placed on
   colors. There are instances where this cannot be helped, such as where
   a charge overlays a partition of the field. Like any rule, this admits
   exceptions, the most famous being the arms chosen by Godfrey of
   Bouillon when he was made King of Jerusalem.

   The names used in English blazon for the tinctures come mainly from
   French and include Or (gold), Argent (white), Azure (blue), Gules
   (red), Sable (black), Vert (green), and Purpure (purple). A number of
   other colors are occasionally found, typically for special purposes.

   Besides tinctures, certain patterns called furs can appear in a coat of
   arms. The two common furs are ermine and vair. Ermine represents the
   winter coat of the stoat, which is white with a black tail. Vair
   represents a kind of squirrel with a blue-gray back and white belly
   sewn together it forms a pattern of alternating blue and white shapes.

   Heraldic charges can also be displayed in their natural colors. Many
   natural items such as plants and animals are described as proper in
   this case. Proper charges are very frequent as crests and supporters.
   It is considered bad form to use proper as a method of circumventing
   the tincture convention.

Divisions of the field

   Divisions of the field.
   Enlarge
   Divisions of the field.
   Ordinaries.
   Enlarge
   Ordinaries.

   The field of a shield in heraldry can be divided into more than one
   tincture, as can the various heraldic charges. Many coats of arms
   consist simply of a division of the field into two contrasting
   tinctures. Since these are considered divisions of a shield the rule of
   tincture can be ignored. For example, a shield divided azure and gules
   would be perfectly acceptable. A line of partition may be straight or
   it may be varied. The variations of partition lines can be wavy,
   indented, embattled, engrailed, or made into myriad other forms.

Ordinaries

   In the early days of heraldry, very simple bold rectilinear shapes were
   painted on shields. These could be easily recognized at a long distance
   and could also be easily remembered. They therefore served the main
   purpose of heraldry—identification. As more complicated shields came
   into use, these bold shapes were set apart in a separate class as the
   "honorable ordinaries." They act as charges and are always written
   first in blazon. Unless otherwise specified they extend to the edges of
   the field. Though ordinaries are not easily defined, they are generally
   described as including the cross, the fess, the pale, the bend, the
   chevron, the saltire, and the pall.

   There is also a separate class of charges called sub-ordinaries which
   are of a geometrical shape subordinate to the ordinary. According to
   Friar, they are distinguished by their order in blazon. The
   sub-ordinaries include the inescutcheon, the orle, the tressure, the
   double tressure, the bordure, the chief, the canton, the label, and
   flaunches.

   Ordinaries may appear in parallel series, in which case English blazon
   gives them different names such as pallets, bars, bendlets, and
   chevronels. French blazon makes no such distinction between these
   diminutives and the ordinaries when borne singly. Unless otherwise
   specified an ordinary is drawn with straight lines, but each may be
   indented, embattled, wavy, engrailed, or otherwise have their lines
   varied.

Charges

   A charge is any object or figure placed on a heraldic shield or on any
   other object of in an armorial composition. Any object found in nature
   or technology may appear as a heraldic charge in armory. Charges can be
   animals, objects, or geometric shapes. Apart from the ordinaries, the
   most frequent charges are the cross—with its hundreds of variations—and
   the lion and eagle. Other common animals are fish, martlets, griffins,
   boars, and stags. Dragons, unicorns, and more exotic monsters appear as
   charges but also as supporters.

   Animals are found in various stereotyped positions or attitudes.
   Quadrupeds can often be found rampant—standing on the left hind foot.
   Another frequent position is passant, or walking, like the lions of the
   coat of arms of England. Eagles are almost always shown with their
   wings spread, or displayed.

   In English heraldry the crescent, mullet, martlet, annulet,
   fleur-de-lis, and rose may be added to a shield to distinguish cadet
   branches of a family from the senior line. These cadency marks are
   usually shown smaller than normal charges, but it still does not follow
   that a shield containing such a charge belongs to a cadet branch. All
   of these charges occur frequently in basic undifferenced coats of arms.

Marshalling

   An extravagant example of marshalling—the 719 quarterings of the
   Grenville Diptych
   Enlarge
   An extravagant example of marshalling—the 719 quarterings of the
   Grenville Diptych

   Marshalling is the art of correctly arranging armorial bearings. Two or
   more coats of arms are often combined in one shield to express
   inheritance, claims to property, or the occupation of an office.
   Marshalling can be done in a number of ways, but the principal mode is
   impalement or dimidiation. This involves using one shield with the arms
   of two families or corporations on either half. Another method is
   called quartering, in which the shield is divided into quadrants. This
   practice originated in Spain after the thirteenth century. One might
   also place a small inescutcheon of a coat of arms on the main shield.

   When more than four coats are to be marshalled, the principle of
   quartering may be extended to two rows of three (quarterly of six) and
   even further. A few lineages have accumulated hundreds of quarters,
   though such a number is usually displayed only in documentary contexts.
   Some traditions have a strong resistance to allowing more than four
   quarters, and resort instead to sub-quartering.

Helm and crest

   In English the word "crest" is commonly used to refer to a coat of
   arms—an entire heraldic achievement. The correct use of the heraldic
   term crest refers to just one component of a complete achievement. The
   crest rests on top of a helmet which itself rests on the most important
   part of the achievement—the shield. The crest is usually found on a
   wreath of twisted cloth and sometimes within a coronet. The modern
   crest has evolved from the three-dimensional figure placed on the top
   of the mounted knights' helms as a further means of identification. In
   most heraldic traditions a woman does not display a crest, though this
   tradition is being relaxed in some heraldic jurisdictions.

   When the helm and crest are shown, they are usually accompanied by a
   mantling. This was originally a cloth worn over the back of the helmet
   as partial protection against heating by sunlight. Today it takes the
   form of a stylized cloak or hanging from the helmet. Typically in
   British heraldry, the outer surface of the mantling is of the principal
   colour in the shield and the inner surface is of the principal metal.
   The mantling is conventionally depicted with a ragged edge, as if
   damaged in combat.

   Clergy often refrain from displaying a helm or crest in their heraldic
   achievements. Members of the Roman Catholic clergy may display
   appropriate headwear. This takes the form of a galero with the colors
   and tassles denoting rank. In the Anglican tradition, clergy members
   may pass crests on to their offspring, but rarely display them on their
   own shields.

Mottoes

   An armorial motto is a phrase or collection of words intended to
   describe the motivation or intention of the armigerous person or
   corporation. This can also form a pun on the family name as in the
   Neville motto "Ne vile velis." Mottos are generally changed at will and
   do not make up an integral part of the armorial achievement. Mottoes
   can typically be found on a scroll under the shield. In Scottish
   heraldry where the motto is granted as part of the blazon, it is
   usually shown on a scroll above the crest. A motto may be in any
   language.

Supporters and other insignia

   Supporters are human or animal figures placed on either side of a coat
   of arms as though supporting it. In many traditions, these have
   acquired strict guidelines for use by certain social classes. On the
   European continent, there are often fewer restrictions on the use of
   supporters. In Britain only peers of the realm, senior members of
   orders of knighthood, and some corporate bodies are granted supporters.
   Often these can have local significance or a historical link to the
   armiger.

   If the armiger has the title of baron, hereditary knight, or higher, he
   or she may display a coronet of rank above the shield. In Britain this
   is usually below the helmet, though it is often above the crest in
   Continental heraldry. In Canada, descendants of the United Empire
   Loyalists are entitled to use a Loyalist military coronet (for
   descendants of members of Loyalist regiments) or Loyalist civil coronet
   (for others).

   Another addition that can be made to a coat of arms is the insignia of
   an order of knighthood. This is usually represented by a collar or
   similar band surrounding the shield. When the arms of a knight and his
   wife are shown in one achievement, the insignia of knighthood surround
   the husband's arms only, and the wife's arms are customarily surrounded
   by a meaningless ornamental garland of leaves for visual balance.

National styles

   An example of an attributed coat of arms. Medieval officers of arms
   attributed this coat to Jesus, though he lived long before the
   development of heraldry.
   Enlarge
   An example of an attributed coat of arms. Medieval officers of arms
   attributed this coat to Jesus, though he lived long before the
   development of heraldry.

   The emergence of heraldry occurred across western Europe almost
   simultaneously. Originially, heraldic style was very similar from
   country to country. Over time, there developed distinct differences
   between the heraldic traditions of different countries. The four broad
   heraldic styles are German-Nordic, Gallo-British, Latin, and Eastern.
   In addition it can be argued that later national heraldic traditions,
   such as South African and Canadian have emerged in the twentieth
   century. In general there are characteristics shared by each of the
   four main groups.

German-Nordic heraldry

   Coats of arms in Germany, the Scandinavian countries, the Baltic
   states, and northern Switzerland generally change very little over
   time. Marks of difference are also very rare in this tradition as are
   heraldic furs. One of the most striking characteristics of
   German-Nordic heraldry is the treatment of the crest. Often, the same
   design is repeated in the shield and the crest. The use of multiple
   crests is also common. The crest cannot be used separately as in
   British heraldry, but can sometimes, especially in southern
   German-speaking regions, serve as a mark of difference between
   different branches of a family.

Gallo-British heraldry

   The use of cadency marks to difference arms within the same family and
   the use of semy fields are distinctive features of Gallo-British
   heraldry. It is also common to see heraldic furs used. In Britain, the
   style is notably still controlled by royal officers of arms. French
   heraldry also experienced a period of strict rules of construction
   under the Emperor Napoleon. English heraldry makes greater use of
   supporters than other European countries.

Latin heraldry

   The heraldry of southern France, Iberia, and Italy is characterized by
   a lack of crests and shields of unique shape. Iberian heraldry
   occasionally introduces words to the shield of arms, a practice frowned
   upon in British heraldry. It is also known for its extensive use of
   quartering, due to armorial inheritance through both the male and
   female lines. Italian heraldry, in particular, is dominated by the
   Roman Catholic church with many shields and achievements bearing some
   reference to the church.

Eastern heraldry

   Eastern heraldry is the tradition that developed in Croatia, Hungary,
   Lithuania, Poland, Ukraine, and Russia. These are characterized by a
   pronounced territorial clan system. Often, entire villages or military
   groups were granted the same coat of arms irrespective of family
   relationships. In Poland, nearly six hundred unrelated families are
   known to bear the same arms of a horseshoe enclosing a cross. Also,
   many heraldic shields derive from ancient housemarks. Marks of cadency
   are almost unknown and shields are generally very simple with only one
   charge. It is also interesting to note that at least 15 percent of all
   Hungarian personal arms bear a decapitated Turk's head in reference to
   their wars against Turkey.

Modern heraldry

   Heraldry continues to flourish in the modern world. Institutions,
   companies, and individuals continue to use coats of arms as forms of
   pictorial identification. In the British Isles, the Kings of Arms and
   the Chief Herald of Ireland continue to make grants of arms. There are
   also heraldic authorities in Spain, Canada and South Africa that grant
   or register coats of arms.

   Heraldic societies abound in the world today in Africa, Australasia,
   the Americas, and in Europe. Some people who have interests in heraldry
   as a hobby participate in the Society for Creative Anachronism and
   other medieval revivals or in micronationalism. Many more people see
   heraldry as a part of their national, and even personal, heritage, as
   well as a manifestation of civic and national pride. Today, heraldry
   has ceased to be an expression of aristocracy throughout the world and
   is simply a form of identification.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heraldry"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
