   #copyright

Hero of Ukraine

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Military History and War

   Hero of Ukraine ( Ukrainian: Герой України, transliteration: Heroy
   Ukrayiny; Russian: Герой Украины) is the highest state decoration that
   can be conferred upon an individual citizen by the Government of
   Ukraine. The title was created in 1998 by President Leonid Kuchma, and
   currently has two classes of distinction: one for heroism and the other
   for achievement in labor. Since the technical scientist Borys Paton
   first received the title in 1998, 170 people have been awarded the
   title. The decoration of Hero of Ukraine closely resembles awards in
   neighboring states, such as Russia's Hero of the Russian Federation and
   Belarus's Hero of Belarus. The nature of these decorations together has
   been historically and culturally influenced by decorations awarded in
   the now-defunct Soviet Union (USSR), especially (in this particular
   case), the prestigious Hero of the Soviet Union.

Creation

   The origin of the "Hero of Ukraine" award can be traced to the highest
   decorations established in the USSR, of which Ukraine was a constituent
   republic: Hero of the Soviet Union, established on 16 April 1934, and
   the Hero of Socialist Labor, established on 27 December 1938. Most of
   the recipients of the former title received it for heroic military
   action (with Soviet cosmonauts being a notable exception), while those
   awarded the latter were recognized for their contributions to national
   economy and culture. The awards could be given to the same individual
   more than once, and only the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet could
   deprive a recipient of the award once given. After the collapse of the
   Soviet Union in 1991, similar awards were created in the resulting
   independent countries, including Ukraine.

   The title Hero of Ukraine was created on 23 August 1998 with Edict
   #944/98 by President Leonid Kuchma. Similar in structure to the titles
   issued by the Soviet Union, the title is awarded in two distinctions:
   "The Order of the Gold Star" and "The Order of the State". Unlike the
   Soviet awards, Ukrainian law allows a person to receive a title in each
   distinction only once, although the person may receive both levels in
   due course. This means that if a holder of the Order of the State
   performs a heroic action, he or she can be presented with the Order of
   the Gold Star. Vice versa, if labor achievements of a holder of the
   Order of the Gold Star are recognized to be of exceptional value to the
   nation, the recipient can be eligible to receive the Order of the
   State. Either of the distinctions can be presented posthumously, and a
   hero cannot have the title voided upon conferment.

Design

                 Order of the State Order of the Gold Star Miniature Medal

   Because of the two distinctions of the title, two different medals have
   been created by Ukrainian law. They have several common features – for
   example, both medals use a ribbon 45 mm long and 28 mm wide and divided
   equally into two bands along its length, with a blue band on the left
   and a yellow band on the right, matching the colors of the Ukrainian
   flag. Connected to the ribbon is a suspension device joined to a
   medallion, both of which are made out of gold. On both medals, the name
   of each decoration and a serial number are engraved on the reverse side
   of the medallion.

   Below the ribbon of the Order of the Gold Star, the golden suspension
   device contains an engraving of the trident, a small Coat of Arms of
   Ukraine. The medallion is shaped like a five-pointed star with the
   width of 35  mm from one end to the other, and is set within a wreath
   of oak leaves. Inside the star, there are two smaller stars engraved
   inside it. In contrast, the medallion for the Order of the State has
   the trident of Prince Volodymyr of Kiev (St. Vladimir) placed on top of
   a wreath of oak leaves. The size of the medallion is 35 mm high and
   36 mm wide. There is no special design or symbol engraved on the
   suspension device. In addition to the formal award, recipients of
   either level are given a wearer's copy for use in public. Only one
   design of the wearer's copy exists, being modeled after the Hero of the
   USSR medal with the red ribbon replaced by a blue and yellow ribbon.
   This medal is made out of non-precious metals and it is worn on the
   wearer's left-hand side above all other decorations.

Regulations

   Two different regulations have been issued by President Leonid Kuchma:
   the edict of 1998 and a new edict in 2002. The edict of 2002 voided the
   edict of 1998, being issued after the law of Ukraine on state awards
   confirmed the status of the title in 2000.

   The 1998 edict contained general guidelines about the title. Some of
   the subjects mentioned were the criteria for receiving each level of
   the title, who can present the title, and how the medal should be
   displayed in public. The decree specified the title as being awarded to
   "citizens of Ukraine for their personal heroism and great labor
   achievements." It stipulated that only the president could award the
   title, though certain other bodies of the Ukrainian Government could
   recommend people to receive it. The edict also allowed for special
   benefits, including increased pay, social security, and health care,
   which heroes could use until their death. The decree also covered the
   topics of duplicate medals and the display, ownership and storage of
   the insignia.

   The new 2002 regulations differ only slightly from the original ones.
   The designs of the medals were not changed, the new edict introduced
   the measurements of the miniature medal, or the "wearer's copy".
   Article 4 outlines the details on the ownership of the insignia and
   special procedures for the medals to be displayed in museums.

Display

   Ribbon bar
   Ribbon bar

   The medal that is presented with the title is always worn on the left
   side of a business or suit jacket and is worn above any other medals
   and decorations awarded by Ukraine. If a person has been awarded both
   levels of the title, the Order of the Gold Star medal is placed to the
   right of the Order of the State medal. A copy of the medal, made out of
   non-precious metals, can be presented to the hero for daily wear. If
   wearing the medal is not permitted, a ribbon bar measuring 12 x 18  mm
   can be worn in its place. Another copy of the decoration, called the
   miniature badge, is worn above the ribbon bars on the left side of the
   uniform.

Procedure

   In order for a person to be awarded the title, a recommendation must be
   made to the President by the Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada (
   parliament of Ukraine), the Prime Minister, the Prosecutor General, the
   Chairman of the Constitutional Court, the Chairman of the Supreme
   Court, any of the ministers or heads of other central executive bodies,
   or any regional authorities.

   If the title is to be conferred to a member of the Ukrainian military,
   security services, national and border guards or civil defense
   services, a recommendation must be filed by the Ministry of Defense,
   the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Security Service, the National
   Guard, the National Border Guards Committee or the Ministry of
   Emergencies.

   The recommendations are then sent to the President for consideration,
   along with a package composed of the details of the nominee's deeds and
   the recommendations that have been filed on his or her behalf. If the
   President agrees with the recommendation, he will issue a decree to
   award the person the title, which includes receiving a medal, miniature
   badge and certificate at a ceremony at the Presidential Palace in Kiev.

Notable recipients

   Vitali Klitschko, right, with his brother Wladimir
   Enlarge
   Vitali Klitschko, right, with his brother Wladimir

     * Sofia Rotaru - arguably the best-known popular singer from Ukraine
       in the former Soviet Union, "for outstanding personal merits in the
       sphere of art".
     * Yana Klochkova - Yana won gold medals in swimming at the Athens and
       Sydney Olympic Games. She was awarded the title in recognition of
       "Klochkova's outstanding services to Ukraine and her efforts to
       build up the country's reputation in the Olympic arena."
     * Vitali Klitschko - champion boxer: given the level "Order of the
       Gold Star" in 2004.
     * Valery Lobanovsky, the former coach of the football club FC Dynamo
       Kyiv (Dinamo Kiev). Lobanovsky died on 13 May 2002 in the hospital
       after he passed out during a game. Awarded the title for "his years
       of service to Ukraine for the development of football inside the
       nation and also improving national prestige".
     * Andriy Shevchenko - 2004 European Footballer of the Year and two
       time winner of the Serie A scoring title; awarded the "Order of the
       Gold Star" in 2004.
     * Pavlo Zahrebelnyy - writer, for "self-sacrifice for Ukraine, and
       for many years of writing and significant personal contributions
       toward the enrichment of the national spiritual treasury" in 2004.

Controversial awards

   There have been allegations that some members of Kuchma's inner circle,
   mainly Viktor Medvedchuk, may have masterminded inappropriate awards of
   Ukrainian decorations and titles, including the Hero of Ukraine title.
   Police, according to the Associated Press, sent summons to Medvedchuk
   on 15 July 2005, inviting him for questioning about these awards.
   Kuchma and Medvedchuk were also questioned on Aleksandr Bartenev's Hero
   of Ukraine title. Bartenev, known also as "Major", an alleged gangster,
   is currently facing legal charges in Ukraine.

   Due to these problems, President Yushchenko has agreed to stop awarding
   state decorations starting in June 2005 until further notice. This move
   was announced by Ivan Vasiunyk, the First Deputy Secretary of State,
   and backed by the Ukraine's Commission for Decorations and Heraldry.
   According to Vasiunyk, forty one people were awarded the title of Hero
   of Ukraine in 2004, with some of the awardings being presented during
   the election period. Vasiunyk also said that "I don't think you know a
   third of these names", referring to those who were presented with the
   hero title in that year. The Commission also agreed not to strip anyone
   of their decorations, unless Ukrainian law would permit them to do so.
   Even so, two posthumous titles were awarded in July of 2005 to Oles'
   (Oleksandr) Honchar and Vadym Hetman.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hero_of_Ukraine"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
