   #copyright

Herring Gull

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

                  iHerring Gull
   Adult
   Adult

                             Conservation status

   Least Concern (LC)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Aves
   Order:   Charadriiformes
   Family:  Laridae
   Genus:   Larus
   Species: L. argentatus

                                Binomial name

   Larus argentatus
   Pontoppidan, 1763

   The Herring Gull, Larus argentatus, is a large gull which breeds across
   North America, Europe and Asia. It migrates further south in winter.
   Some are permanent residents on the lower Great Lakes and the east
   coast of North America. Herring Gulls are also abundant around inland
   garbage dumps, and some have even adapted to life in inland cities.

   The taxonomy of the Herring Gull / Lesser Black-backed Gull complex is
   very complicated, different authorities recognising between two and
   eight species.

   This group has a ring distribution around the northern hemisphere.
   Differences between adjacent forms in this ring are fairly small, but
   by the time the circuit is completed, the end members, Herring Gull and
   Lesser Black-backed Gull, are clearly different species.

   Adult Herring Gulls are similar to Ring-billed Gulls but are much
   larger, have pinkish legs, and a much thicker yellow bill with more
   pronounced gonys. First-winter Herring Gulls are much browner, but
   second and third-winter birds can be confusing since soft part colors
   are variable and third-year Herring Gull often show a ring around the
   bill. Such birds are most easily distinguished by the larger size and
   larger bill of Herring Gull.

   The Association of European Rarities Committees recognises six species:
     * Herring Gull, Larus argentatus
     * American Herring Gull, Larus smithsonianus
     * Caspian Gull, Larus cachinnans
     * Yellow-legged Gull, Larus michahellis
     * East Siberian Gull, Larus vegae
     * Armenian Gull, Larus armenicus

   Adults are easily identified by their size, pale grey back and the red
   spot on the beak. Legs are pink at all ages. The bird depicted is the
   western European race Larus argentatus argenteus. The Scandinavian race
   L. a. argentatus is slightly larger and darker, with more white in the
   wing tips.

   The North American American Herring Gull is similar to argentatus,
   except that immature birds tend to be darker and more uniformly brown.

   These are omnivores like most Larus gulls, and will scavenge on rubbish
   tips and elsewhere, as well as seeking suitable small prey in fields or
   on the coast, or robbing plovers or lapwings of their catches.

   Eggs, usually three, are laid on the ground or cliff ledges in
   colonies, and are defended vigorously by this large gull. The loud
   laughing call is well-known in the northern hemisphere.

   Parasites of Herring gulls include the fluke Microphallus piriformes.
                 A juvenile Herring Gull (Larus argentatus)
                                   Enlarge
   A juvenile Herring Gull (Larus argentatus)
                                                           Juvenile Herring Gull
                                                                  Enlarge
                                                           Juvenile Herring Gull
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herring_Gull"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
