   #copyright

Himalayas

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Asia

   Perspective view of the Himalayas and Mount Everest as seen from space
   looking south-south-east from over the Tibetan Plateau. (annotated
   version)
   Enlarge
   Perspective view of the Himalayas and Mount Everest as seen from space
   looking south-south-east from over the Tibetan Plateau. (annotated
   version)

   The Himalayas, also Himalaya, are a mountain range in Asia, separating
   the Indian subcontinent from the Tibetan Plateau. By extension, it is
   also the name of the massive mountain system which includes the
   Himalaya proper, the Karakoram, the Hindu Kush, and a host of minor
   ranges extending from the Pamir Knot. The name is from Sanskrit
   himālaya, a tatpurusa compound meaning "the abode of snow" (from hima
   "snow", and ālaya "abode"; see also Himavat).

   Together, the Himalaya mountain system is the planet's highest and home
   to all fourteen of the world's highest peaks: the Eight-thousanders,
   including Mount Everest. To comprehend the enormous scale of Himalayan
   peaks, consider that Aconcagua, in the Andes, at 6,962 m, is the
   highest peak outside the Himalaya, while the Himalayan system has over
   100 separate mountains exceeding 7,200 meters.

   The Himalayas stretch across six nations: Bhutan, China, India, Nepal,
   Pakistan and Afghanistan. It is the source of three of the world's
   major river systems, the Indus Basin, the Ganga- Brahmaputra Basin and
   the Yangtze Basin. An estimated 750 million people live in the
   watershed area of the Himalayan rivers, which also includes Bangladesh.

Geography

   The Himalaya range runs for about 2,400 km, from Nanga Parbat
   (Pakistan) in the west to Namche Barwa in the east. The width varies
   between 250-300 km. The Himalayan range comprises three parallel
   ranges, arranged by elevation and geological age.
   Composite satellite image of the Himalayan range. The Tibetan Plateau
   is near the centre and the Taklamakan plain is visible as the lighter
   area near the top.
   Enlarge
   Composite satellite image of the Himalayan range. The Tibetan Plateau
   is near the centre and the Taklamakan plain is visible as the lighter
   area near the top.

   The youngest of the three is called the Sub-Himalayan Range ( Shivalik
   Hills) and has an elevation of about 1,200 m. This range is made up of
   erosion material from the rising Himalaya. Running parallel to this is
   the Lower Himalayan Range, which has an elevation between 2,000–5,000
   m. The northernmost range is called the Great Himalayas and is also the
   oldest of the three. It has an elevation of more than 6,000 m and
   contains a large number of the world's highest peaks including the
   three highest, Mount Everest, K2 and Kangchenjunga. Much of Nepal and
   Bhutan lies in the Himalaya. The Pakistani states of Baltistan and
   Indian states of Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal,
   Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh lie mostly in the Himalaya. A very small
   portion of southeastern Tibet also lies in the Himalaya. (However, the
   Tibetan Plateau is by definition beyond the Himalaya, and thereby not
   part of it). It is in fact just north of India and Bangladesh.

Ecology

   The flora and fauna of the Himalayas varies with climate, rainfall,
   altitude, and soils. The climate ranges from tropical at the base of
   the mountains to permanent ice and snow at the highest elevations. The
   amount of yearly rainfall increases from west to east along the front
   of the range. This diversity of climate, altitude, rainfall and soil
   conditions generates a variety of distinct plant and animal
   communities, or ecoregions.

Lowland forests

   On the Indo-Gangetic plain at the base of the mountains, an alluvial
   plain drained by the Indus and Ganges-Brahmaputra river systems,
   vegetation varies from west to east with rainfall. The xeric
   Northwestern thorn scrub forests occupy the plains of Pakistan and the
   Indian Punjab. Further east lie the Upper Gangetic plains moist
   deciduous forests of Uttar Pradesh and Lower Gangetic plains moist
   deciduous forests of Bihar and West Bengal. These are monsoon forests,
   with drought-deciduous trees that lose their leaves during the dry
   season. The moister Brahmaputra Valley semi-evergreen forests occupy
   the plains of Assam.

The Terai belt

   Above the alluvial plain lies the Terai strip, a seasonally marshy zone
   of sand and clay soils. The Terai has higher rainfall than the plains,
   and the downward-rushing rivers of the Himalaya slow down and spread
   out in the flatter Terai zone, depositing fertile silt during the
   monsoon season and receding in the dry season. The Terai has a high
   water table, and the central part of the Terai belt is occupied by the
   Terai-Duar savanna and grasslands, a mosaic of grasslands, savannas,
   deciduous and evergreen forests that includes some of the world's
   tallest grasslands. The grasslands of the Terai belt are home to the
   Indian Rhinoceros (Rhinoceros unicornis).

The Bhabhar belt

   Above the Terai belt is an upland zone known as the Bhabhar, with
   porous and rocky soils, made up of debris washed down from the higher
   ranges. The Bhabhar and the lower Siwalik ranges have a subtropical
   climate. The Himalayan subtropical pine forests occupy the western end
   of the subtropical belt, with forests dominated by Chir Pine (Pinus
   roxburghii). The central part of the range is home to the Himalayan
   subtropical broadleaf forests, dominated by sal (Shorea robusta).

Montane forests

   At the middle elevations of the range, the subtropical forests yield to
   a belt of temperate broadleaf and mixed forests, with the Western
   Himalayan broadleaf forests at the western end of the range, and the
   Eastern Himalayan broadleaf forests in Assam and Arunachal Pradesh.
   Above the broadleaf forests are the Western and Eastern Himalayan
   subalpine conifer forests.

Alpine shrub and grasslands

   Shilla above the Spiti Valley in India
   Enlarge
   Shilla above the Spiti Valley in India

   Above the tree line are the Northwestern, Western, and Eastern
   Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows, which yield to tundra in the higher
   Himalayan range. The alpine meadows are the summer habitat of the
   endangered Snow Leopard (Uncia uncia). The highest reaches of the range
   are above the permanent snow line.

Origins and growth

   The 6,000 km plus journey of the India landmass (Indian Plate) before
   its collision with Asia (Eurasian Plate) about 40 to 50 million years
   ago.
   Enlarge
   The 6,000 km plus journey of the India landmass (Indian Plate) before
   its collision with Asia (Eurasian Plate) about 40 to 50 million years
   ago.

   The Himalayas are among the youngest mountain ranges on the planet.
   According to the modern theory of plate tectonics, their formation is a
   result of a continental collision or orogeny along the convergent
   boundary between the Indo-Australian Plate and the Eurasian Plate. The
   collision began in the Upper Cretaceous period about 70 million years
   ago, when the north-moving Indo-Australian Plate, moving at about 15
   cm/year, collided with the Eurasian Plate. By about 50 million years
   ago this fast moving Indo-Australian plate had completely closed the
   Tethys Ocean, whose existence has been determined by sedimentary rocks
   settled on the ocean floor and the volcanoes that fringed its edges.
   Since these sediments were light, they crumpled into mountain ranges
   rather than sinking to the floor. The Indo-Australian plate continues
   to be driven horizontally below the Tibetan plateau, which forces the
   plateau to move upwards. The Arakan Yoma highlands in Myanmar and the
   Andaman and Nicobar Islands in the Bay of Bengal were also formed as a
   result of this collision.

   The Indo-Australian plate is still moving at 67 mm/year, and over the
   next 10 million years it will travel about 1,500 km into Asia. About 2
   cm/year of the India-Asia convergence is absorbed by thrusting along
   the Himalaya southern front. This leads to the Himalayas rising by
   about 5 mm/year, making them geologically active. The movement of the
   Indian plate into the Asian plate also makes this region seismically
   active, leading to earthquakes from time to time.

Glaciers and river systems

   Glaciers near by K2.
   Enlarge
   Glaciers near by K2.

   The Himalayan range encompasses a very large number of glaciers,
   notable among which is the Siachen Glacier, the largest in the world
   outside the polar region. Some of the other more famous glaciers
   include the Gangotri and Yamunotri ( Uttaranchal), Nubra, Biafo and
   Baltoro ( Karakoram region), Zemu (Sikkim) and Khumbu glaciers (Mount
   Everest region).

   The higher regions of the Himalayas are snowbound throughout the year
   in spite of their proximity to the tropics, and they form the sources
   for several large perennial rivers, most of which combine into two
   large river systems:
   This image shows the termini of the glaciers in the Bhutan-Himalaya.
   Glacial lakes have been forming rapidly on the surface of the
   debris-covered glaciers in this region during the last few decades.
   Enlarge
   This image shows the termini of the glaciers in the Bhutan-Himalaya.
   Glacial lakes have been forming rapidly on the surface of the
   debris-covered glaciers in this region during the last few decades.
     * The western rivers combine into the Indus Basin, of which the Indus
       River is the largest. The Indus begins in Tibet at the confluence
       of Sengge and Gar rivers and flows southwest through Pakistan to
       the Arabian Sea. It is fed by the Jhelum, the Chenab, the Ravi, the
       Beas, and the Sutlej rivers, among others.
     * Most of the other Himalayan rivers drain the Ganga-Brahmaputra
       Basin. Its two main rivers are the Ganges and the Brahmaputra. The
       Ganga originates as the Bhagirathi from the Gangotri glacier and
       flows southeast through the plains of northern India, fed by the
       Alaknanda and the Yamuna among other tributaries. The Brahmaputra
       originates as the Tsangpo in western Tibet, and flows east through
       Tibet and west through the plains of Assam. The Ganga and the
       Brahmaputra meet in Bangladesh, and drain into the Bay of Bengal
       through the world's largest river delta.

   The eastern-most Himalayan rivers feed the Ayeyarwady River, which
   originates in eastern Tibet and flows south through Myanmar to drain
   into the Andaman Sea.

   The Salween, Mekong, the Yangtze and the Huang He (Yellow River) all
   originate from parts of the Tibetan plateau that are geologically
   distinct from the Himalaya mountains, and are therefore not considered
   true Himalayan rivers. Some geologists refer to all the rivers
   collectively as the circum-Himalayan rivers

   In recent years scientists have monitored a notable increase in the
   rate of glacier retreat across the region as a result of global climate
   change. Although the effect of this won't be known for many years it
   potentially could mean disaster for the hundreds of thousands of people
   that rely on the glaciers to feed the rivers of northern India during
   the dry seasons.

Lakes

   Pangong Tso the largest Himalayan lake located at an altitude of 4,600
   m
   Enlarge
   Pangong Tso the largest Himalayan lake located at an altitude of 4,600
   m
   Gurudogmar, India, a high Himalayan lake at an altitude of 5,148 m.
   Enlarge
   Gurudogmar, India, a high Himalayan lake at an altitude of 5,148 m.

   The Himalaya region is dotted with hundreds of lakes. Most lakes are
   found at altitudes of less than 5,000 m, with the size of the lakes
   diminishing with altitude. The largest lake is the Pangong t'so, which
   is spread across the border between India and Tibet. It is situated at
   an altitude of 4,600 m, and is 8 km wide and nearly 134 km long. A
   notable high (but not the highest) lake is the Gurudogmar in North
   Sikkim at an altitude of 5,148 m (16,890 feet) (altitude source: SRTM).
   Other major lakes include the Tsongmo lake, near the Indo-China border
   in Sikkim.

   The mountain lakes are known to geographers as tarns if they are caused
   by glacial activity. Tarns are found mostly in the upper reaches of the
   Himalaya, above 5,500 metres. For more information about these, see
   here.

Impact on climate

   The Himalayas have a profound effect on the climate of the Indian
   subcontinent and the Tibetan plateau. It prevents frigid, dry Arctic
   winds from blowing south into the subcontinent, which keeps South Asia
   much warmer than corresponding temperate regions in the other
   continents. It also forms a barrier for the monsoon winds, keeping them
   from traveling northwards, and causing heavy rainfall in the Terai
   region. The Himalayas are also believed to play an important part in
   the formation of Central Asian deserts such as the Taklamakan and Gobi
   deserts.

   The mountain ranges also prevent western winter disturbances from Iran
   from traveling further, resulting in snow in Kashmir and rainfall for
   parts of Punjab and northern India. Despite being a barrier to the cold
   northernly winter winds, the Brahmaputra valley receives part of the
   frigid winds, thus lowering the temperature in the northeast Indian
   states and Bangladesh. These winds also cause the North East monsoon
   during this season for these parts.

   The weather phenomenon called Jet Stream in turn affects how we view
   the highest peaks on earth, as the strong stream of winds from the west
   often pass through Everest, creating a familiar plume of snows blowing
   from the summit.

Mountain passes

   The Himalayan range at Yumesongdong in Sikkim, in the Yumthang River
   valley.
   Enlarge
   The Himalayan range at Yumesongdong in Sikkim, in the Yumthang River
   valley.

   The rugged terrain of the Himalaya makes few routes through the
   mountains possible. Some of these routes include:
     * Gangtok in Sikkim to Lhasa in Tibet, via the Nathula Pass and
       Jelepla Passes (offshoots of the ancient Silk Route).
     * Bhadgaon in Nepal to Nyalam in Tibet.
     * Rohtang Pass in Himachal Pradesh, India.
     * The road from Srinagar in Kashmir via Leh to Tibet. This pass is
       now less used because of regional troubles. Many people are
       affected.

Impact on politics and culture

   Mountain sheds like these are used by the rural populace as shelter for
   cattle in summer months as they take them for grazing in higher
   altitudes.
   Enlarge
   Mountain sheds like these are used by the rural populace as shelter for
   cattle in summer months as they take them for grazing in higher
   altitudes.

   The Himalayas, due to their large size and expanse, have been a natural
   barrier to the movement of people for tens of thousands of years. In
   particular, this has prevented intermingling of people from the Indian
   subcontinent with people from China and Mongolia, causing significantly
   different languages and customs between these regions. The Himalayas
   have also hindered trade routes and prevented military expeditions
   across its expanse. For instance, Genghis Khan could not expand his
   empire south of the Himalayas into the subcontinent.

Himal

   Himal is Nepalese for "range" and is used to name the various regions
   of the Himalayas. In Nepal, these are as follows:
     * Sagarmatha Himal
     * Annapurna Himal
     * Ganesh Himal
     * Langtang Himal
     * Manaslu Himal
     * Rolwaling Himal
     * Jugal Himal
     * Gauri Sankar Himal
     * Kanjirowa Himal
     * Khumbu Himal
     * Dhaulagiri Himal

Notable peaks

    Peak Name Other names and meaning Elevation (m) Elevation (ft) First
                                ascent Notes
                 Everest Sagarmatha -"Forehead of the Sky",
    Chomolangma or Qomolangma -"Mother of the Universe" 8,848 29,028 1953
         World's highest mountain situated on Nepal / Tibet border.
      K2 Chogo Gangri 8,611 28,251 1954 World's 2nd highest. Located on
   border between Pakistan and Xinjiang, China. World's toughest mountain
                                  to climb.
     Kangchenjunga Kangchen Dzö-nga, "Five Treasures of the Great Snow"
     8,586 28,169 1955 World's 3rd highest, highest in India and second
                              highest in Nepal.
      Makalu - 8,462 27,765 1955 World's 5th highest situated in Nepal.
   Cho Oyu Mt. Zhuoaoyou 8,201 26,906 1954 World's 6th highest situated in
                                   Nepal.
       Dhaulagiri White Mountain 8,167 26,764 1960 World's 7th highest
                             situated in Nepal.
   Nanga Parbat Nangaparbat Peak or Diamir, "Naked Mountain" 8,125 26,658
    1953 World's 9th highest. Located in Pakistan. Considered one of the
                 world's most dangerous mountains to climb.
     Annapurna "Goddess of the Harvests" 8,091 26,545 1950 World's 10th
                         highest situated in Nepal.
             Nanda Devi "Bliss-Giving Goddess" 7,817 25,645 1936

Notable Himalayan explorers and mountaineers

     * Heinrich Harrer (1912 – 2006) Austrian mountaineer, author of the
       book Seven Years in Tibet.
     * Nazir Sabir (Pakistani mountaineer) For the first time in the
       mountaineering history climbed two eight thousanders (Broad Peak &
       Gasherbrum II) in a single attempt.
     * Tenzing Norgay (1914 – 1986) was a Nepalese Sherpa mountaineer,
       also first to reach summit of Mt. Everest along with Edmund
       Hillary.
     * Sir Edmund Hillary (born 1919) New Zealand mountaineer and
       explorer, one of the first men to reach the summit of Mount
       Everest.
     * Jerzy Kukuczka (1948-1989) Polish mountaineer, considered one of
       the greatest mountain climbers of all time. Ascended all fourteen
       eight-thousanders faster than anybody else, establishing ten new
       routes.
     * Reinhold Messner (born 1944) Italian mountaineer, considered one of
       the greatest mountain climbers of all time. First man to climb all
       fourteen eight-thousanders.
     * Harish Kapadia, (born 1945) mountaineer and author.

Religion and mythology

   The Vaishno Devi shrine near Jammu, India
   Enlarge
   The Vaishno Devi shrine near Jammu, India

   Several places in the Himalaya are of religious significance in
   Hinduism and Buddhism. In Hinduism, the Himalaya have also been
   personified as the god Himavat, the father of Shiva's consort, Parvati.
     * Haridwar, the place where the river Ganga enters the plains.
     * Badrinath, a temple dedicated to Vishnu.
     * Kedarnath, where one of the 12 Jyotirlingas is located.
     * Gaumukh, the source of the Bhagirathi (and hence, by extension, the
       Ganga), located a few miles above the town of Gangotri.
     * Deoprayag, where the Alaknanda and Bhagirathi merge to form the
       Ganga.
     * Rishikesh, has a temple of Lakshmana.
     * Mount Kailash, a 6,638 m high peak which is considered to be the
       abode of the Hindu god Shiva and is also venerated by Buddhists.
       Lake Manasarowar lies at the base of Mount Kailash, and is the
       source of the Brahmaputra.
     * Amarnath, has a natural Shiva linga of ice which forms for a few
       weeks each year. Thousands of people visit this cave during these
       few weeks.
     * The Vaishno Devi is a popular shrine among Durga devotees.
     * A number of Tibetan Buddhist sites are situated in the Himalaya,
       including the residence of the Dalai Lama.
     * The Yeti is one of the most famous creatures in cryptozoology. It
       is a large primate-like creature that is supposed to live in the
       Himalaya. Most mainstream scientists and experts consider current
       evidence of the Yeti's existence unpersuasive, and the result of
       hoaxes, legend or misidentification of mundane creatures.
     * Shambhala is a mystical city in Buddhism with various legends
       associated with it. While some legends consider it to be a real
       city where secret Buddhist doctrines are being preserved, other
       legends believe that the city does not physically exist and can
       only be reached in the mental realm.
     * Sri Hemkund Sahib - Sikh Gurudwara where Guru Gobind Singh
       supposedly meditated and achieved enlightenment in a previous
       incarnation.

The Himalayas in fiction

     * Shangri-La is a fictional utopia situated somewhere in the
       Himalayas, based on the legendary Shambhala. It is described in the
       novel Lost Horizon, written by the British writer James Hilton in
       1933.
     * Tintin in Tibet is one of the series of classic comic-strip albums,
       written and illustrated by Belgian writer and illustrator Hergé,
       featuring the young reporter Tintin investigating a plane crash in
       the Gosain Than massif in the Himalayas. ( 1960)
     * The Hollywood movie Vertical Limit (2000), is set in the K2 peak of
       the Himalayas, in Pakistan.
     * Several levels of Tomb Raider 2 and one level in Tomb Raider:
       Legend of the Tomb Raider series are situated in the Himalayas.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Himalayas"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
