   #copyright

Hinduism

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Religious movements,
traditions and organizations

   Hinduism (Sanskrit: हिन्दू धर्म, Hindū Dharma, also known as सनातन
   धर्म, Sanātana Dharma) is a religion that originated on the Indian
   subcontinent. Hinduism encompasses many religious beliefs, practices,
   and denominations. Most Hindus believe in a supreme cosmic spirit
   called Brahman that is worshipped in many forms, represented by
   individual deities such as Vishnu, Shiva and Shakti. Hinduism centers
   around a variety of practices that are meant to help one experience the
   divinity that is everywhere and realize the true nature of the Self.

   Hinduism is the third largest religion in the world, with approximately
   1 billion adherents (2005 figure), of whom about 890 million live in
   India. Other countries with large Hindu populations include Nepal,
   Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, United
   Kingdom, Canada and the United States, with Nepal being the only
   country with Hinduism as its official religion (see article Hinduism by
   country).

   Hinduism is considered to be the oldest living religion in the world.
   Unlike most other major religions, Hinduism has no single founder and
   is based on a number of religious texts developed over many centuries
   that contain spiritual insights and practical guidance for religious
   life. Among such texts, the Vedas are the most ancient. Other important
   scriptures include Upanishads, the eighteen Puranas and the epic poems
   Mahabharata and Ramayana. The Bhagavad Gita, which is contained within
   the Mahabharata, is a widely studied scripture that summarizes the
   spiritual teachings of the Vedas.

Core concepts

   Modern Hinduism evolved from the ancient Vedic tradition (Vaidika
   paramparā). Prominent themes in Hinduism include Dharma (individual
   ethics, duties and obligations), Samsāra (rebirth), Karma (right
   action), and Moksha (salvation). Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism all
   share some traits in common with Hinduism, as all these religions
   originated in India, and all focus on self-improvement with the
   ultimate aim of attaining personal spiritual experience.

God & the soul

God: both principle and person

   Hinduism is sometimes referred to as a polytheistic religion, but
   strictly speaking, this is not accurate. Mainstream Hinduism believes
   in One God, but asserts that the One God can appear to humans in
   multiple names and forms.

Brahman

   According to the monotheistic and pantheistic theologies of Hinduism,
   God is, in the highest sense, One: beyond form, infinite, and eternal.
   God is changeless and is the very source of consciousness. God is
   beyond time, space, and causation and yet permeates everything and
   every being. God is beyond gender. When God is thought of as this
   infinite principle, God is called Brahman. Brahman is the Absolute
   reality: it is pure existence and knowledge. Brahman does not exist; it
   is existence itself. It is not all-knowing; it is knowledge itself.

   However, when human beings try to think of the infinite God, they
   project the limitations of their finite minds on God. The human mind
   cannot think other than in human terms. Therefore, it projects human
   limitations, such as personality, motherhood, and fatherhood on God.
   According to the Advaita school of thought God does not have any such
   attributes. However, many consider it helpful to project such
   attributes on God — the myriad names and forms of God one finds in
   Hinduism are all ways for humans to approach the divine. Therefore, the
   Hindu scriptures depict God not only as an abstract principle or
   concept, but also as a personal being, much like the God in the
   Judeo-Christian religions.

   Despite Hinduism's belief in the abstract principle of Brahman, most
   Hindus worship God on a day-to-day basis in one of God's less abstract
   personal forms, such as Vishnu, Shiva, or Shakti. Some Hindus worship
   these personal forms of God for a practical reason: it is easier to
   cultivate devotion to a personal being than to an abstract principle.
   Other Hindus, such as those following the Dvaita traditions, consider
   the personal forms in themselves to be the highest form of truth and
   worship God as an infinite and yet personal being.

   The Hindu scriptures declare that Brahman (the impersonal God) is
   beyond description, and can be understood only through direct spiritual
   experience. Nevertheless, for the benefit of others, the ancient Hindu
   sages who experienced Brahman attempted to describe their experiences,
   as recorded in the ancient Vedic texts known as the Upanishads.

   Several mahā-vākyas, or great sayings, indicate what the principle of
   Brahman is:
     * "Brahman is knowledge", (prajnānam brahma)
     * "The Self (or the Soul) is Brahman " (ayam ātmā brahma)
     * "I am Brahman" (aham brahmāsmi)
     * "You are that" (tat tvam asi),
     * "All this that we see in the world is Brahman" (sarvam khalv idam
       brahma),
     * "Brahman is existence, consciousness, and happiness"
       (sachchidānanda brahma).

   Thus, Brahman is conceived of as the very essence of existence and
   knowledge, which pervades the entire universe, including every living
   being. The goal of Hinduism is to somehow "wake up," and realize one's
   own connection to the divine reality that may be called Brahman or God.
   Because God is everywhere, God is also present within each living
   being.

Ishvara

   When God is thought of as Creator, he is called Brahmā (not to be
   confused with Brahman), and is represented visually as shown in this
   temple carving.
   Enlarge
   When God is thought of as Creator, he is called Brahmā (not to be
   confused with Brahman), and is represented visually as shown in this
   temple carving.

   When God is thought of as the supreme all-powerful person (rather than
   as the infinite principle called Brahman), God is called Īśvara or
   Bhagavān. Īśvara is a word used to refer to the personal aspect of God
   in general; it is not specific to a particular deity. Īśvara transcends
   gender, yet can be looked upon as both father and mother, and even as
   friend, child, or sweetheart. Most Hindus, in their daily devotional
   practices, worship some form of this personal aspect of God, although
   they believe in the more abstract concept of Brahman as well. Sometimes
   this means worshiping God through an image or a picture. Sometimes it
   just means thinking of God as a personal being.

   Depending on which aspect of Īśvara one is talking about, a different
   name will be used—and frequently a different image or picture. For
   instance, when God is spoken of as the creator, God is called Brahmā.
   When spoken of as preserver of the world, God is called Vishnu. When
   spoken of as destroyer of the world, God is called Shiva.

   Many of these individual aspects of God also have other names and
   images. For example, Krishna and Rama are considered forms of Vishnu.
   All the various deities and images one finds in Hinduism are considered
   manifestations of the same God, called Īśvara in the personal aspect
   and Brahman when referred to as an abstract concept.

   In their personal religious practices, Hindus worship primarily one or
   another of these deities, known as their "ishta devatā," or chosen
   ideal. The particular form of God worshipped as one's chosen ideal is a
   matter of individual preference. Regional and family traditions can
   influence this choice. Hindus may also take guidance about this choice
   from their scriptures.

   Although Hindus may worship deities other than their chosen ideal from
   time to time as well, depending on the occasion and their personal
   inclinations, they are not required to worship—or even know about—every
   form of God. Hindus generally choose one concept of God (e.g., Krishna,
   Rama, Shiva, or Kali) and cultivate devotion to that chosen form, while
   at the same time respecting the chosen ideals of other people.

Devas & devis

   The Hindu scriptures speak of many individual deities, called devas.
   Goddesses are called devīs. The various devas and devīs are
   personifications of various aspects of one and the same God ( Ishvara).
   For instance, when a Hindu thinks of Ishvara as the giver of knowledge
   and learning, that aspect of Ishvara is personified as the deity
   Saraswati. In the same manner, Lakshmi personifies Ishvara as the giver
   of wealth and prosperity. This does not imply that Ishvara is the Lord
   of all the other deities; Ishvara is just the name used to refer to the
   personal God in general, when no particular deity is being referred to.

   The devas (also called devatās) are an integral part of the colorful
   Hindu culture. These various forms of God are depicted in innumerable
   paintings, statues, murals, and scriptural stories that can be found in
   temples, homes, businesses, and other places. The scriptures recommend
   that for the satisfaction of a particular material desire a person may
   worship a particular deity. For example, shopkeepers frequently keep a
   statue or picture of the devi Lakshmi in their shops. The
   elephant-headed deva known as Ganesha is worshipped before commencing
   any undertaking, as he represents God's aspect as the remover of
   obstacles. Students and scholars may propitiate Saraswati, the devi of
   learning, prior to an exam or lecture.

   The most ancient Vedic devas included Indra, Agni, Soma, Varuna, Mitra,
   Savitri, Rudra, Prajapati, Vishnu, Aryaman and the Ashvins; important
   devīs were Sarasvatī, Ūṣā and Prithvī. Later scriptures called the
   Purānas recount traditional stories about each individual deity.

   Vishnu and Shiva are not regarded as ordinary devas but as Mahādevas
   ("Great Gods" ) because of their central positions in worship and
   mythology. The Purānas also laud other devas, such as Ganesha and
   Hanumān, and avatāras such as Rāma and Krishna (see below). Goddesses
   are worshiped when God is thought of as the Universal Mother.
   Particular forms of the Universal Mother include Lakshmī, Sarasvatī and
   Parvatī, Durgā, and Kālī.

   Some Hindus consider the various deities not as forms of the one
   Ishvara, but as independently existing entities, and may thus be
   properly considered polytheistic.

Avataras (incarnations of God)

   Krishna (left) is the eighth incarnation of the Hindu god Vishnu
   Enlarge
   Krishna (left) is the eighth incarnation of the Hindu god Vishnu

   Many denominations of Hinduism, such as Vaishnavism and Smartism, teach
   that from time to time God comes to Earth as a human being to help
   humans along in their struggle toward enlightenment and salvation (
   moksha). Such an incarnation of God is called an avatāra. In some
   respects, the Hindu concept of avatara is similar to the belief found
   in Christianity that God came to the earth in the human form of Jesus.
   However, whereas most Christians believe that God has assumed a human
   body on only one occasion, Hinduism teaches that there have been
   multiple avatars throughout history, and that there will be more in the
   future. Thus Krishna, an incarnation of God, says:

     Whenever righteousness declines
     And unrighteousness increases,
     I make myself a body;
     In every age I come back
     To deliver the holy,
     To destroy the sin of the sinner,
     To establish righteousness.

   The most famous of the divine incarnations are Rama, whose life is
   depicted in the Ramayana, and Krishna, whose life is depicted in the
   Mahabharata and the Srimad Bhagavatam. The Bhagavad Gita, which
   contains the spiritual teachings of Krishna, is one of the most
   widely-read scriptures in Hinduism.

Ātman

   Most Hindu thinkers agree that the spirit or soul, the true "self" of
   every person, called the ātman, is eternal. It is believed that the
   Spirit of God and the spirit of man have existed and will continue to
   exist throughout all eternity. According to schools influenced by the
   concept of Advaita (non-duality), the human spirit and God's Spirit are
   not seen as ultimately distinct. They believe that the core spirit, or
   "Self", of every individual person is identical with God's Spirit.
   According to the Upanishads, whoever gains insight into the depths of
   his own nature and becomes fully aware of the ātman as the innermost
   core of his own Self will also realize his identity with Brahman, the
   divine source of the whole universe, and will thereby reach salvation.
   According to the Dvaita ("dualistic") school, on the other hand (often
   associated with the Vaishnava tradition), the ātman is not identical
   with God, although it is dependent on Him, and salvation depends on the
   cultivation of love for God and on God's grace.

Heaven and hell

   The concepts of "Heaven" and "Hell" do not translate directly into
   Hinduism and reaching heaven is not necessarily considered the ultimate
   goal. This is because heaven and hell are believed to be temporary. The
   only thing that is considered eternal is divinity, which includes God
   as well as the ātman (the soul). Therefore the ultimate goal is to
   experience divinity.

Hindu scriptures

   The Naradiyamahapuranam describes the mechanics of the cosmos. Depicted
   here are Vishnu the Maintainer with his consort Lakshmi resting on
   Shesha Nag. The great sage Narada and Brahma the Creator are also
   pictured.
   Enlarge
   The Naradiyamahapuranam describes the mechanics of the cosmos. Depicted
   here are Vishnu the Maintainer with his consort Lakshmi resting on
   Shesha Nag. The great sage Narada and Brahma the Creator are also
   pictured.

   Hinduism is based on "the accumulated treasury of spiritual laws
   discovered by different persons in different times." The scriptures
   were transmitted orally, in verse form to aid memorization, for many
   centuries before they were written down. Over many centuries, the
   teachings were refined by other sages, and the canon expanded.

   The overwhelming majority of the sacred texts are composed in the
   Sanskrit language. Indeed, much of the morphology and linguistic
   philosophy inherent in the learning of Sanskrit is sometimes claimed to
   be inextricably linked to study of the Vedas and relevant Hindu
   scriptures. Sanskrit continues to be used even today in religious and
   literary settings.

   The scripture are collectively referred to as Shāstra and are commonly
   classified into two classes: Śruti and Smriti.

Shruti (Vedic literature)

   The Rig Veda is one of the world's oldest religious texts. Shown here
   is a Rig Veda manuscript in Devanagari, early 19th century.
   Enlarge
   The Rig Veda is one of the world's oldest religious texts. Shown here
   is a Rig Veda manuscript in Devanagari, early 19th century.

   Śruti ("that which has been heard") refers to the Vedas (वेद,
   "Knowledge") which form the earliest record of the Hindu scriptures.
   While they have not been dated with much certainty, even the most
   conservative estimates date their origin to 1200 B.C. or earlier.

   The Vedas are said to be eternal truths that were originally realized
   through deep meditation by ancient sages called Ṛiṣhis. Hindus do not
   believe that God or any person created the Vedas; the Vedas are said to
   be without beginning and without end. "Just as the law of gravitation
   existed before its discovery and would exist if all humanity forgot it,
   so is it with the laws that govern the spiritual world." The Vedas have
   therefore been called apaurusheya ("not man-made").

   The Vedas themselves have been classified in various ways. One simple
   way is to divide the Vedas into two sections according to their subject
   matter:
    1. The Karma Kānda ("the action part"), deals with karma, rituals, and
       secular topics, the purpose of which is to attain material
       prosperity and happiness on earth, and
    2. The Jnāna Kānda ("the knowledge part"), is concerned with the
       spiritual knowledge that brings liberation from ignorance and
       realization of the Ultimate Truth.

   The Upaniṣhads constitute a major portion of the Jnāna Kānda, and
   contain the bulk of the Vedas' philosophical and mystical teachings.
   The teachings of the Upanishads emphasize several key points (which are
   interpreted variously by various schools of thought):
    1. The deepest source of all reality, called Brahman, is identical
       with the innermost self of man (ātman).
    2. As long as one does not realize this relationship, one is subject
       to a seemingly endless round of rebirths (sansāra).
    3. A conscious realization of the essential identity of the ātman and
       Brahman leads to liberation from sansāra.

   While the Vedas are not themselves commonly read by a lay Hindu, they
   are yet revered as the spiritual foundation for the later, more
   widely-read scriptures ( smriti).

Smriti

   Hindu texts other than the Shrutis are collectively called the Smṛitis
   ("memory"). All of them laud the Vedas and the Shruti is generally held
   to take precedence over them in any apparent dispute.

   The most notable of the Smritis are the Itihāsas ( epics), such as the
   Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyaṇa, considered sacred by almost all Hindus.
   Bhagavad Gītā (भगवद् गीता) (often referred to as simply the Gītā) is an
   integral part of the epic Mahābhārata and one of the most popular
   sacred texts of Hinduism. It contains philosophical sermons taught by
   Kṛiṣhṇa, an incarnation of Viṣhṇu, to the Pāṇḍava prince Arjuna on the
   eve of a great war. The Bhagavad Gītā is described as the essence of
   the Vedas.

   Also widely known are the eighteen Purāṇas ("ancient histories"), which
   illustrate Vedic ideas through vivid narratives dealing with deities,
   and their interactions with humans. Prominent Purāṇas include the
   Srīmad Bhāgavatam, the Devī Mahātmya (an ode to God as the Divine
   Mother), the Yoga Sūtras (a key meditative yoga text by the sage
   Patañjali), the Tantras, and the Manusmṛiti, as well as the Mahanirvāṇa
   Tantra, Tirumantiram and Shiva Sūtras. Other important Hindu scriptures
   include the sectarian Hindu Āgamas that dedicated to rituals and
   worship associated with Viṣhnu, Shiva and Devī.

   Most Hindu scriptures, especially the epics and Puranic stories, are
   not typically interpreted literally and most Hindus attach greater
   importance to the ethics and the metaphorical meanings derived from
   them. It is widely understood accepted that the Shastras contain a mix
   of historical fact, myth, and spiritual truths and that their aim is to
   highlight deeper spiritual meaning through the stories and teachings.
   Hindu exegesis often leans toward figurative interpretations of
   scriptures rather than literal ones.

Many scriptures, many paths

   In contrast to the scriptural canons in some other religions, the Hindu
   scriptural canon is not closed even today — Hindus believe that because
   the spiritual truths of the Vedas are eternal, they may continue to be
   expressed in new ways in the future. New scriptures may continue to be
   written to express the truths of the Vedas in ways that will be
   accessible to the people of different times and places. However there
   is a special veneration for the shruti scriptures because they have
   been validated by many sages and thinkers over the course of many
   millennia.

   Many Hindus may even venerate the scriptures of other religions, since
   it is believed that the One Divinity can reveal itself in innumerable
   ways. A much-quoted pada (verse) from the Rigveda that emphasizes the
   diversity of paths to the one goal is:

          ekam sat viprā bahudhā vadanti
          Truth is one, the wise call it by many names
          — Rig Veda 1.164.46c

   Thus, Hinduism accepts a large number of scriptures, and remains open
   to any new revelations. Because the same eternal spiritual truths can
   be viewed from innumerable perspectives, there is relatively little
   theological quarrel among Hindu denominations. However, some
   denominations may be more inclined toward this all-inclusive attitude
   than others. For instance, although followers of Advaita Vedanta and
   Smartism often place heavy emphasis on the view that God can be
   worshipped in any form, many members of the Vaishnava sect believe that
   spiritual liberation can be attained only through submission to God in
   the form of Vishnu.

   It is believed that a sage today can realize the same truths that the
   ancient rishis realized. For this reason, Hindus may venerate the words
   of a modern saint — Sri Ramakrishna, Sai Baba, or Sri Ramana Maharshi,
   for example — as much as those of the ancient teachers.

The goal of life (jīvan-lakshya)

   The goal of life is stated variously as the realization of one's union
   with God, attainment of the vision of God, attainment of perfect love
   of God, realization of the unity of all existence, perfect
   unselfishness, liberation from ignorance, attainment of perfect mental
   peace, or detachment from worldly desires. The goal is to have the
   direct experience of divinity, regardless of precisely how one may
   choose to define it. The experience of divinity is the only thing that
   can give one true peace and happiness, and salvation from suffering and
   ignorance. According to Hindu thought, one does not necessarily have to
   wait until death to attain salvation — it is possible to achieve it in
   this very life. One who attains salvation while living is called a
   jīvan-mukta.

Multiple ways to reach the goal (yoga)

   In whatever way a Hindu might define the goal of life—and multiple
   definitions are allowed—there are several methods ( yogas) that have
   been developed over the centuries for people of different tastes and
   temperaments. Paths one can follow to achieve the spiritual goal of
   life include:
     * Bhakti Yoga (the path of love and devotion),
     * Karma Yoga (the path of right action),
     * Rāja Yoga (the path of meditation) and
     * Jñāna Yoga (the path of knowledge).

   An individual, or sect of Hinduism, may prefer one of yogas according
   to their inclination and understanding, for instance some followers of
   the Dvaita school hold that Bhakti ("devotion") is the only path to
   salvation. However, typically, practice of one yoga does not exclude
   acceptance of the other yogas.

   Bhakti Yoga

   The bhakti traditions emphasize cultivation of love and devotion for
   God as the path to perfection. Followers of bhakti ("bhaktas")
   typically worship God as a divine personal being or avatar, such as
   Rama or Krishna. Followers of the bhakti path strive to purify their
   minds and activities through the chanting of God's names ( japa),
   prayer, the singing of hymns ( bhajan), and by treating all living
   creatures with compassion (dayā). Bhaktas seek to enjoy a loving
   relationship with God, rather than seeking to merge their consciousness
   with the supreme Brahman as the followers of jnana yoga do.

   Karma Yoga

   The followers of karma yoga seek to achieve mental equilibrium and
   perfect unselfishness by performing their duties in the world in a
   dedicated but mentally detached manner. According to Hinduism, work,
   which is inevitable, has one great disadvantage. Any work done with
   attachment to its fruits generates a kind of psychological bondage, or
   anxiety, in the mind of the worker. Therefore, followers of karma yoga
   emphasize the following injunction in the Bhagavad Gita:

     Do your duty, always; but without attachment. That is how a man
     reaches the ultimate truth; by working without anxiety about
     results.

   Many followers of karma yoga try to attain mental detachment from the
   results of their work by mentally offering the results of every action
   to God, thus combining karma yoga with bhakti yoga. However, it is
   possible for even an atheist to follow karma yoga by simply remaining
   mentally detached from the results of his or her work by means of
   willpower.

   Raja Yoga

   Swami Vivekananda, shown here practicing meditation, was a Hindu
   sanyāsin (monk) recognized for his inspiring lectures on spiritual
   topics such as bhakti yoga, karma yoga, raja yoga, and jnana yoga. He
   founded the Ramakrishna Mission, which today conducts religious
   teaching and philanthropic activities worldwide.
   Enlarge
   Swami Vivekananda, shown here practicing meditation, was a Hindu
   sanyāsin (monk) recognized for his inspiring lectures on spiritual
   topics such as bhakti yoga, karma yoga, raja yoga, and jnana yoga. He
   founded the Ramakrishna Mission, which today conducts religious
   teaching and philanthropic activities worldwide.

   The followers of Raja yoga seek to realize spiritual truths through
   meditation. Raja yoga, also known simply as yoga, is based on the Yoga
   Sutras (aphorisms on yoga) of the sage Patanjali. Through the practice
   of meditation, followers of this path seek to gradually gain control
   over their own thoughts and actions, rather than being controlled by
   their impulses. They seek to attain one-pointed concentration and
   perfect equanimity of mind. Ultimately, through meditation, the
   followers of raja yoga seek self-knowledge: by concentrating all the
   energies of the mind inward, they seek to perceive whether they have
   souls, "whether life is of five minutes or of eternity, and whether
   there is a God." Thus, the highest goal of raja yoga is
   God-realization, or experiencing the Ultimate Truth.

   The actual act of sitting down for meditation, however, is only the tip
   of the iceberg in raja yoga. The disciplines of raja yoga, as taught by
   Patanjali, consist of eight steps, of which dhyāna (meditation) is only
   one. Thus according to Patanjali, the eight practices of raja yoga are:
    1. Yama: Restraining harmful thoughts and impulses.
    2. Niyama: Cultivating good habits.
    3. Āsana: Learning proper posture for prolonged meditation.
    4. Prānāyama: Control of prana, or life force, through rhythmic
       breathing exercises.
    5. Pratyāhāra: Withdrawing the senses from their objects of enjoyment.
    6. Dhāranā: Fixing the mind on the object of contemplation.
    7. Dhyāna: Uninterrupted contemplation (meditation).
    8. Samādhi: Total absorption of the mind in the object of
       contemplation.

   As with the other yogas, raja yoga may be combined with bhakti yoga,
   karma yoga, or jnana yoga to create a customized path suitable for an
   individual aspirant. The aspects of raja yoga that deal with physical
   exercises (especially āsana) are known collectively as hatha yoga. With
   the increasing popularity of the therapeutic benefits of Hatha Yoga,
   the sanskrit term Yoga is often interpreted in the narrow sense of
   Hatha Yoga. However, yoga encompasses a broader meaning in Hinduism.

   Jnana Yoga

   Jnana Yoga has been called the path of rational inquiry, and is
   prescribed for people to whom reason appeals more than faith. The
   followers of jnana yoga emphasize a two-step process to help one attain
   salvation:

   (1) Viveka: the practice of discriminating between things that are
   impermanent (e.g., worldly pleasures) and those that are permanent
   (e.g., God and the soul), and

   (2) Vairāgya, renunciation of unhealthy attachment to things that are
   impermanent.

   For monks (called sanyāsīs or sādhus) and nuns (sanyāsinīs),
   renunciation may mean actual physical departure from worldly activities
   such as marriage and earning money. For the vast majority of people,
   however, renunciation means mental detachment from selfish desires
   while continuing to fulfill family and community obligations. By
   focusing the mind on Divinity instead of the desire for selfish gain,
   jnana yogis seek to maintain a healthy mental equilibrium in the face
   of the inevitable highs and lows of life.

   According to Hinduism, humans identify themselves with their physical
   bodies and their egos (the sense of "I" and "mine") due to ignorance
   (or māyā). These attributes are considered impermanent, and thus
   ultimately unreal. The true "self" of every person — the only part of a
   person that is permanent — is the soul, called the atman. Further, it
   is postulated that the atman of each person is eternally connected to
   the atman of every other person, with God, and with all existence.

   In an analogy attributed to Swami Vivekanand each individual soul is
   compared to a wave on a shoreless ocean. The ocean is the Infinite
   Brahman. When a person sees rightly, he comes to understand that each
   wave is part of the ocean. Similarly, the highest realization that the
   followers of jnana yoga strive to attain is that all living beings are
   essentially indistinguishable from the infinite, eternal Brahman.

   Jnana yoga is often associated with the Vedanta school of philosophy,
   although Hindus of the Vedanta school may incorporate elements of
   bhakti yoga and the other yogas into their spiritual practices as well.

Karma and reincarnation

   The doctrine of karma is related to the law of cause and effect. It
   states that everything that people do (karma) leaves impressions
   (samskāras) in their mind, which determines what kind of people they
   will be in the future, and hence their fate. Some Hindus see God's
   direct involvement in this process, while others consider the natural
   laws of causation sufficient to explain the effects of karma.

   Some Hindus believe in reincarnation, and to them action in one life
   can determine the fate in subsequent reincarnations. Virtuous actions
   take the soul closer to the Supreme Divine and lead to a birth with
   higher consciousness. Evil actions hinder this recognition of the
   Supreme Divine, and the soul takes lower forms of worldly life. Thus
   according to this school of Hindu philosophy, one should try to behave
   in a virtuous manner, as it impacts current and future lives, Over the
   course of time, if a person sufficiently purifies the mind and
   intellect, he or she can attain the goal of life, which is to
   experience the highest truth or God.

   The cycle of birth and death is called samsāra. According to the
   doctrine of reincarnation, the soul ( atman) is immortal, while the
   body is subject to birth and death. The Bhagavad Gita states that

     Worn-out garments are shed by the body; Worn-out bodies are shed by
     the dweller within the body. New bodies are donned by the dweller,
     like garments.

   Hinduism teaches that the soul goes on repeatedly being born and dying.
   One is reborn on account of desire: a person desires to be born because
   he or she wants to enjoy worldly pleasures, which can be enjoyed only
   through a body. As long as the soul mistakenly identifies itself with
   the ego (the sense of "I" and "mine", called ahamkāra in Sanskrit), it
   has worldly desires, which cause it to be reborn again and again.
   Hinduism does not teach that all worldly pleasures are sinful, but it
   does teach that they can never bring deep, lasting happiness or peace
   (ānanda).

   It is thought that after several cycles of birth and rebirths, a person
   is no longer satisfied with the limited happiness that worldly
   pleasures bring. At this point, the person seeks higher forms of
   happiness, which can be attained only through spiritual experience.
   When, after spiritual practice (sādhanā) the person finally realizes
   his or her own divine nature - i.e., realizes that the true "self" is
   the immortal soul rather than the body or the ego — all desires for the
   pleasures of the world vanish, since they seem insipid compared to
   spiritual ānanda. This realization breaks the cycle of reincarnation.

   When the cycle of rebirth thus comes to an end, a person is said to
   have attained moksha, or salvation. While all schools of thought agree
   that moksha implies the cessation of worldly desires and freedom from
   the cycle of birth and death, the exact definition of salvation depends
   on individual beliefs. For example, followers of the Advaita Vedanta
   school (often associated with jnana yoga) believe that they will spend
   eternity absorbed in the perfect peace and happiness that comes with
   the realization that all existence is One, and that the immortal soul
   is part of that existence. Thus they will no longer identify themselves
   as individual persons, but will see the "Self" (ātman) as a part of the
   infinite ocean of Divinity (Brahman). The followers of dualistic
   schools, on the other hand, expect to spend eternity in a loka, or
   heaven, where they will have the blessed company of their chosen form
   of God (some form of Ishvara) throughout eternity. The two schools are
   not necessarily contradictory, however. A follower of one school may
   believe that both types of salvation are possible, but will simply have
   a personal preference to experience one or the other. Thus, it is said,
   the followers of Dvaita wish to "taste sugar," while the followers of
   Advaita wish to "become sugar."

Practices

   All Hindu practices seek to accomplish a single purpose: increasing a
   person's awareness of the divinity that is present everywhere and in
   everything. Therefore, Hinduism has developed numerous practices meant
   to help one think of divinity even in the midst of everyday life. The
   more a devotee can think holy thoughts, the sooner he or she can purify
   his or her mind, which is the way to salvation. According to one
   teacher:

     The ideal of man is to see God in everything. But if you cannot see
     Him in everything, see Him in one thing, in that thing you like
     best, and then see Him in another. So on you go. . . . Take your
     time and you will achieve your end.

Pūjā (worship)

   Most observant Hindus engage in some type of formal worship ( pūjā)
   both in the home and in temples. In the home, Hindus usually have a
   special place that is used as a shrine, and which contains a picture or
   statue symbolizing the individual's chosen form(s) of God (ishta).
   Typically a devotee enters the shrine at dawn and at dusk to make an
   offering to God, symbolized by placing items such as food, water, and
   flowers before the image, waving incense, lighting candles or oil-lamps
   ( diya), ringing a bell, and/or waving a fan. The devotee thus
   symbolically offers to God items that can be enjoyed by each of the
   five senses. Other practices in the home include meditation (dhyāna),
   the chanting of God's name or names ( japa), and the recitation of
   scriptures such as the Bhagavad Gita.
   Ganesha is the son of Shiva and Parvati (pictured left). He is widely
   worshipped as Vignesh, the remover of obstacles.
   Enlarge
   Ganesha is the son of Shiva and Parvati (pictured left). He is widely
   worshipped as Vignesh, the remover of obstacles.

   Before performing pūjā, the devotee usually bathes and wears washed
   clothes. Women customarily do not engage in pūjā during the first four
   days of menstruation. It is also customary for Hindus not to perform
   pūjā for a month after birth of a child (vṛddhi sūtak) or during the
   first sixteen days after the death of a family member (mritaka-sūtak).
   These periods are explained as resulting from a temporary state of
   ritual impurity (ashaucha).

   Visiting temples is not obligatory for Hindus. Many Hindus go to
   temples only during religious festivals. Temples are not used for
   weddings, funerals, or as social hubs—they are primarily used for
   formal worship. Sometimes worship in temples is accompanied by
   devotional singing (kīrtana) and religious discourse. Hindu temple
   priests (pandās) are salaried workers, hired by temple authorities to
   perform ritualistic worship. They are not to be confused with swāmīs or
   sanyāsins (all-renouncing monks, who do not work for salary).

   Priests begin to perform temple worship at daybreak, and continue with
   various rituals until late in the evening. During the worship the
   priest makes various offerings to God, such as food, drink, flowers,
   and perfume as a token of love, sacrifice and devotion. Often, devotees
   bring their own offerings to the temple, or purchase them from nearby
   vendors. Food offerings are called "Naivedhya". The priest takes the
   offering from the devotees and presents it to God on their behalf. Food
   that has been offered to God is considered to be sanctified (prasāda),
   and is generally distributed to the devotees, wandering monks or nuns,
   or the poor. Accepting prasāda is considered spiritually beneficial.

   Besides home and temple worship, observant Hindus are supposed to
   perform every action as an offering to God as prescribed by karma yoga.

   Worship of God through images
   The dancing posture of Siva, known as the Nataraja, is often said to be
   the supreme statement of Hindu art on account of its multi-faceted
   symbolism
   Enlarge
   The dancing posture of Siva, known as the Nataraja, is often said to be
   the supreme statement of Hindu art on account of its multi-faceted
   symbolism

   Hindus worship God through images ( murti), such as statues or
   paintings, which are symbols of God's power and glory. Through such
   tangible symbols a Hindu tries to establish contact with the intangible
   God and the image, which is a symbol, acts like a link between God and
   His worshipper.

   According to another view, it is not incorrect to think that God is in
   the image because God is everywhere. Thus the Padma Purana states that
   the mūrti is not to be thought of as mere stone or wood but as the
   manifest form of the Divinity.

   Although most mūrtis are more or less anthropomorphic, the deity Shiva
   is worshipped symbolically in the form of a pillar-like stone called a
   lingam.

   A few Hindu denominations, such as the Arya Samaj, do not believe in
   worshipping God through images.

The guru-disciple tradition

   In many Hindu denominations, spiritual aspirants are encouraged to have
   a personal spiritual teacher, called a guru. The student is expected to
   follow the instructions of the guru and to sincerely strive to reach
   the goal of spiritual life. Gurus may teach to each student a special
   mantra, which is a name of God, a holy phrase, or other sacred words,
   which the student repeats to himself or herself daily at dawn and dusk,
   and as much as possible at other times. The chanting of a mantra is
   called japa (see below). Japa is meant to increase remembrance of God
   and to elevate the mind so that it will become purer and able to
   experience God. A guru may also give a student instructions in
   meditation and other practices.

   According to many systems of belief, a guru must never charge any money
   for the guidance that he or she gives, although a student may give
   voluntary gifts to the teacher as a token of appreciation
   (guru-dakshinā).

Japa and Mantra

   Mantras are chanted, through their meaning, sound, and chanting style,
   to help a person focus the mind on holy thoughts or to express love and
   devotion for God. Mantras often give courage in exigent times and serve
   to help invoke one's inner spiritual strength. Indeed, Mahatma Gandhi's
   dying words are said to have been a two-word mantra to the Lord Rama:
   "Hé Ram!"

   One of the most revered mantras in Hinduism is the Gayatri Mantra. In
   India including Kashmir, Brahmins are initiated into this most sacred
   mantra at the time of their Yajñopavit (thread ceremony). Many Hindus
   to this day, in a tradition that has continued unbroken from ancient
   times, perform morning ablutions at the bank of a sacred river while
   chanting the Gayatri and Mahamrityunjaya mantras.

   Japa has been extolled as the greatest dharma for the Kali Yuga, in the
   Mahabharat.

Pilgrimage

   The largest religious gathering on Earth. Around 70 million Hindus from
   around the world participated in Kumbh Mela at one of the Hindu Holy
   city Prayag (India).
   Enlarge
   The largest religious gathering on Earth. Around 70 million Hindus from
   around the world participated in Kumbh Mela at one of the Hindu Holy
   city Prayag (India).

   Pilgrimage is not mandatory in Hinduism as it is in Islam.
   Nevertheless, many Hindus who can afford to do so undertake one or more
   pilgrimages during their lifetimes. There are many Hindu holy places
   (tīrtha-sthānas) in India. One of the most famous is the ancient city
   of Varanasi, otherwise known as Benaras or Kashi. Other holy places in
   India include Kedarnath and Badrinath in the Himalayas, the Jagannath
   temple at Puri, Rishikesh and Haridwar in the foothills of the
   Himalayas, Allahabad (also known by the ancient name Prayāg, located at
   the confluence of multiple holy rivers), Rameshwaram in the South and
   Gaya in the east. The largest single gathering of pilgrims is during
   the annual Kumbh Mela fair held in one of four different cities on a
   rotating basis. After visiting the Kumbh mela of 1895, Mark Twain
   wrote:

     "It is wonderful, the power of a faith like that, that can make
     multitudes upon multitudes of the old and weak and the young and
     frail enter without hesitation or complaint upon such incredible
     journeys and endure the resultant miseries without repining. It is
     done in love, or it is done in fear; I do not know which it is. No
     matter what the impulse is, the act born of it is beyond imagination
     marvelous to our kind of people, the cold whites."

Satsang

   Satsang is the practice of gathering for study or discussion of
   scripture and religious topics, or chanting of hymns. In Sanskrit,
   Satsang means circle, or, fellowship ('sangha') with truth ('sat').
   People may gather under guidance of a sage, a priest, or a singer. This
   practice is sometimes called sādhu-sangha."

Devotional singing

   Devotional singing, called bhajan or kirtan, is an important part of
   worship in many denominations. Devotional singing may take place in
   temples, in ashrams, on the banks of holy rivers, in the home, or
   elsewhere. Hymns may be in the ancient Sanskrit language, or in modern
   languages such as Hindi, Bengali, or Tamil. Musical instruments
   accompanying devotional singing frequently include the manjeera,
   tanpura, harmonium, and tabla.

Denominations

   The temple of Pashupatinath in Nepal is regarded as one of the most
   sacred places in Shaivism.
   Enlarge
   The temple of Pashupatinath in Nepal is regarded as one of the most
   sacred places in Shaivism.

   Many Hindus do not claim to belong to any particular denomination at
   all. However, scholars frequently categorize contemporary Hinduism into
   three or four major denominations: Vaishnavism, Shaivism, Shaktism, and
   sometimes Smartism or Advaita Vedanta. These denominations differ
   primarily in the particular forms of God worshipped, and in the rituals
   and traditions that accompany worship of that form of God. Vaishnavism
   worships God in the form of Viṣhṇu; Shaivism worships God as Shiva;
   Shaktism worships a female divinity or Goddess, Devī; while Smartism
   and Advaita Vedanta believe in an impersonal or pantheistic God without
   focusing on any particular form of God.

   There are also many movements that are not easily placed in any of the
   above categories, such as Swami Dayananda Saraswati's Ārya Samāj, which
   condemns image worship and veneration of multiple deities, focusing
   instead on the Vedas and the Vedic fire sacrifices ( yajña). Traditions
   such as the Ramakrishna movement incorporate elements from all the
   major denominations and stress that God-realization can be achieved
   through any denomination so long as it is followed sincerely. In
   Tantra, the Goddess is considered the power of Shiva, and thus
   represents a combination of the Shaiva and shākta denominations.

   As in every religion, some people view their own denomination as
   superior to others. In Hinduism, however, many Hindus consider other
   denominations to be legitimate alternatives to their own. The concept
   of heresy found in some other religions is therefore generally not an
   issue for Hindus.

History

Origins

   Sacred Mount Kailash in Tibet is regarded as the spiritual abode of
   Shiva.
   Enlarge
   Sacred Mount Kailash in Tibet is regarded as the spiritual abode of
   Shiva.

   The earliest evidence for elements of the Hindu faith is sometimes
   claimed to date back as far as the late Neolithic, to the Early
   Harappan period (ca. 5500–3300 BCE).

   The beliefs and practices of the pre-classical era (ca. 1500-500 BCE)
   are often called the " Vedic religion." The oldest surviving textual
   document of Hinduism is the Rigveda, dated to between 1700–1100 BCE,
   based on linguistic and philological evidence.

The Vedic period

   Modern Hinduism grew out of the knowledge described in the Vedas. The
   earliest of these, the Rigveda, centers on worship of deities such as
   Indra, Varuna and Agni, and on the Soma ritual. The early Indo-Aryans
   would perform fire-sacrifices, called yajña (यज्ञ), with the chanting
   of the Vedic mantras, but they built no temples, idols or icons.
   Probably animals were also sacrificed in larger yajñas, as claimed by
   Buddhist and Jain texts. The most ancient Vedic traditions exhibit
   strong similarities to Zoroastrianism, as well as to other
   Indo-European religions.

The influence of Buddhism & Jainism

   The religions of Buddhism and Jainism arose in North India in the sixth
   century B.C. The Buddha accepted many tenets of Hinduism, but taught
   that to achieve salvation one did not have to accept the authority of
   the scriptures, the caste system, or even the existence of God. Many
   Hindus converted to Buddhism, and even many of those who did not
   convert were influenced by Buddhist teachings. Both Buddhism and
   Jainism influenced Hinduism with their emphasis on compassion for all
   life.

Epic & Puranic periods

   The epic poems Ramayana and Mahabharata were written roughly 400 B.C.
   to A.D. 200, although they were probably transmitted orally for many
   years prior to this period. These epics contain both secular and
   mythological stories of the rulers and wars of ancient India, as well
   as stories about the avataras Rama and Krishna. The later Puranas
   recount tales about various Gods and Goddesses, their interactions with
   humans, and their battles against demons. The Gupta dynasty (c. A.D.
   300-500) is associated with a proliferation of ornate art and extensive
   literature in the Sanskrit and Tamil languages.

Islam & Bhakti (12th-17th Centuries)

   Beginning around 1173, successive waves of armies from Muslim countries
   invaded and, to varying degrees, consolidated control over North India.
   During this period Buddhism declined rapidly, and many Hindus converted
   to Islam. Some Muslim rulers destroyed Hindu temples and otherwise
   persecuted non-Muslims, while others, such as Akbar, were more
   tolerant.

   Hinduism during this period underwent one of the most profound changes
   in its history, due in large part to the influence of the prominent
   teachers Ramanuja, Madhva, and Chaitanya. Followers of the Bhakti
   movement moved away from the abstract concept of Brahman to a focus on
   the more accessible avataras, especially Krishna and Rama. A new
   attitude toward God—emotional, passionate love—replaced the old
   approaches of sacrificial rite and meditation on the formless Absolute
   Principle.

Society

The four pursuits of life

   Within the Grihastha Dharma there are four noble pursuits of life,
   known as puruṣhārthas. The four puruṣhārthas are:
    1. kāma (desire for sensual pleasure)
    2. artha (acquisition of worldly possessions or money)
    3. dharma (observance of religious duties)
    4. mokṣha (liberation achieved through God-realization)

   Among these, dharma and moksha play a special role: the pursuit of kama
   and artha is only noble when pursued under the laws of dharma, with the
   ultimate goal, moksa, at the horizon.

Temples

   Hindu temples inherited rich and ancient rituals and customs, and have
   occupied a special place in Hindu society. They are usually dedicated
   to a primary deity, called the presiding deity, and other subordinate
   deities associated with the main deity. However, some mandirs are
   dedicated to multiple deities. Most major temples are constructed as
   per the āgama shāstras and many are sites of pilgrimage. An important
   element of temple architecture and many Hindu households in general is
   Vaastu Shastra, the science of aesthetic and auspicious design.

   Many Hindus view the four Shankarāchāryas (the abbots of the
   monasteries of Joshimath, Puri, Shringeri and Dwarka — four of the
   holiest pilgrimage centers — sometimes to which a fifth at Kanchi is
   also added) as the Patriarchs of Hinduism.

Ashramas (stages of life)

   Traditionally, the life of a Hindu was divided into four Āshramas
   ("phases" or "stages"; unrelated meanings of āshrama include
   "monastery" or "refuge"). They are
     * Brahmacharya ("meditation, or study of the Brahman"): life as a
       student
     * Gṛihastha : the stage as a householder
     * Vānaprastha ("living out in the forest"): the stage of retirement
     * Sanyāsa: life as a monk.

   The first quarter of one's life, Brahmacharya is spent in celibate,
   controlled, sober and pure contemplation under the guidance of a Guru,
   building up the mind for the realization of truth.

   Grihastha is the householder's stage, in which one marries and
   satisfies kāma and artha within one's married and professional life
   respectively (see the pursuits of life). Among the moral obligations of
   a Hindu householder are the duties to support one's parents, children,
   guests, priests (Brahmins), and monks(sanyāsis).

   Vānaprastha is gradual detachment from the material world. This may
   involve giving over duties to one's children, spending more time in
   contemplation of the Divine, and making holy pilgrimages.

   Finally, in Sannyāsa, one renounces all worldly attachments, often
   envisioned as seclusion, to find the Divine through detachment from
   worldly life and peacefully shed the body for the next life (or for
   liberation).

Monasticism

   In their quest to attain the spiritual goal of life, some Hindus choose
   the path of monasticism (sanyāsa). Monastics commit themselves to a
   life of simplicity, celibacy, detachment from worldly pursuits, and the
   contemplation of God. A Hindu monk is called a sanyāsī, sādhu, or
   swāmi. A female renunciate is called a sanyāsini. Renunciates are
   accorded high respect in Hindu society because their outward
   renunciation of selfishness and worldliness serves as an inspiration to
   householders who strive for mental renunciation, though this may not
   always be present as skepticism surrounds many such sadhus. Some
   monastics live in monasteries, while others wander from place to place,
   trusting in God alone to provide for their needs. It is considered a
   highly meritorious act for a householder to provide sādhus, or any
   brahmana, with food or other necessaries. Sādhus are meant to strive to
   treat all with respect and compassion, whether a person may be poor or
   rich, good or wicked, and also to be indifferent to praise, blame,
   pleasure, and pain. Sādhus often wear ochre-colored clothing,
   symbolizing renunciation, while some may have no clothes whatsoever.

Varnas & the caste system

   Hindu society was traditionally divided into four classes, called
   varnas within what is commonly called the caste system. What varna a
   person was in was based on occupation —
     * the Brāhmaṇas (also anglicised as Brahmins): teachers and priests;
     * the Kṣhatriyas: warriors, kings and administrators;
     * the Vaishyas: farmers, merchants, herdsmen and businessmen; and
     * the Shūdras: servants and labourers.

   Caste system has its root in Varnas, however, the caste system is not a
   creation of Hindu doctrines. For a survey of other theories regarding
   the origins of caste, see Elenanor Zelliot, "Caste in Contemporary
   India," in Contemporary Hinduism, Robert Rinehart, Ed. (2004) ISBN
   1-57607-905-8</ref> The faith of the Shudras and Dalits allowed them to
   become great saints of Hinduism.

   Today it is often debated whether the caste system is an integral part
   of the Hindu religion sanctioned by the scriptures or is simply an
   outdated social custom.

   Although the scriptures contain some passages that can be interpreted
   to sanction the Varna system, they also contain indications that the
   caste system is not an essential part of the Hindu religion, and both
   sides in the debate are able to find scriptural support for their
   views.

   Many social reformers, including Mahatma Gandhi (1869-1948), have
   criticized the problems caused by caste discrimination. The saint and
   religious teacher Sri Ramakrishna (1836-1886) taught that

     lovers of God do not belong to any caste . . . . A brahmin without
     this love is no longer a brahmin. And a pariah with the love of God
     is no longer a pariah. Through bhakti (devotion to God) an
     untouchable becomes pure and elevated.

Ahimsa and vegetarianism

   Hinduism advocates the practice of ahimsa (non-violence) and respect
   for all life because the divine soul is believed to permeate all. The
   term ahimsa first appears in the Upanishads, and is the first of the
   five Yamas, or eternal vows/restraints in Raja Yoga. The influences of
   Buddhism and Jainism helped to enhance the importance of ahimsa.

   Related to the concept of ahimsa, many Hindus embrace vegetarianism in
   a bid to respect higher forms of life. While vegetarianism is not a
   dogma or requirement of Hinduism, it is recommended as a sattwic
   (purifying) lifestyle. As of 2006, about 30% of the population in India
   is lacto-vegetarian but the food habits usually vary with community
   (caste) and region. For instance, the Aadivasi as well as the coastal
   habitants in India are largely non-vegetarian, with vegetarianism
   dominant in landlocked states of northern and western India, states
   like Gujarat (with Jainand Vaishnavic influence), and in many Brahmin
   and Marwari enclaves around the subcontinent. Some Hindus avoid even
   onion and garlic, which are regarded as rajasic foods. Another 20% of
   Hindus avoid meat on specific holy days.

   Even Hindus who do eat meat, generally abstain from beef. Some even
   avoid products made from cow's leather. This is presumably because the
   largely pastoral Vedic people, and subsequent generations, relied so
   heavily on the cow for milk and dairy products, tilling of fields and
   as a provider of fuel and fertilizer, that it was identified as a
   caretaker and a maternal figure (hence the term gau mata, or Cow
   Mother). While most contemporary Hindus do not worship the cow (though
   many venerate her), the cow still holds an honored place in Hindu
   society as a symbol of unselfish giving. Cow-slaughter is legally
   banned in almost all states of the Indian Union.

Hindu festivals

   Hinduism has many festivals distributed throughout the year. Their
   dates are usually prescribed by the Hindu calendar and typically
   celebrate events from Hindu mythology, often coinciding with seasonal
   changes and occasions of importance in an agricultural economy.

   Some widely observed Hindu festivals are,
     * Dussera, or Durga Puja, celebrates events from Hindu mythology
       symbolizing the triumph of good over evil;
     * Diwali, also known as the festival of lights;
     * Ganesh Chaturthi, the festival celebrating Lord Ganesha;
     * Maha Shivaratri, the festival dedicated to Lord Shiva;
     * Ramanavami, celebrates the birth of Lord Ram, the seventh
       incarnation of Lord Vishnu;
     * Krishna Janmastami, celebrates the birth of Lord Krishna, the
       eighth incarnation of Lord Vishnu;
     * Holi, the spring festival of colors and light.
     * Sankranthi, Harvest festival of India, celebrated in mid of January
       every year.

   Besides these there many other Hindu festivals, some of which are
   celebrated primarily by specific denominations or in certain regions of
   the Indian subcontinent.

Conversion

   Since the Hindu scriptures are essentially silent on the issue of
   religious conversion, the question of whether Hindus should evangelize
   is open to interpretations. Those who see Hinduism primarily as a
   philosophy, a set of beliefs, or a way of life generally believe that
   one can convert to Hinduism by incorporating Hindu beliefs into one's
   life and by considering oneself a Hindu. However, those who view
   Hinduism as an ethnicity more than as a religion tend to believe that
   to be a Hindu, one must be born a Hindu. The Supreme Court of India has
   taken the former view, holding that the question of whether a person is
   a Hindu should be determined by the person's belief system, not by
   their ethnic or racial heritage.

   There is no formal process for conversion to Hinduism, although in many
   denominations a ritual called dīkshā ("initiation") marks the beginning
   of spiritual life, much like baptism in Christianity. Most Hindu
   denominations do not actively seek to recruit converts because they
   believe that the goals of spiritual life can be attained through any
   religion, as long as the religion is practiced sincerely. Nevertheless,
   Hindu "missionary" groups operate in various countries to provide
   spiritual guidance to persons of any religion, irrespective of their
   conversion to Hinduism. Examples include the Vedanta Society (also
   known as the Ramakrishna Mission) and the Self-Realization Fellowship.

Schools of Hindu philosophy

   The six Āstika or orthodox schools (those which accept the authority of
   the Vedas) of Hindu philosophy are Nyāya, Vaisheṣhika, Sāṃkhya, Yoga,
   Pūrva Mīmāṃsā (also simply called Mīmāṃsā), and Uttara Mīmāṃsā (also
   called Vedānta). The six schools are known as "Shat Astik (Hindu)
   Darshana."
   In Hinduism, Yoga is considered to be a way of attaining spiritual
   goals. The earliest written accounts of yoga appear in the Rig Veda,
   which began to be codified between 1500 and 1200 BCE.
   Enlarge
   In Hinduism, Yoga is considered to be a way of attaining spiritual
   goals. The earliest written accounts of yoga appear in the Rig Veda,
   which began to be codified between 1500 and 1200 BCE.

   The Heterodox Nāstika schools—those which do not rely on the authority
   of the Vedas—are Buddhism, Jainism and Lokāyata.

   Although these philosophies are usually studied formally only by
   scholars, their influences can be found in many religious books and
   beliefs held by average Hindus.

Themes and symbols

Tilaka

   The tilaka (or tilak) is a mark worn on the forehead and other parts of
   the body for spiritual reasons. Hindus traditionally wear tilaka, in
   one form or another, as a mark of faith in a particular tradition.
   Hindus may wear tilaka always or especially on religious occasions. The
   shape of the tilaka often represents devotion to a certain deity. For
   example, a 'U' shape tilaka usually denotes someone as a devotee of
   Vishnu.

   To denote marriage and auspiciousness, married women today commonly
   wear on the forehead a decorative dot, or bindī. In Southern India,
   this is called pottu (or bottu). Normally a red bindi or pottu is worn
   by married women on the central upper portion of the forehead where the
   hair starts.

Vibhuti

   Vibhuti is the holy ash obtained from sacred puja rites involving fire.
   It is used on the forehead, normally as three horizontal lines
   representing Shiva. Some Hindus meld both the three horizontal vibhuti
   lines of Shiva and the 'U' shape thilaka of Vishnu in an amalgam marker
   signifying Hari-Hara (Vishnu-Shiva).

Symbolism

   Among the most revered symbols in Hinduism, three are quintessentially
   a part of its culture, and representative of its general ethos:

   Aum (or Om, ॐ) is the sacred symbol that represents God (Brahman). It
   is prefixed and sometimes suffixed to all Vedic mantras and prayers. It
   is often said to represent God in the three aspects of Vishnu (A),
   Shiva (U) and Brahmā (M). As the divine primordial vibration, it
   represents the one ultimate reality, underlying and encompassing all of
   nature and all of existence. The written syllable serves as a deeply
   significant and distinctly recognizable symbol for Hindu dharma.

   Swastika is a symbol connoting general auspiciousness. It may represent
   purity of soul, truth, and stability or, alternatively, Surya, the sun.
   Its rotation in four directions has been used to represent many ideas,
   but primarily describes the four directions, the four Vedas and their
   harmonious whole. Its use in Hinduism dates back to ancient times.
   Nazism used a tilted version of this symbol under the name Hakenkreuz,
   and associated it with the notion of "purity of race".

   Sri Chakra Yantra or Yantra of Tripura Sundari (commonly referred to as
   Sri Yantra) is a mandala formed by nine interlocking triangles. Four of
   these triangles are orientated upright representing Shiva - the
   masculine. Five of these triangles are inverted triangles represent
   Shakti - the feminine. Together the nine triangles form a web symbolic
   of the entire cosmos, a womb symbolic of creation and together express
   non-duality. All other yantras are derivatives of this supreme yantra.

   Aum ( Om)

            Swastika

                    Sri Chakra Yantra

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hinduism"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
