   #copyright

Homestar Runner

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Cartoons

   Flash series
   The Homestar Runner logo
          Homestar Runner
   Devised by  The Brothers Chaps
   Animated by The Brothers Chaps
   Voiced by   The Brothers Chaps
               Missy Palmer
   Launch date New Year's Day 2000
   Website     Homestar Runner

   Homestar Runner is a Flash cartoon series. It mixes an absurdist sense
   of humor with references to 1980s and 1990s pop culture, notably video
   games, classic television and popular music. Although originally
   conceived as a book written for children, the site is perhaps most
   popular with youth and preteens, although it does have its share of
   young adults.

   Cartoons are nominally centered on Homestar Runner, a terrific yet
   unintelligent athlete. The series of cartoons in which the antagonist
   Strong Bad answers email from viewers, called Strong Bad Email, is the
   most prominent feature of the site. The site has also grown to
   encompass dozens of other characters.

   The site has been referenced in other media, such as the final episode
   of Buffy the Vampire Slayer, and has been reviewed in National Review.

   This is a spoken article. Click here to listen.

History

   Homestar Runner was brought to life in Atlanta in 1996 by two college
   students, Mike Chapman and Craig Zobel, who were working during the
   summer in jobs related to the 1996 Summer Olympics. On a day off, they
   visited a bookstore where they found that the state of children's books
   was dismal.

   Intending to parody this, they wrote the original story The Homestar
   Runner Enters the Strongest Man in the World Contest. This story
   featured Homestar Runner, Pom Pom, Strong Bad, The Cheat, and a few
   characters that are rarely seen in the Homestar Runner world today(The
   Robot, Senor Havin' a little trouble(or Senor), and the Grape Fairy to
   name a few.). This hand-drawn book was the only incarnation of the
   characters for several years.

   They later used Mario Paint, a Super Nintendo video game to create the
   first cartoon of this series. By 1999, Mike and his younger brother
   Matt (who typically call themselves " The Brothers Chaps") were
   learning Flash and looking for something to practice on. Digging out
   the old children's book provided a solution. By January 2000,
   homestarrunner.com was live. Matt provided the voices of the male
   characters, while Missy Palmer (then Mike's girlfriend, now his wife)
   provided Marzipan's voice. Regarding the origin of the name "Homestar
   Runner", Matt had this to say, from an interview with Kevin Scott:


   Homestar Runner

   It actually comes from a friend of ours. There was an old local grocery
   store commercial, and we live in Atlanta, and it advertised the Atlanta
   Braves. It was like, "the Atlanta Braves hit home runs, and you can hit
   a home run with savings here!" And so there was this player named Mark
    Lemke, and they said something like "All star second baseman for the
     Braves." And our friend knows nothing about sports, and so he would
    always do his old-timey radio impression of this guy, and not knowing
   any positions in baseball or whatever, he would just be like, "Homestar
  Runner for the Braves." And we were just like, "Homestar Runner? That’s
                     the best thing we’ve ever heard!"


   Homestar Runner

   The friend mentioned is Jamey Huggins (band member of Of Montreal) who
   was a childhood friend of the Brothers Chaps while growing up in
   Atlanta (Dunwoody).

   Homestar was once called The Homestar Runner, now only in the
   "Old-Timey" cartoons, but the title has since changed to Homestar
   Runner. The site grew slowly at first, but by mid-2001 it began to take
   off with the first Strong Bad email. The number of visitors to the site
   grew, and by March 2003 the site had outgrown its original web host,
   Yahoo. Currently, merchandise sales pay for all of the costs of running
   the website as well as living costs of the creators, whose retired
   parents manage many of the business aspects.

   "The Brothers Chaps" have a creative freedom that they would not have
   doing a regular TV show, because they run their own website and refuse
   to put their characters onto the small screen. Originally, they
   developed Homestar Runner as a labor of love, and for their own
   amusement. Though the site sells Homestar merchandise, it has no
   commercials—in fact, a few of the cartoons parody advertising, with
   products like "Fluffy Puff Marshmallows", and advertisements for the
   cartoon Cheat Commandos (a parody of G.I. Joe and of other 1980 films),
   where viewers are encouraged to "buy all our playsets and toys!"

   Though the internet was initially the only mechanism for viewing
   Homestar Runner, the first 100 Strong Bad e-mails were released on DVD
   on November 8, 2004. The strongbad_email.exe box set retained the
   various hidden features of the Macromedia Flash originals. Also
   included were three unreleased emails, two music videos, commentary
   tracks by the characters and their creators, and other features. A
   fourth collection of e-mails on DVD was released separately on July 25,
   2005, and a toons DVD called "Everything Else, Volume 1" was released
   on November 14, 2005. Volume 2 of this collection was released on
   October 27, 2006.

   On January 30, 2006, Podstar Runner was launched, allowing people to
   download select Strong Bad Emails and Teen Girl Squad episodes to a
   video-enabled iPod. Once made available through iTunes' podcast
   directory, they very quickly took the #1 slot on Apple's "Most Popular"
   podcast list.

   On August 21, 2006, the 10th anniversary of Homestar Runner was
   celebrated with the release of a brand new big toon, a remake of the
   plotline of the original Homestar Runner book, entitled Strongest Man
   in the World.

Strong Bad Emails

   Traditionally the most popular features on Homestar Runner are
   semi-regular Strong Bad Emails. The format has remained essentially
   unchanged: it is a series of cartoons in which Strong Bad receives an
   email from a fan or viewer, and starts typing his response (generally
   in a mocking way; criticizing names, hometowns, and grammar), and
   usually turns into a short cartoon. Strong Bad usually responds to an
   email on a weekly basis, nearly always on Mondays.

   Some features of the site, such as Teen Girl Squad, and the very
   popular Trogdor games/cartoons/references, originated in Strong Bad
   Emails. Strong Bad emails are updated frequently, and as of November
   13, 2006 there are currently 161 emails, although this doesn't include
   the extra emails found in the DVD extras. Some concepts in the cartoon
   parody real world problems, such as his famous FLAGRANT SYSTEM ERROR,
   which, in the Homestar Runner world, is the equivalent to a Blue Screen
   of Death.

Other "sub-cartoons"

   The Homestar Runner world features several "sub-cartoons" and
   spin-offs. These cartoons take place outside the normal Homestar Runner
   world, and the main characters of the normal cartoons do not
   necessarily appear in them. When they do, it is often not in the same
   way they appear in the Homestar Runner world — each of the main
   characters also has two alter-egos that appear occasionally: a
   futuristic anime-style (20X6) alter-ego and an Old-Timey (at this point
   in time, Old-Timey is 1939) alter-ego.

   There is a huge host of other minor characters who sporadically appear
   in various emails and the other recurring mini-cartoons (listed below).
   Some of these characters are Senor Cardgage, Trogdor, Marshie the
   Marshmallow (spokes-thing for Fluffy Puff Marshmallows), Stinkoman
   (anime parody), The Goblin (usually appearing in Halloween-themed
   toons), The "Sweet Cuppin' Cakes" cast (from a "crazy" cartoon Strong
   Bad invented), Da Huuuudge, (a failed made-up animal attempt by Strong
   Bad), Sterrance (Strong Bad's final result of attempting a made-up
   animal) and the band Limozeen.

Teen Girl Squad

   Teen Girl Squad is a crudely drawn comic strip narrated by Strong Bad,
   using a high-piched, girly voice. It began after Strong Bad received an
   email asking him to make a comic strip of a girl and her friends. The
   comic features four archetypal high-school girls, parody evident in the
   characters' nondescript names: "Cheerleader", "So-And-So",
   "What's-Her-Face", and "The Ugly One". In their quest to become unique
   and popular, the characters are bland and monotonous. Though they are
   just stick figures, Strong Bad often subjects them to gruesome and
   unusual deaths which are described with words using in a "'D" suffix --
   like "LATHE'D!", which means their deaths were caused by a lathe, or
   "MANIAC IN A SPEEDO'D!" which means they were killed by a maniac in a
   speedo with a chainsaw. Later, three months after the email, new Teen
   Girl Squad episodes were made. Presently, there are eleven episodes,
   the tenth one being colored and in 3-D, since it celebrates the strip's
   "tenthennial issueversary". In many episodes, one can click on the "O"
   and/or the "!" of the ending screen where it states "(Now) It's Over!"
   to see extra footage, much like the "Strong Bad Emails". The Teen Girl
   Squad comics also have a recurring theme which features an opening
   sequence a flock of birds in the background who are always killed in
   some obscure and gruesome way (ex: the Sun turns into a buzzsaw and
   chops them to pieces).

Li'l Brudder

   Li'l Brudder originated in a drawing created by Strong Bad for the sole
   purpose of making Homestar Runner cry. He is a puppy with only one leg
   who dreams of being a quarterback. His motto is "I can make it on my
   own." His debut was in Strong Bad Email 109 entitled "Crying". . He
   recently starred in his own cartoon, where he was met by his friend
   Tendafoot, a two legged elephant. Tendafoot was created when Strong Sad
   asked Strong Bad if Li'l Brudder meant "little brother", implying that
   Strong Bad saw him as analogous to a one-legged dog. Strong Bad replied
   that he saw Strong Sad as more of a two-legged elephant named Tendafoot
   who could "power a small city with [his] whining" (which Strong Sad
   admits "[he] probably could").

Sweet Cuppin' Cakes

   Sweet Cuppin' Cakes is another cartoon created by Strong Bad in
   response to an email request. The cartoon, designed to be as "kah-razy"
   as possible is largely based on Eastern Europe avant garde cartoons
   from the 1980's. It takes place on a surreal multi-colored plane
   resembling a disco dance floor. Violation of reality is the miniseries'
   forte. The central character is Sherlock, "a cross between a cow and a
   helicopter" who communicates through a series of weird noises and
   spends each episode trying to catch a worm that crawls in and out of
   the ground. Other characters include " Eh! Steve", an anthropomorphic
   polygon with a swirly mouth and a Greek pattern on his body that
   appears once an episode to deliver his eponymous catch phrase, "Eh!
   Steve," and the Wheelchair (voiced by Bubs), whose goal in life is to
   destroy Eh! Steve. Strong Bad also placed himself in the cartoon,
   although his head is an old Casio VL-Tone keyboard. Whenever he becomes
   angry, it plays the demo (the German folk song "Unterlander's
   Heimweh"). Also featured is another small, anthropomorphic polygon
   named "Ready for Primetime" with blonde tufts of hair that, according
   to Homestar, does a "tiny, tiny dance". This "tiny, tiny dance-man" is
   based on the "Ready for Primetime" eyebrow style Strong Bad made for
   Strong Mad in the e-mail entitled "haircut" (hence the name). Upon
   seeing it, Strong Mad said "SWEETY CAKES!", and Strong Bad remarked
   that "it does look a little bit like one of them 'Sweet Cuppin Cakes'
   guys."

Old-Timey

   Some cartoons take place in an "old-timey" setting, sometimes referred
   to as 1936, with most of the Homestar Runner characters having direct
   counterparts in the Old-Timey universe. These cartoons are in black and
   white with film grain and scratchy, noisy sound. They parody the
   distinctive style of animated cartoons during the 1920s and 1930s, and
   can at first be seen as perhaps purposely unfunny, to make a slanted
   joke about such old-style cartoons. One such cartoon features an
   original song by the comedic a cappella ensemble Da Vinci's Notebook.

Stinko Man K 20X6

   Stinko Man K 20X6 (pronounced "Twenty Exty-Six") is yet another cartoon
   in response to an email, asking Strong Bad what would he look like if
   he was a Japanese cartoon character. The main character, Stinkoman, is
   an anime version of Strong Bad with blue hair, a shiny body, and "cool
   robot boots". He goes around looking for "a challenge, or maybe some
   light fighting". His features are based on the popular conception of
   stereotypical characters of anime and Japanese video games
   (predominantly Mega Man) held by non-fans. Also featured are the
   stylized versions of Homestar (" 1-Up", also goes by "Kid"), Pom-Pom ("
   Pan Pan", colored like a panda) The Cheat (" Cheatball", talks with
   only his name, like Pokémon) and Marzipan (heavy Sailor Moon influence,
   though she only appears once; she also does the "Yatta!" victory pose
   of Street Fighter's Chun-Li). Another character has been remade into
   his 20X6 counterpart, though his exact name and full appearance has not
   been revealed. This character is Coach Z (white face with twitching
   eye). Another character introduced in a short toon, Stickly Man, is a
   parody of the "under construction" GIF seen on many websites. Stickly
   Man is prone to shovelling pudding. Some fans believe that Stickly Man
   is the 20X6 version of The Poopsmith because of this, but any
   connection between the two has been hotly contested. Furthermore, his
   appearance fighting with Stinkoman doubles as a spoof on the popular
   Xiao Xiao series of Flash animations, which detail stick figures in
   highly animated, effects-laden battles of martial arts and firearms
   with one another. There is also the dragon "Trogador", parody of
   Trogdor. He is found in the toon "Happy Trogday".

   The name "Stinkoman" is a reference to Strong Bad email 52 entitled
   "island". In the cartoon Homestar and Strong Bad end up stranded on an
   island in the middle of the ocean, and Homestar accidentally calls
   Strong Bad "Stinkoman". The year 20X6 is a reference to the ambiguous
   year 20XX in which the Mega Man series takes place (21XX for the Mega
   Man X series), and also the Atari 2600. It may also be a reference to
   the first Metroid game, which takes place in 20X5. The series also
   draws inspiration from Dragon Ball Z, Ranma ½, Street Fighter 2, Sailor
   Moon and others. The Stinkoman theme song is one of the selectable
   stage tunes from the NES-game Rad Racer (written by Nobuo Uematsu) with
   "neo- Japanese" lyrics (i.e. "Challenge and fighting and fighting that
   challenge tonight!").

   The games section of the Homestar Runner website includes a Stinkoman
   20X6 side-scrolling video game in the style of early 1990s Nintendo or
   Sega games. It is especially similar to Mega Man games. It also
   includes mock Engrish phrases such as, "And other victory for
   Stinkoman." As the site is updated, new levels are being added to the
   game, extending its playability as well as adding new features (a shmup
   level, introducing 1-Up (who is Homestar Runner's 20X6 counterpart) as
   a playable character, new pages into the " manuél", etc.).

Powered by The Cheat

   Some shorts are portrayed as being drawn by The Cheat, who has his own
   distinctive animation style that he produces on his old iMac-like
   computer, "Tangerine Dreams" . The drawings usually consist of an
   amalgam of clashing textures, pixelated JPEGs used as objects, and
   uncoordinated voices. The cartoon characters also have amorphous
   appendages. This style has appeared in many forms, such as in Strong
   Bad e-mails, cartoons, even its own welcome page. In Powered by The
   Cheat segments, Mike Chapman provides intentionally poor imitations of
   his brother Matt's normal voice work. The animation style itself is
   designed to mock stereotypical amateur flash animation, and features
   simple tweening instead of frame-by-frame animation and purposely has
   an unpolished, rushed look that is common in that setting. Some of the
   humor in these clips require some knowledge of flash creation to
   understand, such as items being placed on the wrong animation layers
   and parts of the scenery of one scene remaining visible into the next
   scene.

   Note that these animations clue us into The Cheat's fantasies and
   insecure personality. Strong Bad Email #87 ("Mile") is an ideal example
   of what he most desires yet cannot possibly possess. The Cheat
   shamelessly elevates his status in the eyes of others through praise
   given by his boss Strong Bad while Marzipan finally gives him the
   attention and affection he has been craving. (Notice that the two
   rarely exchange words outside of a fabricated Flash universe.)

Cheat Commandos

   The Cheat Commandos are a fictional line of action figures that all
   resemble The Cheat wearing different outfits. The Commandos are an
   extensive parody of the popular '80s version of the G.I. Joe action
   figures and cartoon. As with G.I. Joe, the Cheat Commandos figurines
   are all nearly exactly the same; the cartoon has silly dialogue, bad
   animation, mindless action sequences, and stereotypical
   characterization; and the entire series exists to sell merchandise (The
   Cheat Commandos theme song ends with, "Buy all our playsets and
   toys!"). The Cheat Commandos fight an evil organization known as Blue
   Laser (or Blue Lazer), a clear parody of G.I. Joe's arch-nemesis Cobra,
   and its hopelessly incompetent and hotheaded leader Cobra Commander
   (known in the UK as "Red Laser"). The series parodies some other
   elements of G.I. Joe's cartoons, such as the dispensibility of the
   "green helmets", or the fact that the Cheat Commandos' computer screen
   can at any time display where Blue Laser is and vice versa, including
   in each others' hideouts.

   The Cheat Commandos were inspired by the Strong Bad Email "Army", in
   which Strong Bad commands The Cheat to spy on Homestar Runner and his
   Homestarmy (Strong Sad, Homsar, a painting of a man holding a big
   knife, and a hot-air popcorn popper), poised to attack Strong Badia.
   The Cheat is dressed in his black commando gear, and demands to be
   referred to as "Firebert", which Strong Bad reluctantly does, though
   "it's just not a good commando name." An Easter egg in this email shows
   Firebert's action figure package, which is also featured in the first
   Cheat Commandos cartoon.

Holiday specials

   Several episodes have been dedicated to special days of the year. For
   example, every Halloween, a cartoon is released that features all the
   characters in costumes celebrating some traditional aspect of Halloween
   (such as ghost stories, trick-or-treating, or pumpkin carving). The
   characters' costumes have gotten famously esoteric in recent years,
   full of obscure pop culture references. For example, in 2005 Strong Bad
   dressed up as Jambi, the Genie from Pee-Wee's Playhouse.

   On April Fool's Day 2005, fans were greeted with a page which stated
   that fans would be required to purchase a membership to continue
   viewing the site. The page contained a full "Tour" which parodied paid
   membership websites. It also featured 3 short clips (Homestar counting
   to seven; a Strong Bad email segment; and a Teen Girl Squad/Sweet
   Cuppin' Cakes crossover episode) and a "trial version" game which
   lampooned Space Invaders. On the same day in 2004, the main page was
   replaced with an "Under Construction" page which turned out to be a
   20X6 cartoon in disguise. In 2003, the main page was replaced with a
   King of Town main page.

   For April Fool's Day 2006, the entire website and all of its content
   was turned upside down. This caused problems with some of the content
   of the site – many pages which were of a different size so the default
   550x400 would not be centred properly, and some pages with a lot of
   ActionScript would fail, including many of the older games. This also
   caused problems with the Strong Bad E-Mail menu. It caused an empty
   e-mail list and a nonworking Random button. But some of those were
   fixed a few minutes or a few hours after releasing the upside down
   pages.

   The characters also celebrate an annual holiday called "Decemberween",
   which features gift-giving, carol-singing, and decorated trees. The
   fact that it takes place on December 25th has been presented as just a
   coincidence, stating that Decemberween traditionally takes place "55
   days after Halloween". In 2004, however, the traditional Decemberween
   toon was replaced with a Decemberween in July toon in July, a clear
   parody of Christmas in July.

   Other holidays include New Year's Day, "The Big Game" (around the time
   of the Super Bowl), St. Valentine's Day, Mother's Day, "Senorial Day"
   (a reference to Senor Cardgage and Memorial Day), Flag Day,
   Independence Day (which Homestar calls "Happy Fireworks"), Labor Day,
   and Thanksgiving. Most holiday cartoons are archived on the Toons page
   and can be accessed using the "Holiday" button on the top right of the
   remote.

Puppet stuff

   Some sketches use live-action puppets of Homestar, Strong Bad, and The
   Cheat. From time to time, the characters are featured with a little
   girl known simply as Little Girl, actually the niece of The Brothers
   Chaps. Several "Puppet Stuff" sketches feature Homestar Runner singing
   with members of the rock band They Might Be Giants. Furthermore, the
   Chapmans themselves occasionally make cameo appearances with their own
   characters in various skits, most notably in the puppets' appearances
   on the Strongbad_email.exe DVDs as bonus features and Easter eggs. This
   DVD set also contains extensive puppet content including a scene in
   which Homestar Runner plays Mike Chapman in a game of basketball.

Marzipan's Answering Machine

   These are the messages left on Marzipan's answering machine by
   Homestar, Strong Bad, Strong Sad, and others of the town. The messages
   are not updated as frequently as Strong Bad's emails. They tend to
   include prank calls from Strong Bad as well as calls of various sorts
   from other characters. Also in the early Answering machine, it hints
   that some of the other characters are in love with Marzipan, probably
   because she's the only girl in the Homestar Runner universe.

Limozeen

   An 80's hair metal band that acts as a recurring segment. This features
   The Brothers Chaps and others as the band, all voice-overed by Matt.
   Strong Bad brandishes a tape of their short-lived Saturday morning
   cartoon in one e-mail, and apparently voice-chats with the lead singer.
   Limozeen is not simply a hair metal band; they are the ultimate
   stereotype of the hair metal genre, as evidenced by the lyrics of their
   song "Because It's Midnite".

Online video games

   Homestar Runner offers a variety of online games that feature one or
   more of their characters. The first games were simple in nature and are
   now found under Super Old Games-n-Such. Among them are the "Homestar
   Talker", a Soundboard starring Homestar, and "Spin n' Say", a variation
   on the popular children's toy of the same name. Also, at the end of the
   email, Duck Pond, you can play the duck pond simulator featured in the
   game. More recent games have been released as products of "
   Videlectrix", a side project of the brothers. These games are far more
   complex, spoofing many popular 80's videogames. Their greatest gaming
   endeavor, " Peasant's Quest", is an adventure game featuring a young
   peasant (in short pants) named Rather Dashing, who vows to kill the
   destroyer of his cottage: Trogdor. The game uses a system that is a
   near replica of Sierra Entertainment's Adventure Game Interpreter, used
   in King's Quest, Space Quest and several other early Sierra titles. The
   most recent addition to the website is " Kid Speedy", a 2-D racing
   game. You are an overweight kid running a foot race against other
   athletes. One video game known as StrongBadZone, originating in the
   Strong Bad Email " video games", started the Internet catchphrase "Your
   head a splode." The phrase, used by the game as a game over message, is
   a reference to translation errors in Japanese games imported to an
   English speaking country, such as " All Your Base Are Belong To Us".

   The December 2005 issue of Wired Magazine claimed that a new Homestar
   Runner video game would soon be coming to the Atari 2600, but this has
   yet to be seen. The interview with the Brothers Chaps by Bobby
   Blackwolf reported that the game was in limbo because the game's
   developer, Paul Slocum, was getting overwhelmed by the sheer amount of
   work and was pushing the limits of the Artari 2600. The price was set
   at $40.

They Might Be Giants music videos

   The Brothers Chaps have partnered up with the rock band They Might Be
   Giants to produce a music video for their song " Experimental Film",
   available on the website. Other TMBG songs have found their way onto
   the website in the form of "Puppet Jam", a subset of "Puppet Stuff",
   where Puppet Homestar rocks out with TMBG.

Reception

   The site receives several million hits a month, and almost a thousand
   emails a day. According to Matt Chapman, "Certain bands, like fairly
   popular bands and stuff would link us on their site and, you know we
   were shockwave site of the day a couple of times over the years."

   A review published in the National Review characterized the site's
   humor as having "the innocence of slapstick with sharp satire of
   American popular culture" — humor that "tends to be cultural, not
   political." Free Country is "definitely a guys' place, where video
   games, monster trucks, and smashing things take priority over sensitive
   male themes." Homestarrunner.com is the "Internet equivalent to The
   Yellow Kid, the comic introduced by Richard Outcault in the New York
   World in 1896.

Merchandise

   The Chapman brothers have created a very large collection of
   collectable merchandise, ranging from t-shirts to DVDs. The most
   popular item in their store is the Strong Bad Sings CD, which mostly
   includes songs sung by Strong Bad (but also includes songs by other
   characters). Also available in the store is the collectable figurines
   of the website's characters. There are two different sets of figurines
   available that feature the main Homestar Runner characters, and another
   set for the Cheat Commandos.

The Homestar Runner Wiki

   Homestar Runner Wiki logo

   The Homestar Runner Wiki, commonly abbreviated to HRWiki, is a Homestar
   Runner wiki fansite running on MediaWiki software. It was founded on
   October 7, 2003 and is owned and operated by Joey Day. The wiki was
   originally powered by WikkiTikkiTavi wiki software. After users began
   signing up, and content grew, it was moved to its own domain, and
   upgraded to its current format running MediaWiki on July 16, 2004. The
   HRWiki is not affiliated with The Brothers Chaps, though they often use
   the Wiki to help them remember their own continuity. They have praised
   it on multiple occasions and once even donated money to it.

   The Homestar Runner Wiki contains detailed information on all of the
   Cartoons, Strong Bad Emails, Games and Characters from the main site as
   well as other minutiae. These articles include full Transcripts, Easter
   Eggs, Fun Facts and Trivia, DVD Commentary Transcript and Links to
   external resources. A complete list of items sold in the Homestar
   Runner Store along with detailed descriptions of the items, prices and
   even mistakes found in the page. Other pages found on the wiki include
   Secret Pages, Places, Running Gags, Inside Jokes and Cartoons no longer
   on the site. The Homestar Runner Wiki recently acquired the
   homestarrunner.net domain made famous by the First Time Here? cartoon.
   This site will eventually become the Homestar Runner Community Portal.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homestar_Runner"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
