   #copyright

Hong Kong

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Asian Countries;
Countries

   中華人民共和國香港特別行政區
   Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
   of the People's Republic of China

   Flag of Hong Kong Emblem of Hong Kong
   Flag              Emblem
   Anthem: March of the Volunteers
   (the national anthem of the People's Republic of China)
   Location of Hong Kong
   Capital none
   Historically, the capital was Victoria City; government headquarters
   are located in the Central and Western District.
   22°17′N 114°08′E
   Most populated district Sha Tin District
   Official languages Chinese
   English
   Government
    - Chief Executive Donald Tsang
   Establishment
    - occupied by the UK January 25, 1841
    - Crown colony of the UK August 29, 1842
    - SAR of the PRC July 1, 1997
   Area
    - Total 1,104 km² ( not ranked)
   426.4 sq mi
    - Water (%) 4.6
   Population
    - 2005 estimate 7,041,000 ( 97th)
    - 2001 census 6,708,389
    - Density 6,294.65/km² ( 3rd)
   16,469.6/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total $254.2 billion ( 40th)
    - Per capita $37,400 ( 2006)
   HDI  (2004) 0.927 (high) ( 22nd)
   Currency Hong Kong dollar ( HKD)
   Time zone HKT ( UTC+8)
    - Summer ( DST) not observed
   Internet TLD .hk
   Calling code +852 (01 from Macau)

   This is a featured article. Click here for more information.

   The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of
   China ( Traditional Chinese: 中華人民共和國香港特別行政區 [ pronunciation]) is one of
   the two special administrative regions (SARs) of the People's Republic
   of China (PRC), the other being Macau. It is commonly known as Hong
   Kong (Chinese: 香 港), which is often written Hongkong in older
   English-language texts. The Hong Kong Government officially changed the
   name of Hongkong to Hong Kong on 3 September 1926.

   Hong Kong is on the eastern side of the Pearl River Delta on the
   southeastern coast of the People's Republic of China, facing the South
   China Sea in the south, and bordering Guangdong Province in the north.
   Hong Kong has one of the world's most liberal economies and is a major
   international centre of finance and trade.

   Hong Kong was a British colony from 1842, until its sovereignty was
   transferred to the PRC in 1997. It is governed as a special
   administrative region under the Basic Law of Hong Kong. Under the terms
   of the Sino-British Joint Declaration, the PRC has promised that Hong
   Kong will have a relatively high degree of autonomy until at least
   2047, fifty years after the transfer of sovereignty. Under the " One
   Country, Two Systems" policy, it retains its own legal system,
   currency, customs policy, cultural delegation, international sport
   teams, and immigration laws, with the PRC representing Hong Kong
   diplomatically and militarily.

History

   The area now known as Hong Kong became an important trading region and
   a significant strategic location for the Chinese mainland during the
   Tang and Song dynasties. These populated townships or villages had
   never been collectively known as Hong Kong before the British
   administration. The area began to attract the attention of China and
   the rest of the world again in the 19th century, when it was ceded to
   Britain after the Opium Wars. Hong Kong's earliest recorded non-Asian
   visitor was the Portuguese mariner Jorge Álvares who arrived in 1513.
   Álvares began trading with the Chinese, and the Portuguese continued to
   make periodic trade stops at various locations along the coast.

   Tea, silk, and other Asian luxury goods were introduced in Europe by
   the Portuguese, and by the mid-18th century these items were in high
   demand, particularly tea. The British, to redress their net outflow of
   payments to China for tea and to force China to conduct relations like
   other states, invaded China, winning the First Opium War in 1841.
   During the war, Hong Kong Island was first occupied by the British, and
   then formally ceded by the Qing Dynasty of China in 1842 under the
   Treaty of Nanking.

   Hong Kong became a crown colony in 1843. The first urban settlement was
   named Victoria City. The Kowloon Peninsula south of Boundary Street and
   Stonecutter's Island was ceded to the British in 1860 under the
   Convention of Peking after the Second Opium War. Various adjacent
   lands, known as the New Territories (including New Kowloon and Lantau
   Island), were then leased by Britain for 99 years, from 1 July 1898 to
   30 June 1997. For the first 20 years there was little contact between
   the European and Chinese communities. The first specially-recruited
   Hong Kong civil servants to be taught Cantonese were recruited in 1862,
   markedly improving relations.

   Hong Kong entered a dark age during the Japanese Occupation of World
   War II, which lasted for three years and eight months. Many Hong
   Kongers were executed by the Japanese army during the war. There was a
   significant resistance movement most notably on Lantau Island. After
   their defeat by the allied forces, the Japanese surrendered on 15
   August 1945. The port was quickly re-opened and welcomed a mass
   migration of Chinese refugees in 1949 from the civil war. Many refugees
   escaped to Hong Kong fearing the new Communist government in China.

   Hong Kong had been a trade port ever since the British occupation, but
   its position as an entrepôt declined greatly after the United Nations
   ordered a trade embargo against the People's Republic of China as a
   result of the Korean War. In response, a textile industry was
   established, taking advantage of the new pool of workers from China who
   were willing to work for almost any wage. During this period, the
   economy grew extremely rapidly. Towards the 1970s, Hong Kong began to
   move away from the textile industry and develop its financial and
   banking economy. This led to even greater growth, and Hong Kong quickly
   became one of the wealthiest territories in the world. Its position as
   an entrepôt was revived when the Open Door Policy was adopted by the
   PRC in the late 1970s under Deng Xiaoping.
   Hong Kong in late-19 century
   Enlarge
   Hong Kong in late-19 century

   In the 1980s, with the lease on the New Territories running out, the
   British government, led by Margaret Thatcher, decided to negotiate the
   question of the sovereignty of Hong Kong. Although the British would
   have been legally required to transfer only the New Territories to the
   PRC, Whitehall decided that maintaining a rump colony would not be
   worthwhile - the majority of Hong Kong's land was in the New
   Territories, and failure to return the entire colony would undoubtedly
   have generated political friction between the UK and PRC.
   Flag of Hong Kong before 1 July 1997
   Enlarge
   Flag of Hong Kong before 1 July 1997

   Pursuant to an agreement known as the Sino-British Joint Declaration,
   signed by the People's Republic of China and the United Kingdom on 19
   December 1984, the whole territory of Hong Kong under British colonial
   rule became the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the PRC on 1
   July 1997. In the Joint Declaration, the PRC promised that under the "
   One Country, Two Systems" policy proposed by Deng Xiaoping, the
   socialist economic system in mainland China would not be practiced in
   Hong Kong, and Hong Kong's previous capitalist system and life-style
   would remain unchanged for at least 50 years, or until 2047. Hong Kong
   would enjoy a high degree of autonomy in all matters except diplomatic
   affairs and national defence.

   The Joint Declaration came into particular focus in June 1989 when the
   PRC authorities in Beijing moved with particular severity against
   "pro-democracy" demonstrators in Tiananmen Square and elsewhere in
   Beijing. The loss of life amongst their Chinese brethren in the Chinese
   capital led to literally millions of Hong Kong Chinese protesting
   openly in the streets of Hong Kong. In the (then) colony of Hong Kong
   there was immediate concern about Hong Kong's future, a fall in the
   stock market and general disquiet.
   Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Centre: It served as the site of
   the handover ceremony, which signified the end of British rule
   Enlarge
   Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Centre: It served as the site of
   the handover ceremony, which signified the end of British rule

   Hong Kong was transferred to the PRC at midnight on 1 July 1997, with
   the last governor, Chris Patten, leaving on the royal yacht. Soon after
   the handover in July, land values in Hong Kong collapsed substantially
   and expedited the burst of the bubble economy, as part of the Asian
   financial crisis. This was exacerbated by Tung Chee Hwa's
   unsubstantiated pledge to supply 85,000 new flats annually ; which
   essentially manipulated the region's real estate prices. In some areas,
   land values fell by over half; and the Hang Seng Index fell by over
   1,500 points on 28 October 1997, losing 22.8% of its value in a week.

   Hong Kong was hit badly by the outbreak of the SARS virus beginning in
   mid-March through the summer of 2003. This exacerbated the region's
   economic problems, especially in the effect that it had on travel to
   and from Hong Kong.
   City of Hong Kong at night
   Enlarge
   City of Hong Kong at night

   On 1 July the same year, half a million people marched in the largest
   protest rally ever aimed at the government of Hong Kong, voicing
   concerns about a proposed anti-subversion bill that would have eroded
   freedom of the press, of religion and of association arising from
   Article 23 of the Hong Kong Basic Law, as well as dissatisfaction with
   the poor state of the economy. Regina Ip, then Secretary for Security,
   and Antony Leung, then Financial Secretary, were forced to leave office
   in 2003 under public pressure (though Antony Leung left office for
   reason unrelated to the SARS and Article 23 crisis, he gave in to
   public pressure after his involvement in the ' Lexusgate' scandal).

   On 10 March 2005, Tung Chee Hwa submitted his resignation as chief
   executive of Hong Kong. Donald Tsang, the Chief Secretary for
   Administration of Hong Kong, served as Acting Chief Executive until 25
   May, when he, too, resigned to take part in the campaign for the new
   Chief Executive election. Following an interim government headed by
   Henry Tang, Tsang was elected as Chief Executive.

Politics and government

   The Legislative Council of Hong Kong
   Enlarge
   The Legislative Council of Hong Kong
   The Government House in Central where the Chief Executive resides.
   Enlarge
   The Government House in Central where the Chief Executive resides.

   The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region is headed by its Chief
   Executive, the head of government. This office is currently held by
   Donald Tsang, who was elected on 16 June 2005.

   Tsang had held the post of Chief Secretary for Administration
   previously. He assumed his post on 24 June 2005 in Beijing, China; he
   will finish the remaining portion of Tung Chee Hwa's last term, which
   ends on 30 June 2007, according to the interpretation of Annex I and
   Article 46 by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress.

   The election of a new Chief Executive by the 852-member Election
   Committee was expected to be held on 10 July 2005. On 16 June 2005,
   Donald Tsang was acclaimed the winner, as the only candidate securing
   the required 100 nominations from members of the election committee.
   Tung Chee Hwa, the first Chief Executive, assumed office on 1 July
   1997, following his election by a 400-member electoral college. For the
   second five-year term of the Chief Executive which began in July 2002,
   Tung was the only nominated candidate and therefore acclaimed.

   The PRC set up a Provisional Legislative Council (PLC) in 1996 just
   before the handover, where it moved to Hong Kong to have its meetings
   after the handover. It reverted some laws passed by the colonial
   Legislative Council, which was formed by means of universal suffrage
   since 1995. The PLC passed some new laws, such as the Public Order
   Ordinance, which required permission from police to hold a
   demonstration where the number of people who participates exceeds 30.
   Legislative Council elections were held on 24 May 1998, 10 September
   2000, and again on 12 September 2004, with the next election scheduled
   for 2008. According to the Basic Law, Hong Kong's "mini- constitution",
   the present third term of the Legislative Council has 25 seats directly
   elected from geographical constituencies, and 30 seats elected from
   functional constituencies. The 1998, 2000 and 2004 Legislative Council
   elections were seen as free, open, and widely contested, despite
   discontent among mainly 'pro-democratic' politicians, who contended
   that the functional constituency elections and the Election Committee
   elections (for 1998 and 2000) were undemocratic, as they consider that
   the electorate for these seats is too narrow.

   The civil service of Hong Kong maintains its quality and neutrality
   following its tradition in the colonial times, operating without
   discernible direction from Beijing. Many government and administrative
   operations are located in Central on Hong Kong Island near the
   historical location of Victoria City, the site of the original British
   settlements.

   The right of abode issue sparked debates in 1999, while the controversy
   over Hong Kong Basic Law Article 23 was the focus of politics in Hong
   Kong between 2002 and 2003, culminating in a peaceful mass
   demonstration (over 500,000 demonstrators) on 1 July 2003, after which
   the government still tried to pass the law to the Legislative Council.
   But one of the major pro-government parties refused to vote for passing
   the bill. Thus the government found that the bill could not be passed.
   So it shelved the drafted law brought forth by Article 23. The focus of
   controversies shifted to the issue of universal suffrage towards the
   end of 2003 and in 2004, which was the slogan of another mass
   demonstration on 1 July 2004.

   On 24 September 2005, 25 Hong Kong pro-democracy Legco members, some of
   whom were previously labelled as traitors by Beijing after the 1989
   Tiananmen Square crackdown and barred from entering the mainland,
   crossed the border into the southern province of Guangdong, following
   an unprecedented invitation by the PRC. The invitation was generally
   regarded as one of the greatest goodwill gestures from the PRC to the
   Hong Kong democrats since the Tiananmen Square massacre.

   On 4 December 2005, a demonstration was organised by the Civil Human
   Rights Front and pro-democracy lawmakers to demand a timetable for
   universal suffrage to be included in political reform proposals for the
   2007 and 2008 elections for the Chief Executive and the Legislative
   Council respectively. The turnout was reported to be 63,000 by the
   police, and at least 250,000 by the organisers. The proposals would
   have doubled the size of the election committee (from 800 members to
   1,600) and added ten seats to the Legislative Council (5 geographic and
   5 functional seats for district councillors). On 22 December 2005, the
   reforms, proposed by the Chief Executive of Hong Kong, Donald Tsang,
   were defeated by the pro-democracy camp after they failed to reach the
   necessary two-third threshold with 34 votes in favour and 24 opposed.
   In the wake of the defeat, China and the Chief Executive have indicated
   that reforms will not be possible until the 2012 elections. The defeat
   also did little to blunt Tsang's popularity, with his approval ratings
   only dropping from 82 to 79% in the wake of the vote.

   After the transfer of sovereignty, Hong Kong maintains its own
   delegation but changes its designation from "Hong Kong" to "Hong Kong,
   China" in most international organizations, such as the Asia-Pacific
   Economic Cooperation, and to international sporting events, such as the
   Olympic Games. Only the defence and the diplomatic relations of Hong
   Kong are the responsibilities of the Central People's Government in
   Beijing.

Legal system and judiciary

   The Court of Final Appeal in Central
   Enlarge
   The Court of Final Appeal in Central
   An assembly of Hong Kong judges
   Enlarge
   An assembly of Hong Kong judges

   In contrast to mainland China's civil law system, Hong Kong continues
   to follow the common law tradition established by British colonial
   rule. Article 84 of the Basic Law of Hong Kong allows Hong Kong's
   courts to refer to decisions ( precedents) rendered by courts of other
   common law jurisdictions. Articles 82 and 92 allow invite judges from
   other common law jurisdictions to participate in proceedings of Hong
   Kong's Court of Final Appeal and sit as Hong Kong judges.

   Structurally, Hong Kong's court system consists of the Court of Final
   Appeal which replaced the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, the
   High Court, which is made up of the Court of Appeal and the Court of
   First Instance, and the District Court, which includes the Family
   Court. Other adjudicative bodies include the Lands Tribunal, the
   Magistrates' Courts, the Juvenile Court, the Coroner's Court, the
   Labour Tribunal, the Small Claims Tribunal, and the Obscene Articles
   Tribunal, which is responsible for classifying non-video pornography to
   be circulated in Hong Kong. Justices of the Court of Final Appeal are
   appointed by Hong Kong's Chief Executive. The Basic Law of Hong Kong is
   subject to interpretation by the Standing Committee of the National
   People's Congress (NPC:SC) and this power has been invoked three times:
   the right of abode issue, an interpretation regarding post-2008
   election procedures, and an interpretation regarding the length of the
   term of the Chief Executive.

   As in England, lawyers in Hong Kong are classified as either barristers
   or solicitors, where one can choose to practice as either one but not
   both (but it is possible to switch from one to another and vice versa).
   The vast majority of lawyers are solicitors, who are licensed and
   regulated by the Law Society of Hong Kong. Barristers, on the other
   hand, are licensed and regulated by the Hong Kong Bar Association. Only
   barristers are allowed to appear in the Court of Final Appeal and the
   High Court. Just as the common law system is maintained, so are British
   courtroom customs such as the wearing of robes and wigs by both judges
   and lawyers.

Geography

   A relief map of Hong Kong and the southern part of Shenzhen (circa
   2000). ([2])
   Enlarge
   A relief map of Hong Kong and the southern part of Shenzhen (circa
   2000). ( )

   Hong Kong consists of Hong Kong Island, Kowloon, and the New
   Territories (see map below). The Kowloon Peninsula is attached to the
   New Territories in the north, and the New Territories are in turn
   connected to mainland China across the Sham Chun River (Shenzhen
   River). In total, Hong Kong has 262 islands in the South China Sea, of
   which Lantau is the largest. Hong Kong Island itself is the second
   largest and also the most populated. Ap Lei Chau is the most densely
   populated island in the world.

   The name "Hong Kong", literally meaning "fragrant harbour", is derived
   from the area around present-day Aberdeen and Wong Chuk Hang on Hong
   Kong Island, where fragrant trees were once abundant and widely
   exported. The body of water between Hong Kong Island and Kowloon
   Peninsula is Victoria Harbour, one of the deepest natural maritime
   ports in the world. The landscape of Hong Kong is fairly hilly to
   mountainous with steep slopes. The highest point in the territory is
   Tai Mo Shan, at a height of 958 metres (3,142 ft). Lowlands exist in
   the northwestern part of the New Territories.

   Hong Kong is 60 kilometres (37 miles) east of Macau, on the opposite
   side of the Pearl River Delta and borders the city of Shenzhen in
   Guangdong Province. Of the territory's 1,104 square kilometres (426
   square miles) and nearly 7 million residents, less than 25% is
   developed; the remaining land is remarkably green and significant
   portions are reserved as country parks and nature reserves. This is
   because most live and work in high-rise buildings in the city and
   surrounding new towns.

Climate

   Hong Kong's climate is subtropical and prone to monsoons. It is cool
   and dry in the wintertime which lasts from around January to March, and
   is hot, humid and rainy from spring through summer. It is warm, sunny,
   and dry in autumn. Hong Kong occasionally has typhoons. The ecology of
   Hong Kong is mostly affected by the results of climatic changes. Hong
   Kong's climate is seasonal due to alternating wind direction between
   winter and summer. Hong Kong has been geologically stable for millions
   of years, though landslides are common especially after rain. Flora and
   fauna in Hong Kong are altered by climatic change, sea level
   alternation and human impact.

   The highest recorded temperature in Hong Kong is 36.1° C (97° F) while
   the lowest recorded temperature is 0.0°C (32°F). The average
   temperature in the coldest month, January, is 15.8°C (61°F) while the
   average temperature in the hottest month, July, is 28.8°C (82°F). Hong
   Kong's climate is subtropical but half of the year is temperate. The
   territory is situated south of the Tropic of Cancer which is
   approximate to Hawaii in latitude. In winter, strong and cold winds
   generate from the north and cool the city; in the summer, the wind's
   direction reverses and brings the warm and humid air in from the south.
   This climate can support a tropical rainforest.

Administrative divisions

   18 districts of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
   Enlarge
   18 districts of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region

   Hong Kong consists of 18 administrative districts:

   The new territories
    1. Islands
    2. Kwai Tsing ( Kwai Chung and Tsing Yi)
    3. North
    4. Sai Kung
    5. Sha Tin
    6. Tai Po
    7. Tsuen Wan
    8. Tuen Mun
    9. Yuen Long

   Kowloon
   10. Kowloon City
   11. Kwun Tong
   12. Sham Shui Po
   13. Wong Tai Sin
   14. Yau Tsim Mong ( Yau Ma Tei, Tsim Sha Tsui and Mong Kok)

   Hong Kong Island
   15. Central and Western
   16. Eastern
   17. Southern
   18. Wan Chai

   There are several cities and towns within Hong Kong, the largest of
   which include Kowloon, Victoria ( Hong Kong Island), Tseun Wan New
   Town, and Sha Tin New Town. These entities, however, are not granted
   any formal administrative status and are either administered as parts
   of districts (e.g. Sha Tin New Town) or divided up amongst districts
   (e.g. Tsuen Wan New Town and Kowloon).

Economy

   2 International Finance Centre, Hong Kong
   Enlarge
   2 International Finance Centre, Hong Kong

   Hong Kong has the least restricted economy in the world and is
   basically duty-free. But the Hong Kong Government plans to introduce a
   new Goods and Services Tax (GST)- a value-added tax on consumer
   spending. Economists fear that this will severely harm tourists'
   shopping and local consumer spending It is the world's 11th largest
   trading entity and 13th largest banking centre. It has a laissez-faire
   capitalist system, which according to the Index of Economic Freedom and
   the Economic Freedom of the World Report is the freest economy on
   earth. Hong Kong is a rich city with a GDP per capita surpassing most
   Western nations'. To put in perspective Hong Kong's economic strength,
   its closest Chinese rival, Shanghai, has a GDP of ¥46,586 (ca. US$
   5,620) per capita in 2003, ranked no. 13 among all 659 Chinese cities.
   Hong Kong on the other hand, possessed an unparalleled GDP of ¥310,021
   (ca. US$ 37,400), ranked #1 in Asia. It has one of the world's most
   liberal economies and is a major international centre of finance and
   trade. The dominant presence of international trade is reflected in the
   number of consulates in the territory: at June 2005, it had 107
   consulates and consulates-general, more than any other city in the
   world. (Even New York City, host of the United Nations, has only 93
   consulates.)

   The objective of Hong Kong's monetary policy is to maintain currency
   stability. Given the highly externally-oriented nature of the economy,
   this objective was further defined as a stable external value for the
   Hong Kong dollar in terms of a linked exchange rate against the US
   dollar at the rate of approximately HK$7.80 to one United States dollar
   until 2005, when it was allowed to trade within a band of
   HK$7.75–$7.85.

   Hong Kong has limited natural resources, and most food and raw
   materials must be imported. In fact, imports and exports (including
   re-exports) exceed the GDP of Hong Kong. Hong Kong has extensive trade
   and investment ties with the People's Republic of China which existed
   even before the handover on 1 July 1997. These ties and its autonomous
   status enable it to be the middleman between the Republic of China on
   Taiwan and the mainland. Flights, investment, and trade from Taiwan go
   through Hong Kong to get to the mainland. The service sector
   represented 86.5% of the GDP in 2001. The territory, with a highly
   sophisticated banking sector and good communication links, hosts the
   Asian headquarters of many multinational corporations.

   At USD $37,400 in 2006, the real per capita GDP of Hong Kong is
   somewhat higher than that of the four big economies of western Europe
   which is around USD $30,000. Growth averaged a strong 8.9% per annum in
   real terms in the 1970s and 7.2% p.a. in the 1980s. As the economy
   shifted to services (manufacturing currently accounts for just 4% of
   GDP), growth slowed to 2.7% p.a. in the 1990s, including a 5.3% decline
   in 1998, due to the Asian financial crisis' impact on demand in the
   region. Growth since 2000 has averaged 5.2% p.a. amid strong deflation.

   The economy rebounded rapidly, growing by 10% in 2000. A world-wide
   global downturn and the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)
   outbreak reduced economic growth to 2.3% in 2003. Thereafter, a boom in
   tourism from the mainland because of China's easing of travel
   restrictions, a return of consumer confidence, and a solid rise in
   exports resulted in the resumption of strong growth in late 2003 and
   2004, with growth averaging 6.5% in the first half of 2005. To further
   increase economic co-operation between Hong Kong and the mainland, the
   Individual Visit Scheme was started on 28 July 2003, which allows
   travellers from some cities in mainland China to visit Hong Kong
   without an accompanying tour group. As a result, the tourism industry
   in Hong Kong is booming due to an exponential increase in the number of
   visitors from mainland China. The upsurge is also boosted by the recent
   opening of Hong Kong Disneyland Resort.

   A revival in both external and domestic demand led to a strong upswing
   in growth in 2004, surging to 8.2% for the year. The domestic sector
   completely shrugged off its earlier sluggishness, and the general
   weakness of the Hong Kong dollar, when included with the still modest
   cost and price pressures in Hong Kong, has resulted in a strengthening
   in Hong Kong's external price competitiveness. In addition, Hong Kong's
   68-month-long deflationary spiral, the longest and highest deflation
   according to Guinness World Records, ended in mid-2004, with consumer
   price inflation hovering at near zero levels.

   Along with Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan, Hong Kong's fast-paced
   industrialisation earned it a place as one of the four original East
   Asian Tigers.

   Hong Kong enjoys low rates of both personal and corporate taxation.
   Concerned at the territory's narrow tax base and the government's
   over-dependence on tax revenue from property transactions, the
   government is consulting the public on the proposed introduction of a
   Goods and Services Tax (GST). Initial popular reaction has been largely
   unfavourable, primarily because of concerns that it will impose an
   undue burden on the poorer members of society, and may also harm Hong
   Kong's attractiveness as a tourist destination.

Demographics

   Sai Yeung Choi Street South in Mong Kok (Broadway), a popular shopping
   street
   Enlarge
   Sai Yeung Choi Street South in Mong Kok ( Broadway), a popular shopping
   street

   The population of Hong Kong increased markedly during the 1990s,
   reaching 6.86 million in 2005. About 96% of Hong Kong's population are
   of Chinese descent, the majority of which are Cantonese. Groups such as
   the Hakka and Teochew are also substantial. Cantonese, used in
   government matters, is spoken by most of the local Chinese population
   at home and at work, although English is also widely understood, spoken
   and used at work by more than one-third of the population. Since the
   British handover to China, a new group of immigrants from mainland
   China have increased the ethnic diversity of the Chinese population and
   intensified the usage of Mandarin in the territory, in addition to the
   indirect effects of closer communication with mainland China, where
   Mandarin is the official language.

   The remaining 4% of the population is composed of non-ethnic Chinese,
   who form a highly visible group (see Lan Kwai Fong and Tai-Pan) despite
   their small numbers, and other foreign nationals.

   Among these is a significant South Asian population. Amongst them are
   Indians, Pakistanis and Nepalis, some of whom were born in Hong Kong
   and speak fluent Cantonese even though only a rare few are also
   literate in Chinese. The first Filipinos arrived in the 80's to work as
   domestic helpers, followed by the Indonesians. Some Nepalis residing in
   Hong Kong are Gurkhas who, along with their families and descendants,
   chose to stay after their service to Britain. In July 2006, British
   authorities will be granting full British citizenship to all Nepalese
   and their dependants serving the British army during its stays in the
   occupied territories; namely Malaysia, Singapore and Hong Kong, as well
   as among other former territories. This entitles them full privilege to
   stay and work in the United Kingdom. According to the press secretary,
   there are approximately 140,000 eligible to apply under this gesture.
   More than 15,000 Vietnamese, who came to Hong Kong as refugees, have
   become permanent residents, the majority of whom survive on casual
   work.

   Around 130,000 Filipinos work in Hong Kong as domestic helpers and
   housekeepers, often known locally as amahs, or feiyung, with other such
   workers Indonesia. On Sundays and public holidays, thousands of these
   non-ethnic Chinese workers, the majority of whom are female domestic
   helpers, gather in Central (mainly Filipinos) and Victoria Park (mainly
   Indonesians) to socialise. There are also a number of Europeans, North
   Americans, Australians, Japanese, and Koreans, largely working in Hong
   Kong's commercial and financial sector. The top three sources of
   foreigners in Hong Kong are the Philippines (132,770), Indonesia
   (95,460), and the United States (31,330).

   Hong Kong is the fifth largest metropolitan area of the PRC by
   population. Considered as a dependency, Hong Kong is one of the most
   densely populated countries/dependencies in the world, with an overall
   density of more than 6,200 people per km². Hong Kong has a fertility
   rate of 0.95 children per woman, one of the lowest in the world, and
   far below the 2.1 children per woman required to maintain an even
   population level. However, population is continuously growing due to
   immigration of approximately 45,000 per year from mainland China.

   Hong Kong's population is very unevenly distributed. It has an
   extremely dense urban core, normally associated with "the city (市區)",
   consisting of Kowloon and the north of Hong Kong Island, which is
   Central and Western District, Wan Chai District, Eastern District, Yau
   Tsim Mong District, Kowloon City District, Sham Shui Po District, Wong
   Tai Sin District, and Kwun Tong District. The rest, however, is
   relatively sparsely populated, although millions of residents live
   there.

   Despite its population density, Hong Kong was reported to be one of the
   greenest cities in Asia. Hong Kong is as of 2006 the fourth most
   expensive city in the world to live in. The majority of people live in
   flats (apartments) in high-rise buildings. The rest of the open spaces
   are often covered with parks, woods and shrubs. About 40% of the land
   is designated as Country Parks and Nature Reserves. Hiking and camping
   are popular outdoor activities in Hong Kong's hilly country parks. The
   irregular and long coastline of Hong Kong also provides many bays and
   fine beaches for its inhabitants. Environmental concern and awareness
   is growing, however, as Hong Kong also ranks as one of the most
   (air-)polluted cities in the world. Estimates are that 70-80% of the
   city's air pollution comes from other parts of the Pearl River Delta.

Education

   Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
   Enlarge
   Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
   Hong Kong Polytechnic University
   Enlarge
   Hong Kong Polytechnic University

   A former British colony, Hong Kong's education system is roughly based
   upon that of the United Kingdom, and in particular, the system used in
   England. At the higher education levels, both British and American
   systems exist. In particular, the Hong Kong University of Science and
   Technology was established on the American model of higher education.
   The Chinese University of Hong Kong follows the American model with a
   characteristically British college system. The University of Hong Kong
   has traditionally been based on the British model but has switched to
   the American model in recent years. There are eight public universities
   in Hong Kong, and a number of private higher institutions.

   Hong Kong's public schools are operated by the Education and Manpower
   Bureau of the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative
   Region.

   The system features a non-compulsory three-year kindergarten, followed
   by a compulsory six-year primary education, three-year junior secondary
   education; a non-compulsory two-year senior secondary education leading
   to the Hong Kong Certificate of Education Examinations and a two-year
   matriculation course leading to the Hong Kong Advanced Level
   Examinations. A new “3+3+4” senior secondary curriculum, consisting of
   a three-year junior secondary, three-year senior secondary and
   four-year undergraduate academic system, will be implemented from 2009
   onwards. There are also tertiary institutions offering various
   Bachelor's, Master's, and Doctoral degrees, other higher diplomas, and
   associate degree courses.

   Most comprehensive schools in Hong Kong fall under three categories:
   government schools (rare), subsidised schools and private schools.
   Subsidised schools are by far the most common type, and include
   government-aided and grant schools, run by charitable organisations
   often with religious affiliations (mostly Christian, but Buddhist,
   Taoist, Islamic and Confucian as well). Meanwhile, private schools,
   often run by Christian organisations, have admissions based on academic
   merit rather than on financial resources. Outside this system are the
   schools under the Direct Subsidy Scheme (DSS) and private international
   schools.

Culture

   A statue on the Avenue of Stars, Hong Kong
   Enlarge
   A statue on the Avenue of Stars, Hong Kong

   Hong Kong is often described as a city where East meets West. This is
   reflected in all aspects of the culture, but especially in its
   shopping, nightlife, and dining.

   A popular destination for shoppers from around the world, Hong Kong has
   everything to offer from the latest European fashion to traditional
   Chinese wares. Malls, department stores, and designer boutiques offer
   an amazing contrast to the bustling open-air Stanley Market and Jade
   Market shopping areas. Every district in Hong Kong has old-fashioned
   stores that sell Chinese herbal medicine. The largest concentration of
   these shops is along Bonham Strand and Bonham Strand West in Sheung
   Wan, where all types of pills, plants, and dried animals are for sale.
   The Hong Kong Cultural Centre and Tsim Sha Tsui Clock Tower at night
   Enlarge
   The Hong Kong Cultural Centre and Tsim Sha Tsui Clock Tower at night

   Hong Kong has an active nightlife centred on two major entertainment
   districts, Lan Kwai Fong (Central) and Wan Chai. Both areas are
   frequented by expatriates and locals alike. For a more quiet evening, a
   trip to Victoria Peak offers a spectacular view of the city. There is
   also a promenade along the Tsim Sha Tsui waterfront, which is popular
   among young Chinese couples. Shopping, a form of entertainment for the
   people of Hong Kong, is even done at nighttime as evident in the Temple
   Street Night Market.

   The city's cosmopolitan flavour can also be seen in the wide variety of
   cuisines available. While different varieties of Chinese selections,
   especially seafood, are most popular, there are also many European,
   American, Japanese, Korean, and other restaurants. Ethnic dishes served
   in cha chaan teng and dai pai dong are also popular. The people of Hong
   Kong take their food seriously and many top chefs make their way to the
   city to show off their talents to these discerning diners.
   Dimsum breakfast in Hong Kong
   Enlarge
   Dimsum breakfast in Hong Kong

   Entertainment and the performing arts also reflect Hong Kong's blend of
   the Chinese and the Western. The film industry and the " Cantopop"
   music industry scramble together both influences and have had some
   international success, with star performers as ubiquitous icons. Many
   of these come out of the dramatic and variety programs on local
   television, which has been a major presence since 1967. All three of
   these industries export entertainment to Chinese-speaking communities
   around the world. Western-style theatre and various forms of
   traditional Chinese opera co-exist on local stages.

   Chinese New Year

   Ching Ming Festival

   Mid-Autumn Festival

   The world famous Hong Kong International Dragonboat Festival, now known
   as the Circus Capital Stanley Dragon Boat Championships, is a
   celebration of community that is televised globally.

   The Museum of Art and the Museum of History strive to bring
   internationl exhibitions to Hong Kong.

Religion

   Hong Kong enjoys a high degree of religious freedom, a right enshrined
   and protected through its constitutional document, the Basic Law. The
   majority of Hong Kong's population practices ancestor worship due to
   the strong Confucian influence. A sizable Christian community of around
   500,000 exists, forming about 10% of the total population; roughly
   equally divided between Catholics and Protestants. There are also
   followers of Buddhism or Taoism. There are also estimated 3,000 Jews,
   and a few Muslims, Hindus, Sikhs and Bahá'ís are also represented.
   Apart from offering religious instructions, many major religious bodies
   have established schools and provided social welfare facilities.
   Interestingly, it is not uncommon for a living room to have a Crucifix
   as well as a Buddha statue.
   Buddhistic statues praising the Tian Tan Buddha on Lantau, Hong Kong
   Enlarge
   Buddhistic statues praising the Tian Tan Buddha on Lantau, Hong Kong

   Hong Kong's religious beliefs are tied to the region's early role as a
   fishing community. Tin Hau, the protector of seafarers, has been
   honoured with several temples throughout Hong Kong for at least 300
   years. Hung Shing, another protector of seafarers, has also been
   honoured for centuries. Hongkongers, especially elder generations, go
   to Taoist or Buddhist temples to appease the deities and, usually, to
   ask for compassion or good fortune. Gifts of food, and in particular
   fruit, are presented, and incense and paper offerings are burnt in
   respect.

   With the transfer of Hong Kong to the PRC, there were significant
   concerns over religious freedom in Hong Kong. So far, this has proved
   mostly unfounded - despite the banning of the Falun Gong movement by
   Beijing in 1999, adherents are still free to practice in Hong Kong.
   Similarly, the Catholic Church is free to appoint its own bishops in
   Hong Kong, unlike on mainland China, where the only approved 'Catholic'
   institution is the Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association, which
   bishops and priests are appointed by Beijing (though there is also an
   unofficial and illegal part of the Catholic church that maintains
   contact with the Vatican). A significant issue in the normalisation of
   ties between the PRC and the Vatican is Beijing's insistence that the
   Vatican drops its diplomatic ties with the ROC.

   Although freedom of religion remains true in Hong Kong, it remains a
   volatile issue for many, as any threat will have lasting implications
   for the perceived freedoms in Hong Kong.

Architecture

   The Bank of China Tower at dusk.
   Enlarge
   The Bank of China Tower at dusk.

   Due to the creative destruction so endemic to Hong Kong over the past
   50 years, few historical buildings remain in Hong Kong. Instead the
   city has become a centre for modern architecture, especially in and
   around Central. The tall business buildings of Central comprise the
   skyline along the coast of the Victoria Harbour, which is one of Hong
   Kong's famous tourist attractions. In Kowloon, which once included the
   anarchistic settlement called the Kowloon Walled City, strict height
   restrictions were in force until Kai Tak Airport closed in 1998, but
   these restrictions have now been lifted, and several new skyscrapers in
   Kowloon are being planned.
   The Peak Tower at Victoria Peak Enlarge
   The Peak Tower at Victoria Peak

   Hong Kong's best-known building is arguably Ieoh Ming Pei's Bank of
   China Tower, completed in 1990 and now Hong Kong's third tallest
   skyscraper. The building attracted heated controversy from the start,
   as its sharp angles were said to cast negative feng shui energy into
   the heart of Hong Kong. Predating the Bank of China Tower, another
   well-known structure is the HSBC Headquarters Building, finished in
   1985. It was built on the site of Hong Kong's first skyscraper, which
   was finished in 1935 and was the subject of a bitter heritage
   conservation struggle in the late 1970s. Both banks' buildings are
   featured on many of Hong Kong's banknotes.

   The tallest building in Hong Kong is Two International Finance Centre.
   One of the largest construction projects in Hong Kong and the world was
   the new Hong Kong International Airport on Chek Lap Kok near Lantau, a
   huge land reclamation project linked to the centre of Hong Kong by the
   Lantau Link, which features three new major bridges: Tsing Ma, the
   world's sixth largest suspension bridge; Kap Shui Mun, the world's
   longest cable-stayed bridge carrying both road and railway traffic; and
   Ting Kau, the world's first major four-span cable-stayed bridge.

   Particularly notable about Hong Kong's skyline and streetscape is the
   omnipresence of public housing estates, which began as a squatter
   resettlement program in the 1950s, and now houses close to 50% of the
   population. These estates have evolved from seven-storey walk-up
   apartments with public toilets and minimal amenities, allocated on a
   basis of 24 square feet per adult, half of that for a child, to
   high-quality high-rises. The public rental program has been
   supplemented with a government-subsidized Home Ownership Scheme.
   Panorama of Hong Kong Island from Kowloon.
   Panorama of Hong Kong Island from Kowloon.

Transport

   Hong Kong has a highly developed and sophisticated transport network,
   encompassing both public and private transport. The Octopus card stored
   value smart card payment system can be used to pay for fares on almost
   all railways, buses and ferries in Hong Kong. The Octopus card uses
   RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) to allow users to scan their card
   without taking it out of their wallet or bag. All parking meters in
   Hong Kong accept payment by Octopus card only, and Octopus card payment
   can be made at various car parks.
   Hong Kong International Airport
   Enlarge
   Hong Kong International Airport
   Double-decker bus in Hong Kong
   Enlarge
   Double-decker bus in Hong Kong

   Hong Kong Island is dominated by steep, hilly terrain, and sometimes
   unusual methods of transport have been devised to ease movement up and
   down the slopes. In Central and Western district there is an extensive
   system of escalators and moving sidewalks, including the longest
   outdoor covered escalator system in the world, the Mid-levels
   Escalator.

   Hong Kong has several different modes of public rail transport. The two
   metro systems for the city are the MTR (Mass Transit Railway) and KCR
   which acts as a link between Hong Kong and mainland China (KCR also
   operates a light rail system in northwest New Territories). These are
   operated by the MTR Corporation Limited and the Kowloon-Canton Railway
   Corporation respectively. The tramway system covers the northern parts
   of Hong Kong Island and is the only tram system in the world run
   exclusively by double deckers.

   Five separate companies operate franchised public bus services in Hong
   Kong. Double-decker buses were introduced to Hong Kong in 1949. They
   are now used almost exclusively in Hong Kong, just as in Dublin and the
   United Kingdom. However, single-decker buses remain in use for routes
   with lower demand or roads with lower carrying capacity. Such
   single-decker buses are mainly used on Lantau Island and for overnight
   services. Most normal franchised bus routes in Hong Kong operate until
   1 am. Public light buses run the length and breadth of Hong Kong,
   through areas where standard bus lines cannot reach or do not reach as
   frequently, quickly, or directly. Taxis are also widely used throughout
   Hong Kong. 99% of taxis in Hong Kong run on liquefied petroleum gas;
   the rest are still diesel operated.

   Most ferry services are provided by licensed ferry operators, which
   serve outlying islands, new towns, and inner- Victoria Harbour. The two
   routes operated by the Star Ferry, operating for over 100 years, are
   franchised. Additionally, 78 " kai-to" ferries are licensed to serve
   remote coastal settlements.

   Hong Kong has one active international airport, known as Hong Kong
   International Airport located at Chek Lap Kok. This replaced the famous
   Kai Tak Airport located in Kai Tak, Kowloon, in 1998. After dreadful
   delays in the cargo systems in the first few months, the airport now
   serves as a transport hub for Southeast Asia, and as the hub for Cathay
   Pacific Airways, Dragonair, Air Hong Kong and Hong Kong Express.
   Additionally, both Hong Kong International Airport and Cathay Pacific
   Airways have been voted best in the world, in the airport and airline
   criteria respectively, by Skytrax from 2001 to 2005. Hong Kong
   International Airport served more than 36 million passengers in the
   year 2004, and increased to over 40 million passengers in 2005.

   Access to the airport includes 'Airport Express', 'CityFlyers' and
   'Airbuses'. These services connect the airport to the rest of Hong
   Kong. The Airport Express zooms passengers to Central on Hong Kong
   Island in just 23 minutes. The recent opening of Sunny Bay Station of
   the MTR allows easy access to the Disneyland Resort.

   While the traffic in mainland China drives on the right, Hong Kong
   still maintains its own road rules, with traffic continuing to drive on
   the left. There are about 517,000 registered vehicles in Hong Kong, 64%
   of which are privately owned passenger cars. As a metropolis for luxury
   in Asia, Hong Kong is world famous for having the most Rolls-Royce cars
   per capita in the world. Note that the Hong Kong highway code uses the
   same road sign system as Great Britain whereas the Chinese system is
   different.

Military

   The headquarters of the People's Liberation Army Hong Kong Garrison
   (former Prince of Wales Building)
   Enlarge
   The headquarters of the People's Liberation Army Hong Kong Garrison
   (former Prince of Wales Building)

   Hong Kong has never had its own military forces because it has never
   been a sovereign state, except voluntary auxiliary force like The Royal
   Hong Kong Regiment (The Volunteers). All defence matters have been
   dependent on the state which controls Hong Kong. Before the British
   handover to PRC sovereignty, defence were provided by the British
   military, who stationed soldiers in barracks throughout Hong Kong,
   including the British Forces Overseas Hong Kong. Its finance was
   supported by the Hong Kong Government.

   The People's Republic of China Central People's Government (CPG)
   assumed sovereignty over Hong Kong on 1 July 1997 and stationed a
   garrison of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) to manage its defence
   affairs. Although the garrison has little practical military value, the
   stationing of the PLA troops in Hong Kong is a significant symbol of
   the PRC government's assumption of sovereignty over Hong Kong.

   According to Hong Kong's Basic Law, military forces stationed in Hong
   Kong shall not interfere with local civil affairs; the Hong Kong
   Government shall remain responsible for the maintenance of public
   order. The Hong Kong Garrison, composed of ground, naval, and air
   forces, is under the command of the Chinese Central Military
   Commission. The garrison subsequently opened its barracks on
   Stonecutters Island and Chek Chu to the public to promote understanding
   and trust between the troops and residents.

   Under British rule, ethnic Chinese Hong Kong residents (and other Hong
   Kong residents) were able to join the British Forces Overseas Hong
   Kong. However, since the handover in 1997, no Hong Kong resident is
   allowed to join the PLA.

International rankings

   CAPTION: Table of Hong Kong International Rankings

   Date Context Organization Ranking Note
   2001-05 World's Best Airports Skytrax 1/155 countries Ranked 1st out of
   155 countries
   2004 Third annual worldwide press freedom index Reporters without
   borders 34/167 Countries Ranked 34th out of 167 countries
   2006 Corruption Perceptions Index Transparency International 15/163
   Countries Ranked 15th out of 163 countries
   2006 Index of Economic Freedom Heritage Foundation/The Wall Street
   Journal: 2006 1/157 Countries Ranked 1st out of 157 Countries for 11
   years in a row.
   2005 Worldwide quality-of-life index The Economist 18/111 Countries
   Ranked 18th out of 111 countries
   2006 World Competitiveness Yearbook 2006 IMD International 2/61
   Economies Ranked 2nd out of 61 economies (countries and regions)
   2006 World City's Skyline/ Skyscrapers Emporis Data Committee (EDC)
   1/100 Major cities Ranked #1 out of all the major cities in the World.
   This listing ranks cities by the visual impact of their skylines.
   2006 Global Competitiveness Report - Growth Competitiveness Index
   Ranking World Economic Forum 11/125 Countries Ranked 11th out of 125
   countries
   2006 World's Best Airports Skytrax 2/155 countries Ranked 2nd out of
   155 countries
   2006 Business Competitiveness Index - BCI World Economic Forum 10/121
   countries Ranked 10 out of 121 countries
   2006 Human Development Index - HDI United Nation 22/177 countries
   Ranked 22 out of 177 countries
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hong_Kong"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
