   #copyright

Hopman Cup

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Sports events

   The Hopman Cup is an annual international team tennis tournament held
   in Perth, Western Australia in early-January (sometimes commencing in
   late-December) each year.

Format

   Unlike other major international team tennis tournaments like the Davis
   Cup and the Fed Cup, which are strictly for men or women only, the
   Hopman Cup is a mixed competition where male and female players team up
   together on combined teams. Players are invited to attend, national
   coaches not being involved in selecting teams.

   Eight nations are selected annually to compete in the Hopman Cup. (The
   'last' team may be decided by play-offs between several nations before
   competition begins. For Hopman Cup XIX however, this will not be
   occurring, due to the Asian Qualifying Tournament creating the 8th
   team. The official tournament website also has no qualifier listed in
   its schedule.)

   Each team consists of one male player and one female player. Each
   match-up between two teams at the championships consists of:
     * one women's singles match
     * one men's singles match
     * one mixed doubles match

   Each year the eight competing teams are separated into two groups of
   four (with two teams being seeded) and face-off against each of the
   other three teams in their group in a round-robin format. These
   seedings do not have much of an impact, as all teams meet each other
   regardless. The top team in each group then meet in a final to decide
   the champions.

   If a player is injured then a player of a lower ranking of that nation
   may be substituted.

Venue

   The matches are played at an indoor hardcourt venue - the Burswood Dome
   at the Burswood Entertainment Complex. The tournament is a sanctioned
   event in the calendar of the International Tennis Federation (ITF), and
   individuals players' results are included in the calculation of the
   tennis' world rankings. The competition receives extensive television
   coverage in Australia and is an important lead-up tournament to the
   Australian Open each January. The winning team receives a silver cup
   perpetual trophy, and the winning team members are presented with
   distinctive individual trophies in the shape of a tennis ball encrusted
   with diamonds from the Argyle diamond mine in the Kimberley region of
   Western Australia.

Harry Hopman

   The championship is named in honour of Harry Hopman ( 1906- 1985), an
   Australian tennis player and coach who guided the country to no less
   than 15 Davis Cup titles in the 1938- 1969 period.

   Since the Hopman Cup was founded, it has been attended every year by
   the late-Harry Hopman's wife, Lucy, who travels to the tournament
   annually from her home in the United States. Fans have warmly adopted
   her as the "Queen of the Cup".

Curiosities

   The Tournament Director of the Hopman Cup is the former Australian
   tennis player Paul McNamee, who played a key role in the founding of
   the championships.

   The 2006 Hopman Cup was the first elite-level tennis tournament where
   the system was introduced allowing players to challenge point-ending
   line calls similar to that in clay court tournaments. The challenged
   calls are immediately reviewed on a large monitor using Hawk-Eye
   technology.

   The XX Hopman Cup, in 2008, will be the last to be held at the Burswood
   Dome.

Past Champions

   Year Winning Country Players
   2006 United States USA Taylor Dent & Lisa Raymond
   2005 Slovakia Slovakia Dominik Hrbatý & Daniela Hantuchová
   2004 United States USA James Blake & Lindsay Davenport
   2003 United States USA James Blake & Serena Williams
   2002 Spain Spain Tommy Robredo & Arantxa Sánchez Vicario
   2001 Switzerland Switzerland Roger Federer & Martina Hingis
   2000 South Africa South Africa Wayne Ferreira & Amanda Coetzer
   1999 Australia Australia Mark Philippoussis & Jelena Dokic
   1998 Slovakia Slovakia Karol Kučera & Karina Habšudová
   1997 United States USA Justin Gimelstob & Chanda Rubin
   1996 Croatia Croatia Goran Ivanisevic & Iva Majoli
   1995 Germany Germany Boris Becker & Anke Huber
   1994 Czech Republic Czech Republic Petr Korda & Jana Novotná
   1993 Germany Germany Michael Stich & Steffi Graf
   1992 Switzerland Switzerland Jakob Hlasek & Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere
   1991 Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Yugoslavia Goran Prpic & Monica
   Seles
   1990 Spain Spain Emilio Sánchez & Arantxa Sánchez Vicario
   1989 Czechoslovakia Czechoslovakia Miloslav Mečíř & Helena Suková

   2006 Final

   USA defeated Netherlands 2-1

   Women's Singles - Michaella Krajicek (NET) defeated Lisa Raymond (USA)
   6-4, 7-6 (7/4)

   Men's Singles - Taylor Dent (USA) defeated Peter Wessels (NET) 6-1, 6-4

   Mixed Doubles - Dent & Raymond defeated Wessels & Krajicek 4-6, 6-2,
   7-6 (10/7)

   2007 Hopman Cup

Multiple Titles

   Rank   Nation    Total Wins
   1    USA         4
   2    Germany     2
   =    Slovakia    2
   =    Spain       2
   =    Switzerland 2

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hopman_Cup"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
