   #copyright

House

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Architecture; Everyday
life

   A house in Pathanapuram, Kerala (India)
   Enlarge
   A house in Pathanapuram, Kerala (India)

   People construct houses primarily as dwelling-spaces for human
   habitation. Such dwellings generally feature enclosing walls and a roof
   to protect against precipitation, wind, heat, cold and intruders.
   Animals may often live inside a house as well, both domestic pets and
   "unwanted" animals (such as mice living in the walls). The word "house"
   may also apply to a building provided to shelter animals, especially
   within a zoo.

   The house often provides a permanent residence for a family or for a
   similar social unit. When occupying a house routinely as a dwelling,
   English-speaking people may call this building their " home". People
   may leave their house most of the day for work and recreation, but
   typically return 'home", to their house, at least for sleeping.

   A house generally has at least one entrance, usually in the form of a
   door or a portal — but some early houses, such as those at Çatalhöyük,
   used roofs and ladders for access. Many houses have back doors that
   open into what some English-speakers call the backyard and others the
   back garden. When built in appropriate climates, houses may have any
   number of windows to let in natural sunlight and to provide views of
   the outside.

Word-usage

   English-speakers use the word "Katie" to describe buildings with a
   specific use, such as an opera house; and to refer to commercial
   premises: "printing house", " house advantage" in a casino, "house
   wine" in a restaurant or "house lights" over the audience in a theatre.

   Humans have long treated and named favoured shrines or temples as a "
   house of God", and religious buildings have inherited the role as a
   "house of prayer". The term "madhouse" refers disparagingly to a mental
   hospital or insane asylum. For more examples, see: House
   (disambiguation).

   As a verb, to house (pronounced [hæuz]) means "to provide a routine
   locale for an object, a person or an organisation". Museums, for
   example, can house historic or artistic artefacts. A storefront may
   house a business or an organisation; or an entity (a local authority,
   for example) may house a family in an apartment or house. City planners
   often refer to a collection of domiciles (either for persons, for
   organisations, for animals or for objects) as housing. An individual
   person or a single object might also find housing in an appropriate
   domicile.

   The two words "house" and "home" have distinctly different meanings and
   connotations. "House" refers to the physical object, "home" has a more
   abstract and poetic connotation as the centre of family life. Enlisted
   men during World War II used the phrase "A house is not a home" — in
   part to justify infidelity during war-time. On the other hand, a
   stately home classifies as a house.

   Historical associations between extended families and their property
   (notably their house) can account for usage of the word "house" to mean
   a dynasty — a noble or royal house. Compare also household.

Types of house

     * See: List of house types.

Structure

   The developed world in general features three basic house types:
     * Single-family homes - detached and often standing on their own
       parcel of land
     * Semi-detached houses - attached to one or more houses
     * Terraced house (UK) or row house (USA) - attached to other houses,
       possibly in a row (separated by a party wall)

   In the United Kingdom, 27% of the population lived in terraced houses
   and 32% in semi-detached houses, as of 2002. In the United States in
   2000, 61.4% of people lived in detached houses and 5.6% in
   semi-detached houses, 26% in row-houses or apartments, and 7% in mobile
   homes.

   People build " face houses" in one or more faces; though they occur
   most commonly as a fort or playhouse for children, this design
   sometimes serves as a house for adults.

Shape

   Archaeologists have a particular interest in house shape: they see the
   transition over time from round huts to rectangular houses as a
   significant advance in optimising the use of space, and associate it
   with the growth of the idea of a personal area (see personal space).

Function

   Some houses transcend the basic functionality of providing "a roof over
   one's head" or of serving as a family " hearth and home". When a house
   becomes a display-case for wealth and/or fashion and/or conspicuous
   consumption, we may speak of a " great house". The residence of a
   feudal lord or of a ruler may require defensive structures and thus
   turn into a fort or a castle. The house of a monarch may come to house
   courtiers and officers as well as the royal family: this sort of house
   may become a palace. And in time the lord or monarch may wish to
   retreat to a more personal or simple space such as a villa, a hunting
   lodge or a dacha. Compare the popularity of the holiday house or
   cottage, also known as a crib.

   In contrast to a relatively upper-class or modern trend to multiple
   houses, much of human history shows the importance of multi-purpose
   houses. Thus the house long served as the traditional place of work
   (the original cottage industry site or "in-house" small-scale
   manufacturing workshop) or of commerce (featuring, for example, a
   ground-floor "ship-front" shop or counter or office, with living-space
   above). It took an Industrial Revolution to separate manufacturing and
   banking from the house; and to this day some shopkeepers continue (or
   have returned) to live "over the shop".

Inside the house

Parts

   Floor plan of a typical "foursquare" house
   Enlarge
   Floor plan of a typical " foursquare" house

   Many houses have several rooms with specialised functions. These may
   include a living/eating area, a sleeping area, and (if suitable
   facilities and services exist) washing and lavatory areas. In
   traditional agriculture-oriented societies, domestic animals such as
   chickens or larger livestock (like cattle) often share part of the
   house with human beings. In the West, with ready access to plumbing and
   a fairly high standard of living, each house will at least contain a
   bedroom, bathroom, kitchen (or kitchen area), and a living room. A
   typical " foursquare house" (as pictured) occurred commonly in the
   early history of the United States of America, with a staircase in the
   centre of the house, surrounded by four rooms, and connected to other
   sections of the house (including in more recent eras a garage).

   The names of parts of a house often echo the names of parts of other
   buildings, but could typically include:
     * atrium
     * attic
     * alcove
     * basement / cellar
     * bathroom (in various senses of the word)
     * conservatory
     * family room
     * front room (in various senses of the phrase)
     * guest room
     * hallway/ passage
     * hearth - often an important symbolic focus of family togetherness
     * larder
     * libraries
     * living room
     * lounge
     * pantry
     * parlour
     * recreation room / rumpus room
     * shrines to serve the religious functions associated with a family
     * stairwell
     * storage room
     * study
     * toilet (the room)

   See also: room.

Layout

   Ideally, architects and/or builders of houses design rooms to meet the
   needs of the people who will live in the house. Such designing, known
   as " interior design", has become a popular subject in universities.
   Feng shui, originally a Chinese method of situating houses according to
   such factors as sunlight and micro-climates, has recently expanded its
   scope to address the design of interior spaces with a view to promoting
   harmonious effects on the people living inside the house. Compare the
   real-estate sales concept of "indoor-outdoor flow".

   The square footage of a house in the United States reports the area of
   "living space", excluding the garage and other non-living spaces. The
   "square meters" figure of a house in Europe reports the area of the
   walls enclosing the home, and thus includes any attached garage and
   non-living spaces^[ citations needed].

Construction

   Modern house-construction techniques include light-frame construction
   (in areas with access to supplies of wood) and adobe or sometimes
   rammed-earth construction (in arid regions with scarce wood-resources).
   Some areas use brick almost exclusively, and quarried stone has long
   provided walling. To some extent aluminium and steel have displaced
   some traditional building-materials. Increasingly popular alternative
   construction materials include insulating concrete forms (foam forms
   filled with concrete), structural insulated panels (foam panels faced
   with oriented strand board or fibre cement), and light-gauge steel
   framing and heavy-gauge steel framing.

   More generally, people often build houses out of the nearest available
   material, and often tradition and/or culture govern
   construction-materials, so whole towns, areas, counties or even
   states/countries may be built out of one main type of material. For
   example, a large fraction of American houses use wood, while most
   British and many European houses utilise stone or brick.

   Some home designers have begun to collaborate with structural engineers
   who use computers and finite element analysis to design prefabricated
   steel-framed homes with known resistance to high wind-loads and seismic
   forces. These newer products provide labour savings, more consistent
   quality, and possibly accelerated construction processes.

   Lesser-used construction methods have gained (or regained) popularity
   in recent years. Though not in wide use, these methods frequently
   appeal to homeowners who may become actively involved in the
   construction process. They include:
     * Cannabrick construction
     * cordwood construction
     * straw-bale construction
     * geodesic domes
     * wattle and daub

   Thermographic comparison of traditional and 'passivhaus' buildings
   Enlarge
   Thermographic comparison of traditional and ' passivhaus' buildings

Energy efficiency

   In the developed world, energy conservation has grown in importance in
   house-design. Housing produces a major proportion of carbon emissions (
   30% of the total in the UK, for example).

   Development of a number of low-energy building types and techniques
   continues. They include the zero-energy house, the passive solar house,
   and houses built to the Passivhaus standard.

Identifying houses

   With the growth of dense settlement, humans designed ways of
   identifying houses and/or parcels of land. Individual houses sometimes
   acquire proper names; and those names may acquire in their turn
   considerable emotional connotations: see for example the house of
   Howards End or the castle of Brideshead Revisited. A more systematic
   and general approach to identifying houses may use various methods of
   house numbering.

Animal houses

   Humans often build "houses" for domestic or wild animals, often
   resembling smaller versions of human domiciles. Familiar animal houses
   built by humans include bird-houses, hen-houses/chicken-coops and
   doghouses ( kennels); while housed agricultural animals more often live
   in barns. However, human interest in building houses for animals does
   not stop at the domestic pet. People build bat-houses, nesting-sites
   for wild ducks, and a lot more.

Shelter

   Forms of (relatively) simple shelter may include:
     * Bus stop
     * Camper
     * Cottage
     * dugout
     * Gazebo
     * hut
     * Lean-to
     * Shack
     * Tent (see also camp)
     * yaodong
     * Caravan
     * Houseboat.

Houses and symbolism

   Houses may express the circumstances or opinions of their builders or
   their inhabitants. thus a vast and elaborate house may serve as a sign
   of conspicuous wealth; whereas a low-profile house built of recycled
   materials may indicate support of conservation.

   Houses of particular historical significance (former residences of the
   famous, for example, or even just very old houses) may gain a protected
   status in town planning as examples of built heritage and/or of
   streetscape values. Plaques may mark such structures.

   House-ownership ( home-ownership) provides a common measure of
   prosperity in economics. Contrast the importance of house-destruction,
   tent-dwelling and house-rebuilding in the wake of many natural
   disasters.

   Peter Olshavsky’s House for the Dance of Death provides a 'pataphysical
   variation on the house.

Heraldry

   The house occurs as a rare charge in heraldry.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/House"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
