   #copyright

Hurricane Edouard (1996)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Natural Disasters

   CAPTION: Hurricane Edouard

   Category 4 hurricane ( SSHS)
   Hurricane Edouard near peak intensity.
   Hurricane Edouard near peak intensity.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Formed August 19, 1996
   Dissipated September 3, 1996
   Highest
   winds
   145 mph (230 km/h) (1-minute sustained)
   Lowest pressure 933 mbar ( hPa)
   Damage $3.5 million (1996 USD)
   $4.25 million (2005 USD)
   Fatalities 2 direct
   Areas
   affected New Jersey, New England
   Part of the
   1996 Atlantic hurricane season

   Hurricane Edouard was the strongest hurricane in the 1996 Atlantic
   hurricane season, reaching winds of 145 mph (230 km/h) on its path.
   Edouard remained a major hurricane for eight days, an unusually long
   amount of time. A Cape Verde-type hurricane, the storm formed near the
   coast of Africa in the middle of August. It moved westward then curved
   northward, and persisted until early September when it became
   extratropical to the southeast of New England.

   Edouard, originally forecasted to strike the northeast United States,
   produced hurricane force gusts to portions of southeastern
   Massachusetts while remaining offshore. The winds caused minor damage
   totaling to $4.25 million (2005 USD). In addition, the hurricane
   generated strong waves and rip currents to coastlines, killing two
   people in New Jersey and causing numerous injuries.

Storm history

   Storm path
   Enlarge
   Storm path

   A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on August 19, accompanied
   with spiral bands of convection around an area of low pressure. A large
   circulation quickly developed once it reached the Atlantic Ocean, and
   the system organized into Tropical Depression Four late on the 19th
   while located 345 miles (555 km) southeast of the Cape Verde Islands.
   Initial forecasts predicted for great intensification, including one
   forecast for the depression to strengthen to a hurricane within three
   days. However, the depression remained disorganized, and slowly
   intensified to attain tropical storm status on August 22.

   After becoming a tropical storm, Edouard quickly strengthened due to
   the establishment of an upper-level anticyclone over the storm. The
   storm moved to the west in response to a strong subtropical ridge to
   its north, and Edouard strengthened into a hurricane on August 23. Due
   to very favorable conditions, the hurricane rapidly strengthened on the
   24th and 25th to peak as a 145 mph (230 km/h) Category 4 hurricane on
   the Saffir-Simpson Scale. A weakness in the subtropical ridge allowed
   for a motion more to the west-northwest, and the hurricane to passed
   about 250 miles (400 km) north of the Lesser Antilles on August 28. For
   three days during this time, Edouard maintained Category 4 intensity,
   though weakened late on the 28th due to an eyewall replacement cycle
   and vertical shear.
   Hurricane Edouard to the south-southeast of Massachusetts on September
   1
   Enlarge
   Hurricane Edouard to the south-southeast of Massachusetts on September
   1

   Late on August 29, Hurricane Edouard developed three concentric
   eyewalls, an unusual occurrence coinciding with an increase in strength
   to 140 mph (220 km/h). A mid-tropospheric trough turned the hurricane
   to the north to an area of unfavorable conditions, and Edouard weakened
   to a Category 3 hurricanes on the 31st. On September 1, the hurricane
   passed about mid-way between Bermuda and Cape Hatteras, and turned to
   the north-northeast. Edouard continued to weaken as it turned to the
   northeast, and on the 2nd passed about 95 miles (150 km) to the
   southeast of Nantucket, Massachusetts as an 80 mph hurricane, its
   closest point of approach to the United States. Edouard weakened to
   tropical storm status on September 3, and became extratropical shortly
   thereafter while located to the south of Nova Scotia. As an
   extratropical storm, Edouard turned to the east, then moved around the
   periphery of a larger extratropical storm until becoming absorbed by
   the storm early on September 7.

Preparations

   A high pressure system over New England resulted in the possibility
   that Edouard would track to the west and strike the United States. One
   computer model predicted the hurricane would strike near Atlantic City,
   New Jersey with winds of over 111 mph (178 km/h) on Labor Day. This
   caused Cape May County officials to contemplate ordering an evacuation
   for the busiest tourist weekend of the year, though an evacuation never
   occurred. Due to the possibility for a landfall on the East Coast of
   the United States, officials at the National Hurricane Centre issued
   Tropical Storm and Hurricane Watches and Warnings from Cape Lookout,
   North Carolina to Eastport, Maine at various times. Tropical storm
   warnings existed from North Carolina to Watch Hill, Rhode Island and
   from the mouth of the Merrimack River to the United States/Canada
   border, while hurricane warnings existed from Watch Hill, Rhode Island
   to Merrimack River, Massachusetts. Hurricane watches were also issued
   for the tropical storm warning area.

   In North Carolina, Cape Lookout was closed and evacuated prior to the
   storm's passage. Because a Hurricane Watch existed for the New York
   City metropolitan area, New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani urged citizens to
   take preparations. In addition, city officials set up a hurricane
   helpline, activated the city's Emergency Command Centre at the Police
   Headquarters, and distributed leaflets to flood-prone areas. Near New
   Bedford, Massachusetts, where landfall was predicted to occur, schools
   were prepared as shelters in case of a direct hit. New Bedford Mayor
   issued a state of emergency for the city. However, few people stayed in
   shelters during the storm's passage. On Cape Cod, thousands of tourists
   and summer residents evacuated in preparation for the storm, resulting
   in an 18-mile (29 km) traffic backup. As a result, many beach resorts
   lost millions in potential revenue. Of those who remained on Cape Cod,
   900 stayed in emergency shelters when the storm passed the area. In
   Boston's Logan International Airport, numerous flights were cancelled
   or delayed to move planes to safety. Many sailors removed their boats
   from the water prior to the storm. At one time in Mattapoisett Harbour,
   workers removed boats at a rate of one every eight minutes. In Maine,
   the Red Cross opened several emergency shelters, though they were never
   used. Like in Massachusetts, sailors removed their boats, and due to
   media coverage, residents were well-prepared for the hurricane.

Impact

   Despite initial predictions, Edouard's effects were much less than
   expected. Strong waves struck much of the East Coast of the United
   States, killing 2 and injuring numerous others. Damage was greatest on
   Cape Cod, where moderate wind gusts resulted in $4.25 million in damage
   (2005 USD).

Carolinas and Mid-Atlantic

   In South Carolina, minor beach erosion was reported in Charleston and
   Colleton Counties. Swells of up to 15 feet (4.5 m), in combination with
   strong waves, caused overwash on Route 12 on Hatteras Island. Minor
   beach erosion occurred. Moderate winds of up to 50 mph (80 km/h) blew
   down a few trees and caused shingle damage to buildings. In Delaware,
   rough surf closed numerous coastal beaches, while storm tides and waves
   flooded a campground near the Indian River in Sussex County. Strong
   waves in New Jersey killed two people and seriously injured another.
   Lifeguards made numerous rescues along the coast, while other beaches
   were closed or had restrictions on bathing. Winds were minor along the
   Jersey coastline, peaking at less than 30 mph (48 km/h).

   In New York, Edouard produced strong waves and storm tides of 1 to 2
   feet (0.3 to 0.6 m), causing overwash along southern Long Island due to
   high tide. Coastal flooding occurred, including in Hampton Bays where
   the waves flooded one road and covered another with sand. The flooding
   trapped six cars, while the strong waves forced several beaches to
   close. Because the hurricane moved through the New York Shipping
   Channel, numerous ships reported winds of over hurricane status ,
   though winds remained below tropical storm force on land. A boat
   capsized off the coast of Jones Beach Island, though its passengers
   were not injured. A Celebrity Cruises cruise ship suffered damage from
   30 to 50 foot (9 to 15 m) waves, injuring several passengers and crew
   members. Rainfall was minimal, peaking at less than a half of an inch
   in eastern Long Island.

New England and Canada

   Rainfall from Edouard
   Enlarge
   Rainfall from Edouard

   Hurricane Edouard passed about 95 miles (150 km/h) southeast of
   Nantucket while moving at only 12 mph (19 km/h), much slower than
   previous New England hurricanes. This resulted in several hours of
   strong waves, winds, and rain. The hurricane produced wave heights of
   up to 31 feet (9.4 m), which washed twelve boats ashore and damaged
   numerous others. The strong waves and a storm surge of up to 2.1 feet
   (.6 m) in Nantucket flooded a few coastal roads. Edouard also produced
   tropical storm force winds across much of Massachusetts, as well as one
   hurricane force gust on Nantucket. In addition, there were unofficial
   reports of stronger gusts, including 77 mph (124 km/h) on Cape Cod, 80
   mph (129 km/h) on Martha's Vineyard, and 90 mph (145 km/h) on
   Nantucket. The strong winds caused power outages to 2/3 of Nantucket,
   all of Martha's Vineyard for 6 hours, and most of Cape Cod for several
   hours. Power outages, effecting 35,000 to 40,000 were reported
   throughout Massachusetts, though far from the power outages caused by
   Hurricane Bob five years prior. The winds also downed numerous trees,
   and blew off the roof of the fire station in Hyannis. Rainfall was
   moderate from the slow-moving hurricane, peaking at 6.37 inches (162
   mm) in West Dennis with many other locations reporting over 3 inches
   (76 mm). The rainfall produced minor street flooding. Damage on Cape
   Cod totaled to $3.5 million (1996 USD, $4.25 million 2005 USD).

   In New Hampshire, the hurricane produced winds gusts of up to 38 mph
   (61 km/h) and around 1 inch (25 mm) of rain along the coast. In Maine,
   heavy surf closed several beaches and injured two people. Waves also
   damaged several boats. Winds were moderate near the coast, peaking at
   47 mph (76 km/h) with gusts to 54 mph (87 km/h) at Mount Desert Island.
   The winds knocked over several trees and caused sporadic power outages
   throughout the state, including loss of power for 1900 Portland
   residents. In Kittery, water fell through an office building, damaging
   computer equipment. Rainfall was minor, peaking at 1.23 inches in
   Eastport.

   In southern Nova Scotia, Edouard produced heavy rainfall from 3.7 to
   5.5 inches (95 to 140 mm). Winds were moderate, peaking at 75 mph (120
   km/h) in Cape Breton Highlands. The hurricane also caused beach erosion
   on southeastern Nova Scotia.

   The name Edouard was not retired and was re-used in the 2002 season. It
   will next be used during the 2008 season.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hurricane_Edouard_%281996%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
