   #copyright

Hurricane Camille

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Storms

   CAPTION: Hurricane Camille

   Category 5 hurricane ( SSHS)
   Hurricane Camille in the Gulf of Mexico
   Hurricane Camille in the Gulf of Mexico
     __________________________________________________________________

   Formed August 14, 1969
   Dissipated August 22, 1969
   Highest
   winds
   190  mph (305  km/h) (1-minute sustained)
   Lowest pressure 905  mbar ( hPa)
   Damage $1.42 billion (1969  USD)

   $9.14 billion ( 2005 USD)
   Fatalities 259 direct
   Areas
   affected Cuba, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, Southern United States
   (particularly major flooding in Virginia)
   Part of the
   1969 Atlantic hurricane season

   Hurricane Camille was the third tropical cyclone and second hurricane
   of the 1969 Atlantic hurricane season. Camille was the second of three
   Category 5 hurricanes to make landfall in the United States during the
   20th century, which it did near the mouth of the Mississippi River on
   the night of August 17, resulting in catastrophic damage. Camille was
   the only Atlantic hurricane with official winds reported to reach at
   190 mph until Allen in 1980.

   The storm formed on August 14 and rapidly deepened. It scraped the
   western edge of Cuba at Category 3 intensity. Camille strengthened
   further over the Gulf of Mexico and made landfall with a pressure of
   909  mbar ( hPa), estimated sustained winds of 190  mph (305  km/h),
   and a peak storm surge of 24 feet (7.3 m); by maximum sustained wind
   speeds, Camille was the strongest landfalling tropical cyclone recorded
   worldwide, and one of only four tropical cyclones worldwide to even
   reach 190 mph winds. The hurricane flattened nearly everything along
   the coast of the U.S. state of Mississippi, and caused additional
   flooding and deaths inland while crossing the Appalachian mountains of
   Virginia. In total, Camille killed 259 people and caused $1.42 billion
   (1969 USD, $9.14 billion 2005 USD) in damages.

Storm history

   Storm path
   Enlarge
   Storm path
   Camille in the Central Gulf of Mexico
   Enlarge
   Camille in the Central Gulf of Mexico

   A tropical wave left the coast of Africa on August 5, becoming a
   tropical disturbance on August 9, 480 miles east of the Leeward
   Islands. Aircraft reconnaissance identified a closed circulation in the
   disturbance on the 14th near Grand Cayman and the system was designated
   Tropical Storm Camille with 60 mph (95 km/h) winds.

   The storm already had a well organized circulation and rapidly
   strengthened from August 14 to August 15 to a 115 mph (185 km/h) major
   hurricane before hitting the western tip of Cuba later that day. Land
   interaction weakened Camille to a 100 mph (160 km/h) hurricane, but it
   returned to perfect conditions as it crossed the Gulf of Mexico
   (possibly while passing over the Loop Current). On August 17, Camille
   reached an intense minimum central pressure of 905 mbar ( hPa), and it
   continued to strengthen to a peak of over 190 mph (305 km/h) winds
   (possibly the strongest ever recorded in an Atlantic hurricane). In the
   hours before landfall, a reconnaissance aircraft was unable to obtain a
   surface wind report, but it estimated winds of up to 205 mph (335 km/h)
   and a minimum central pressure of 901 mbar (hPa).
   Camille nearing its final landfall
   Enlarge
   Camille nearing its final landfall

   Camille crossed the southeastern tip of Louisiana, and then hit near
   Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, on the night of August 17. Its Category 5
   strength winds are only estimated, due to the lack of wind reports near
   the centre, though the NASA site at Stennis Space Centre, MS near
   Picayune, Mississippi, recorded an estimated gust of 160 mph with a
   pressure of 950 mbar. It maintained hurricane force winds for 10 hours
   as it moved 150 miles inland. As Camille turned east, it weakened to a
   tropical depression over northern Mississippi on the 19th. It picked up
   additional moisture from the Gulf Stream along the way and produced
   torrential rains in the remote mountains of Virginia. Camille turned
   eastward as it moved inland, and emerged into the Atlantic Ocean near
   Virginia Beach, Virginia, on the 20th. The depression restrengthened
   over the Gulf Stream, and briefly attained a peak of 70 mph (110 km/h)
   before becoming extratropical on the 22^nd, east of Nova Scotia.

Impact

                                  Most intense landfalling U.S. hurricanes
                          Intensity is measured solely by central pressure
                      Rank      Hurricane Season         Landfall pressure
                         1    "Labor Day"   1935      892 mbar ( hPa)
                         2        Camille   1969      909 mbar (hPa)
                         3        Katrina   2005      920 mbar (hPa)
                         4         Andrew   1992      922 mbar (hPa)
                         5    "Indianola"   1886      925 mbar (hPa)
                         6 "Florida Keys"   1919      927 mbar (hPa)
                         7   "Okeechobee"   1928      929 mbar (hPa)
                         8          Donna   1960      930 mbar (hPa)
                         9 " New Orleans"   1915      931 mbar (hPa)
                        10          Carla   1961      931 mbar (hPa)
                                    Source: U.S. National Hurricane Centre

   Making landfall as a Category 5 hurricane, Camille caused damage and
   destruction across much of the Gulf Coast of the United States. Because
   it moved quickly through the region, Hurricane Camille dropped only
   moderate precipitation in most areas. Most other areas reported from 1
   to 6 inches. The area of total destruction in Harrison County,
   Mississippi was 68 square miles (176 km²). The total estimated cost of
   damage was $1.42 billion (1969 USD, $9.14 billion 2005 USD). This made
   Camille the second-most expensive hurricane in the United States, up to
   that point (behind Hurricane Betsy). The storm directly killed 143
   people along Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana. An additional 153
   people perished as a result of catastrophic flooding in Nelson County,
   Virginia and other areas nearby. In all, 8,931 people were injured,
   5,662 homes were destroyed, and 13,915 homes experienced major damage,
   with many of the fatalities being coastal residents who had refused to
   evacuate.

Gulf Coast and the Caribbean

   In the only Caribbean Island greatly affected by Camille, Cuba, three
   deaths were reported. Over 10 inches of rain were recorded in the
   western portion of Cuba. But in continental North America, where
   Camille was stronger, more damage was brought. While moving over
   southeastern Louisiana, the Weather Bureau Office at Boothville
   reported wind gusts of 107 mph. At least $350 million (1969 USD, $1.85
   billion 2005 USD) in damage was reported. Alabama also experienced
   damage along U.S. Highway 90. 26,000 homes and over 1,000 businesses
   were wiped out completely across the state. Camille's large circulation
   also resulted in a 3 to 5 foot storm surge in Apalachicola, Florida.
   Ships beached in Gulfport, Mississippi
   Enlarge
   Ships beached in Gulfport, Mississippi

   Mississippi received the worst of the damage. Upon making landfall,
   Camille produced a 24 foot storm surge. Mississippi's entire shore and
   for some three to four blocks in, the destruction was nearly complete.
   The worst hit areas were Clermont Harbour, Lakeshore, Waveland, Bay St.
   Louis, Pass Christian, Long Beach, and the beach front of Gulfport,
   Mississippi City, and Biloxi. More than 11 inches of rain occurred in
   Hancock County, Mississippi, and most low-lying areas were flooded with
   up to 15 feet of water. U.S. Highway 90, which is close to the shore,
   was broken up in many areas and sand and debris blocked much of it.
   Totals say that 3,800 homes and businesses were completely destroyed.
   As Camille came ashore, it passed over Ship Island, off the coast of
   Mississippi. Camille's strong storm surge and torrental rains literally
   split the island in two. That body of water between the east and west
   parts of the island is now called "Camille's Cut".

   In addition, one of Frank Lloyd Wright's waterfront houses for W. L.
   Fuller, in Pass Christian, Mississippi, was completely destroyed by
   Hurricane Camille.

The Hurricane Party

   One persistent legend about Camille states that a hurricane party was
   held on the third floor of the Richelieu Manor Apartments in Pass
   Christian, Mississippi, in the path of the eyewall as it made landfall.
   The high storm surge flooded and destroyed the building, and there was
   only one survivor to tell of the story of the others. Who the survivor
   is, how many party guests there were, and just how far the sole
   survivor was swept by the storm varies with the retelling.
   Richelieu Apartments before Camille
   Enlarge
   Richelieu Apartments before Camille
   A large, antebellum mansion destroyed by the high winds and storm
   surge.
   Enlarge
   A large, antebellum mansion destroyed by the high winds and storm
   surge.

   In reality, most of the people that stayed in the Richelieu Apartments
   survived, but there is heavy debate on whether or not there was a
   party. Interviews from the local TV news station, WLOX, interviewed
   people who claimed to have stayed in the Richelieu Apartments. Among
   the survivors was the manager, who supposedly stayed in the Manager's
   Office while the party was going on. The wall of the office collapsed,
   causing water to come in. The manager claimed to have used a nearby
   object to stay afloat on the water until the storm receded. Though
   other people have claimed that the residents, exhausted from preparing
   the town to weather the storm, took refuge in the building not out of
   recklessness, but because it was believed to be one of the sturdiest
   buildings in the area. Survivor Ben Duckworth is quoted in Hurricane
   Camille: Monster Storm of the Gulf Coast as stating that the Richelieu
   was a designated civil defense air-raid shelter. However, their faith
   in the building's sturdiness was unfounded, as it was completely
   demolished by the storm. Twenty-three people are known to have stayed
   in the Richelieu Apartments during the hurricane, of whom eight died.
   Richelieu Apartments After Camille
   Enlarge
   Richelieu Apartments After Camille

   The tale of the lone survivor and the party appears to have originated
   with survivor Mary Ann Gerlach. Other survivors, including Duckworth
   and Richard Keller have expressed irritation at the story. "The
   hurricane party never happened, nor were the number of deaths
   associated with the apartment inhabitants accurate," says Pat
   Fitzpatrick, Mississippi State University professor and author of
   Hurricanes: A Reference Handbook.

Ohio Valley and the Virginias

   Camille caused moderate rainfall in Tennessee and Kentucky of up to 5
   inches, helping to relieve a drought in the area.
   Image:Camilledamageva.jpg
   The flooding of the James River

   While moving through Virginia and West Virginia, Camille dropped
   torrential rainfall of 12 to 20 inches, with one unofficial report of
   31 inches. Most of the rainfall occurred in Virginia during a 3-5 hour
   period on August 20. The flooding led to overflown rivers in the 2
   states, with the highest amounting being the James River in Richmond
   with a peak crest of 28.6 feet. Many rivers in Virginia and West
   Virginia set records for peak flood stages, causing numerous mudslides
   along mountainsides. In the mountain slopes between Charlottesville and
   Lynchburg, more than 10 inches of rain fell in a course of 12 mere
   hours. And in the same time, Nelson County recorded 27 inches of rain.
   Flooding was so catastrophic that all communications were cut off from
   the rest of the state. Because the hurricane was expected to quickly
   dissipate, few were prepared for the flash flooding. The ensuing flash
   flood and mudslide killed 153 people. In Nelson County alone, 133
   bridges were washed out, while some entire communities were under
   water. The major flooding that occurred downstream cut off all
   communications between Richmond and the Shenandoah Valley. Waynesboro
   on the South River saw eight feet of water downtown and Buena Vista had
   more than five feet. Throughout Virginia and West Virginia, Camille
   destroyed 349 houses, 83 trailers, 730 farm buildings, and 96
   buildings. 4,128 families were affected by the hurricane in the area,
   and total damage amounted to $140.8 million (1969 USD, $747 million
   2005 USD).

Aftermath

   The response after the storm involved many federal state and local
   agencies and volunteer organizations. The main organization for
   coordinating the federal response to the disaster was the Office of
   Emergency Preparedness which provided $76 million (1969 USD, $403
   million 2005 USD) to administer and coordinate disaster relief
   programs. Food and shelter were available the day after the storm. On
   August 19 portions of Mississippi and Louisiana were declared major
   disaster areas and became eligible for federal disaster relief funds.

   Major organizations contributing to the relief effort included the
   Federal Power Commission which helped fully return power to affected
   areas by November 25, 1969. The Coast Guard (then under the Department
   of Transportation), Air Force, Army, Army Corps of Engineers, Navy and
   Marine Corps all helped with evacuations, search and rescue, clearing
   debris and distribution of food. The Department of Defense contributed
   $34 million (1969 USD, $180 million 2005 USD) and 16,500 military
   troops overall to the recovery. The Department of Health provided 4
   million dollars towards medicine, vaccines and other health related
   needs.

   Long term re-development was overseen by the Department of Commerce,
   which contributed $30 million (1969 USD, $159 million 2005 USD) towards
   planned and coordinated redevelopment of affected areas.

   The devastation of Camille inspired the implementation of the
   Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale. After the storm, many Gulf Coast
   residents commented that hurricane warnings were not clear enough in
   conveying the expected intensity of the coming storm. The
   Saffir-Simpson scale offered a much more concise statement of storm
   intensity than barometric pressure and wind speed measurements, and
   veterans of previous hurricanes could analogize the power of the
   approaching storm to those they had experienced.

   In a 1999 report on Hurricane Camille sponsored by the NOAA Coastal
   Services Centre, the authors concluded: "With Camille, the preparations
   for the event and the response were based on processes put in place
   long before the storm made landfall. Coordination between government
   agencies as well as with state and local officials was enhanced because
   of preexisting plans."

   One small compensation was that recovery from flood damage in Nelson
   County, Virginia led to the discovery of the Ginger Gold apple in the
   orchards of Clyde Harvey.

Retirement

   The name Camille was retired after the 1969 season due to the major
   destruction and death in much of the Southern United States. A
   replacement name was never chosen, as a new list of names was created.

Comparisons to Hurricane Katrina

   Side-by-side comparison of Camille and Katrina
   Enlarge
   Side-by-side comparison of Camille and Katrina

   Comparisons between Hurricane Katrina of the 2005 season and Camille
   are inevitable because of their similar strengths and nearly identical
   landfall locations. Before Katrina, Camille was considered to be the
   "benchmark" against which all Gulf Coast hurricanes were measured.
   Katrina was weaker than Camille at landfall but substantially larger,
   which led to both a broader and a larger storm surge. Katrina was
   described by those that experienced Camille as "much worse" - not only
   because of the massive storm surge, but from the fact that Katrina
   pounded the Mississippi coast for a longer period of time. Camille also
   drew part of its record storm surge from adjacent coastal waters; Lake
   Borgne and Lake Pontchartrain actually receded, sparing the city of New
   Orleans from flooding.

   Some locals argue that Katrina's death toll was made higher because
   those who survived Camille with no flooding and little damage believed
   Katrina to be less of a threat, creating a false sense of security
   among Camille veterans. An innkeeper at the Harbour Oaks Inn, Tony
   Brugger, stayed at the inn and died when his inn collapsed. A popular
   rumor has Brugger telling a radio station during an interview that he
   wouldn't leave because since Camille's surge had not affected the inn,
   Katrina's would not either.

Records and naming

                                          Most intense Atlantic hurricanes
                          Intensity is measured solely by central pressure
                       Rank   Hurricane Season               Min. pressure
                          1       Wilma   2005       882 mbar ( hPa)
                          2     Gilbert   1988       888 mbar (hPa)
                          3 "Labor Day"   1935       892 mbar (hPa)
                          4        Rita   2005       895 mbar (hPa)
                          5       Allen   1980       899 mbar (hPa)
                          6     Katrina   2005       902 mbar (hPa)
                          7     Camille   1969       905 mbar (hPa)
                                  Mitch   1998       905 mbar (hPa)
                          9        Ivan   2004       910 mbar (hPa)
                         10       Janet   1955       914 mbar (hPa)
                                       Source: U.S. Department of Commerce

Records

   Camille produced the seventh lowest official barometric pressure ever
   recorded in the Atlantic basin, a scant 905 mbar; the only hurricane to
   hit the United States with a lower pressure at landfall was the Labor
   Day Hurricane of 1935. A reconnaissance flight indicated a pressure of
   901 mbar, but this pressure was not verified, and remains unofficial
   pending reanalysis. The wind speed of Camille can only be approximated,
   as no meteorological equipment survived the extreme conditions at
   landfall, but Camille is estimated to have had sustained winds of 190
   mph (305 km/h) at landfall, with gusts exceeding 210 mph (340 km/h).
   Before Hurricane Katrina in 2005, Camille likely had the highest storm
   surge measured in the United States, at over 24 feet (7.3 meters).

   The 24-foot storm surge quoted by the Army Corps of Engineers was based
   on high water marks inside surviving buildings, of which there were but
   three. Prior to the collapse of the Richelieu Apartments, Ben Duckworth
   shined a flashlight down a stairwell and found the water within one
   step of the third-story floor; this establishes a surge height of 28
   feet at that spot at that time. About 15 minutes later, the building
   collapsed and the evidence vanished with it.

   In addition, Camille forced the Mississippi River to flow backwards for
   a river-distance of 125 miles (from its mouth to a point north of New
   Orleans). The river further backed up for an additional 120 miles, to a
   point north of Baton Rouge.

Naming

   In 1969 the naming conventions for hurricanes were not strictly
   controlled as they are today. There were only three requirements: the
   name had to be female (male names were not used at that time), the
   names had to remain in alphabetical order, and the name could not have
   been retired. John Hope, a meteorologist at the National Hurricane
   Centre had a daughter who had just graduated from high school. He added
   her name — Camille — to the list of storm names for the year, having no
   way of knowing that the storm bearing her name would become infamous.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hurricane_Camille"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
