   #copyright

Hurricane Georges

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Natural Disasters

   CAPTION: Hurricane Georges

   Category 4 hurricane ( SSHS)
   Georges as a Category 4 hurricane
   Georges as a Category 4 hurricane
     __________________________________________________________________

   Formed September 15, 1998
   Dissipated September 29, 1998
   Highest
   winds
   155  mph (250  km/h) (1-minute sustained)
   Lowest pressure 937  mbar ( hPa)
   Damage $5.9 billion (1998  USD) $6.8 billion (2005 USD)
   Fatalities 603 direct
   Areas
   affected Leeward Islands, Puerto Rico, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Cuba,
   Florida Keys, Mississippi, Alabama
   Part of the
   1998 Atlantic hurricane season

   Hurricane Georges was the seventh tropical storm, fourth hurricane, and
   second major hurricane of the 1998 Atlantic hurricane season. The
   tropical cyclone made seven landfalls on its long track through the
   Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico during September, becoming the second
   most destructive storm of the season. Georges killed 603 people, mainly
   on the island of Hispaniola, and caused nearly $6 billion (1998 US
   dollars) in damages, mostly in Puerto Rico and Hispaniola.

   The hurricane affected at least six different countries (Antigua and
   Barbuda, St. Kitts and Nevis, Haiti, the Dominican Republic, Cuba, and
   the United States) — more than any other hurricane since Hurricane Inez
   of the 1966 season, and more than any other hurricane until Hurricane
   Wilma in the 2005 season affected ten different countries.

Storm history

   Storm path
   Enlarge
   Storm path

   A tropical wave exited the coast of Africa on September 13. Moving
   westward, the large system quickly developed a closed circulation, and
   was classified Tropical Depression Seven on the 15th. A strong
   upper-level ridge forced the depression to the west-northwest, where
   warm water temperatures allowed it to strengthen to a tropical storm on
   the 16th. Georges's circulation developed strong banding features
   around a well-organized Central Dense Overcast, and with the aid of a
   developing anti-cyclone, Georges attained hurricane status late on
   September 17.

   Conditions became nearly ideal for continued development, including
   warm water temperatures, low-level inflow to the hurricane's north, and
   good upper-level outflow. A banding eye developed, and Georges reached
   major hurricane strength on September 19 while 675  miles (1085  km)
   east-southeast of Antigua. Rapid intensification continued, and Georges
   peaked at 155  mph (250  km/h) on the 20th. Shortly after peaking,
   upper-level wind shear from the development of an upper-level low
   weakened the hurricane as it approached the Leeward Islands.
   Georges near peak intensity
   Enlarge
   Georges near peak intensity

   On September 21, Georges made landfall directly on Antigua and St.
   Kitts, though its wide windfield affected many other islands. After
   weakening to a Category 2 hurricane over the Caribbean Sea, upper-level
   shear decreased, and Georges strengthened again before making landfall
   near Fajardo, Puerto Rico as a 115 mph (185 km/h) hurricane. Over the
   mountainous terrain of the island, the hurricane weakened to a Category
   2 storm again, but over the Mona Passage it again re-intensified to hit
   eastern Dominican Republic with winds of 120 mph (195 km/h) on the
   22nd. Like in Puerto Rico, Georges was greatly weakened by the
   mountainous terrain, and after crossing the Windward Passage, it struck
   30 miles (48 km) east of Guantanamo Bay, Cuba on the 23rd. Well-defined
   upper-level outflow allowed the hurricane to remain well organized, and
   while paralleling the northern coastline of the island Georges retained
   minimal hurricane status.
   Hurricane Georges hitting Key West on September 25
   Enlarge
   Hurricane Georges hitting Key West on September 25

   Hurricane Georges reached the Straits of Florida on September 24, and
   as it had done earlier in its lifetime, quickly restrengthened to
   Category 2 status on the 25th due to warm water temperatures and little
   upper-level shear. It continued to the west-northwest, and struck Key
   West later on the 25th with winds of 105 mph (165 km/h). Despite moving
   over warmer water, Georges only managed to peak at 110 mph (175 km/h)
   in the Gulf of Mexico, likely due to its disrupted inner core. A
   mid-tropospheric anticyclone pushed the hurricane slowly
   north-northwestward, forcing Georges to make its 7th and final landfall
   near Biloxi, Mississippi on the 28th. Within 24 hours, Georges had
   weakened to a tropical depression, and due to weak steering currents
   the storm looped over southern Mississippi, then drifted to the east.
   The weak circulation moved eastward over the interior of the Florida
   Panhandle, and dissipated on October 1 near the Florida/ Georgia
   border.

Preparations

   In the days prior to the hurricane's arrival, thousands of citizens in
   Puerto Rico prepared for the major hurricane by boarding windows and
   purchasing supplies. Puerto Rican governor Pedro Rosselló activated the
   island's National Guard, opened 416 shelters, and enacted a temporary
   prohibition on alcohol sales. More than 28,000 people across the island
   evacuated their homes to the shelters in the northern portion of the
   island. Both FEMA and the American Red Cross deployed workers there
   with supplies for a potentially deadly event. The National Hurricane
   Centre issued hurricane warnings for the island 37 hours prior to
   Hurricane Georges's landfall.

   Due to initial forecasts of the hurricane brushing the northern portion
   of the country, the Dominican Republic was caught off guard. Instead,
   like in Puerto Rico, Georges traversed the entire country, and passed
   close to Santo Domingo. Neighboring Haiti expected the worst, opening
   shelters and evacuating vulnerable people from low-lying coastal areas.

   Prior to making landfall, more than 200,000 people were evacuated from
   coastal areas in eastern Cuba. In the potentially impacted area, Cuba's
   revolutionary army was sent to farm lands to harvest crops that could
   be destroyed during the storm. Members of the Cuban government
   travelled door-to-door to alert everyone of the hurricane. In addition
   to this, President Fidel Castro spoke live on national television to
   explain the country's plans to withstand the hurricane, as well as
   ensuring a quick recovery effort by using all of the nation's
   resources. The Cuban Government issued Hurricane Warnings 30½ hours
   prior to landfall.

   Initial forecasts of a southeastern Florida landfall forced over
   1.2 million to evacuate, including much of the Florida Keys. Despite
   the mandatory evacuation order, 20,000 people, including over 7,000
   Key West citizens, refused to leave. Some of those who remained to ride
   out the storm were shrimpers, whose boats were their entire livelihood.
   Insurance companies refused to insure some of the older shrimp boats,
   leading shrimpers to ride it out with all they had left. Due to lack of
   law enforcement, those who stayed in Key West went through red lights,
   double-parked, and disobeyed traffic laws. Long-time Florida Keys
   citizens noted the solitude of the time and enjoyed the island for how
   it once was, rather than the large crowds of tourists.

   In the northern Gulf of Mexico, Georges was forecast to attain major
   hurricane status and make landfall in southeastern Louisiana. Because
   of this, portions of the state were evacuated, including New Orleans.
   There, the Louisiana Superdome was, for the first time in its history,
   used as a refuge of last resort for those unable to evacuate New
   Orleans. More than 14,000 citizens rode out the storm in the facility,
   causing difficulties to supply necessities. The building had no
   problems related to the weather, though evacuees looted the building,
   stole furniture, and damaged property. However, the damage was much
   less than in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in 2005. Many citizens
   in southern Mississippi were told to leave due to a mandatory or
   recommended evacuation. Of those in the evacuation area, 60% actually
   left. Most of those who stayed remained because they believed their
   house was safe enough for the storm. Of those who left, most went to a
   relative's house in their own county. Prior to making landfall,
   Georges's track was very uncertain. This forced for the mandatory
   evacuations of Alabama's two coastal counties, Baldwin and Mobile
   Counties, with a combined population of over 500,000 people. Despite
   the order, only 67% of the area actually left to a safer place. Most of
   those who remained stayed because they believed their house would be
   able to withstand the hurricane. The majority of those who did leave
   went to a relative's house in a safer portion of the state. In the days
   before making landfall, only 22% of the population in recommended
   evacuation areas along the Florida Panhandle actually left. However,
   most of them were prepared to leave if the situation became worse.
   Those who did leave were concerned about the severity of the storm,
   while those who stayed felt their home was safe enough for the
   hurricane's effects. Floridians who evacuated typically left for a
   friend or relative's house, and only went to another area of their
   county.

Impact

                                               CAPTION: Death Toll by Area

                                                      State/country Deaths
                                                            Antigua      2
                                                St. Kitts and Nevis      5
                                                 Dominican Republic    380
                                                              Haiti    209
                                                            Bahamas      1
                                                               Cuba      6
                                                            Alabama      1
                                                              Total    603

   A long-lasting hurricane, Hurricane Georges brought torrential rainfall
   and mudslides along much of its path through the Greater Antilles. In
   all, the hurricane caused $5.9 billion (1998 USD, $6.8 billion 2005
   USD)) in damage to the United States and its possessions, and resulted
   in 603 fatalities. In the two months after Georges's final landfall,
   the American Red Cross spent $104 million (1998 USD, $120 million 2005
   USD) on relief aid through Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands,
   Florida, Louisiana, Alabama, and Mississippi, making Georges the
   costliest disaster aid in the program's 125-year history.

Leeward Islands

   Upon moving through the Leeward Islands, Georges brought strong winds
   and heavy rainfall, amounting to a maximum of 7.5 inches (190 mm) at
   St. John.

   In Antigua, strong winds caused severe property damage, mostly caused
   to roofs. 10-20% of houses were greatly impacted, including three
   schools. High winds during the passage of the hurricane downed
   telephone and power lines, causing loss of communication and power
   across much of the island. Between Barbuda and Antigua, Georges killed
   2 people and left 3,800 homeless.

   After passing through Antigua, Georges produced strong winds of up to
   115  mph (185  km/h) while passing over St. Kitts, downing power lines,
   telephone lines, and trees across the island. Lack of electricity
   resulted in damage to water facilities, as well. Georges's high winds
   caused extensive property damage, damaging 80-85% of the houses on the
   island, and destroying 20-25% of homes. Many schools, businesses,
   hospitals, and government buildings lost their roofs, while the airport
   experienced severe damage to its main terminal and control tower,
   limiting flights to the daytime. St. Kitts' economy was disrupted from
   severe agricultural losses, including the devastation of 50% of their
   sugar crop. In addition, damaged hotels and piers created a long-term
   impact through lack of tourism - an industry the island relies on. In
   all, Hurricane Georges caused 5 fatalities, left 3,000 homeless, and
   resulted in $445 million (1998 USD) in damage on the island.

   In the other part of the country, Nevis fared better. Like on St.
   Kitts, high winds downed power and telephone lines, damaging the water
   system there. 35% of homes on the island were damaged, though none were
   destroyed. Rainfall and debris killed several hundred livestock and
   seriously damaged coconut trees, amounting to $2.5 million (1998 USD)
   in agricultural damage. There were no casualties reported on the
   island, and damaged amounted to $39 million (1998 USD).

   In other nearby islands, Georges's impact was relatively minor. Power
   outages, flooding, and minor to moderate structural damage was common.

Puerto Rico

   Debris runoff in central Puerto Rico
   Enlarge
   Debris runoff in central Puerto Rico
   Damage from mudslides
   Enlarge
   Damage from mudslides

   On making landfall, Georges brought a 10 foot (3 m) storm surge, along
   with 20 foot (6 m) waves on top of it. The hurricane spawned
   2 tornadoes on the island, though they caused little damage. Georges
   dropped immense precipitation in the mountain regions, amounting to a
   maximum of 30.51 inches (775 mm) in Jayuya with many other locations
   reporting over 1 foot (300 mm). The mountain flooding drained off in
   the island's rivers, causing every river to overflow its banks. Near
   the coast, the surfeit of water carved new channels from the record
   discharge rate. The storm's strong winds caused beach erosion in many
   places along the coastline. Eroded beaches, flooding, and debris left
   many roads impassable or destroyed, isolating some villages on the
   western portion of the island. Over 22,000 people were sheltered in
   139 shelters in cities throughout the island. All experienced power
   outages, and after the storm passed through, lack of water and sewer
   systems was a serious problem.
   Puerto Rico Damage
   Enlarge
   Puerto Rico Damage

   Hurricane Georges was the first hurricane to cross the entire island
   since the San Ciprian Hurricane in 1932. Its large circulation brought
   fierce winds to the entire island, damaging 72,605 houses and
   destroying 28,005 homes. This left tens of thousands homeless after the
   storm's passage. High winds downed nearly half of the island's electric
   and telephone lines, leaving 96% of the population powerless and 8.4%
   of telephone customers without service. Lack of electricity greatly
   damaged the water system, resulting in the loss of water and sewers for
   75% of the island. Georges's deluge of rainfall caused significant
   damage to the agricultural industry, including the loss of 75% of its
   coffee crop, 95% of its banana or plantain crop, and 65% of its live
   poultry.
   Total rainfall in Puerto Rico from Georges
   Enlarge
   Total rainfall in Puerto Rico from Georges

   In all, Hurricane Georges caused $1.9 billion in damage (1998 USD, $2.2
   billion 2005 USD), but due to well-executed warnings there were no
   reported casualties.

   In the nearby small island of Culebra, Georges destroyed 74 houses and
   damaged 89 others, although damage estimates are not available there.

Hispaniola

   Though there are no recorded amounts, satellite-derived rainfall
   estimates show up to 39 inches (990 mm) of rain falling in the
   mountainous terrain of the countries. This heavy rainfall resulted in
   mudslides and flooding, killing a total of 589 people across the
   island.

Dominican Republic

   In the Dominican Republic, Georges brought strong winds and very heavy
   rains, along with a 7 foot (2 m) storm surge. Nearly 10  hours of
   continuous rainfall resulted in mudslides and overflown rivers across
   the mountainous country, damaging many cities along the southern
   coastline, including the capital. 120 mph (195 km/h) winds downed and
   uprooted trees across much of the country, littering streets with
   debris and mud. Thousands of houses were destroyed, while many were
   completely destroyed from the flooding and winds. The entire country
   was without electricity during the aftermath of the storm, damaging
   water and communication systems. Heavy wind damage and flooding caused
   extensive damage to the airport in Santo Domingo, restricting usage to
   military and non-commercial flights.

   Most impacted by Hurricane Georges was the agricultural industry. The
   areas hardest hit by the hurricane coincided with the country's main
   crop-growing areas, including the provinces around Santo Domingo. After
   a severe drought in 1997, extreme rainfall damaged around 470,000 acres
   (1,900 km²) of food crops, including various types of vegetables,
   fruits, and roots — some of the country's main diet food. Substantial
   amounts of tobacco and sugar plantations, the country's most important
   export crop, were severely damaged. The extreme flooding caused great
   losses in the poultry industry, an important economy in the area. The
   Dominican Republic had to import significant amounts of rice and other
   crops to compensate for the losses.

   Death toll reports were slow in the wake of the storm, but a total of
   380 people died from Hurricane Georges. Damage in the Dominican
   Republic amounted to $1.2 billion (1998  USD, $1.4 billion 2005 USD).

Haiti

   Upon reaching Haiti, Georges was a weakened hurricane, but it still
   brought heavy rainfall across the entire country. The capital city of
   Port au Prince was largely unharmed, with the exception of flooding in
   low-lying coastal areas, damaging the main commercial port. The rest of
   the country, however, experienced a significant number of mudslides due
   to deforestation along the mountains. These mudslides destroyed or
   severely damaged many houses, leaving 167,332 homeless. Damage was
   greatest along the northern coastline from Cap-Haitien to Gonaives due
   to the flooding and mudslides. Lack of electricity led to a total
   disruption of the water supply system, causing a decrease in sanitary
   conditions across the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere. In
   all, 209 people died in Haiti.

   Like in the Dominican Republic, the agricultural sector suffered
   extreme damage. After a severe drought in 1997, Georges's severe
   flooding stopped any chances of recovering quickly. Most of the
   country's significant crop land, including Artibonite Valley, suffered
   total losses. Up to 80% of banana plantations were lost, while
   vegetable, roots, tubers, and other food crops were ruined. In
   addition, thousands of small farm animals were either killed or lost.
   Total agricultural losses amounted to $179 million (1998 USD, $207
   million 2005 USD). The country requested food assistance in the
   aftermath of the hurricane to alleviate the serious losses.

Cuba

   Upon making landfall, Hurricane Georges produced torrential rainfall,
   amounting to a maximum of 24.41 inches (620 mm) at Limonar in the
   province of Guantánamo. Several other locations reported over a foot
   (300 mm) of precipitation as well. Storm surge of 4–6 feet (1–2 m) was
   expected along the eastern coastline, along with dangerous waves on top
   of the surge. Though winds were reduced by the time Georges hit Cuba,
   it still retained winds of 75 mph (120 km/h), along with stronger gusts
   in squalls.

   The hurricane's heavy rainfall resulted in mudslides along the
   mountainous terrain. This, combined with strong winds, damaged
   60,475 homes, of which 3,481 were completely destroyed. In the country,
   100,000 were left homeless due to Hurricane Georges. High winds downed
   power lines, trees, and telephone poles, leaving many in eastern Cuba
   without electricity in the aftermath of the storm. Along the coast,
   severe flooding washed out railroad and highway bridges. Though eastern
   Cuba was the area most affected, the central and western portion of the
   island, including Havana, experienced torrential rains and strong wind
   gusts. There, strong waves broke over the seawall, and caused heavy
   flood damage to some of the town's old buildings.

   Like in Puerto Rico and Hispaniola, the severe drought during the El
   Niño of 1997 exacerbated the flood's disruption to crops in eastern
   Cuba. The heavy rainfall from Georges damaged the crops greatly,
   despite the effort to harvest them prior to its arrival. Up to 70% of
   the plantain crop, a chief food in the country's diet, was destroyed.
   The sugarcane crop fared badly as well, limiting one of the country's
   important export crops. The coffee and cocoa plantations also suffered
   from the hurricane, further damaging the country's food supply.

   Well-executed evacuations and warnings limited the death toll to six,
   while damage amounted to $40 million (1998 USD, $46 million 2005 USD).

Bahamas

   Though Georges was forecast to move through the Bahamas, it passed to
   the south of the archipelago. It brought 70 mph (110 km/h) winds to
   Turks and Caicos Islands and South Andros, as well as precipitation in
   the storm's outer bands. Though damage was minimal, one person died in
   the country.

South Florida

   Downed trees in Key West
   Enlarge
   Downed trees in Key West
   Damage to the seawall
   Enlarge
   Damage to the seawall

   The eye of the storm passed near Key West about midday. Upon making
   landfall, Hurricane Georges brought a storm surge of up to 12 feet
   (3.6 m) in Tavernier, Florida, with similar but lesser amounts along
   the Florida Keys. The islands, some only 7 feet (2 m) high and
   300 yards (275 m) wide, are easily flooded, and with up to 10 foot
   (3 m) waves many parts of the Overseas Highway were under water. Strong
   winds downed palm trees and power lines, leaving all of the Keys
   without power. Georges's waves overturned 2 boats in Key West, damaged
   1,536 houses, and destroyed 173 homes, many of which were mobile homes.
   Rainfall amounts amounted to a maximum of 8.41 inches (210 mm) in
   Tavernier, while other locations reported lesser amounts. Damage in the
   Florida Keys amounted to $200 million (1998 USD, $231 million 2005
   USD).

   Further up the coast, the hurricane's outer bands produced light
   rainfall of up to 3 inches (80 mm). Strong winds knocked down power
   lines, leaving 200,000 without power in the Miami area. Damage was
   minimal, and there were no reported casualties.

Louisiana

   Chandeleur Islands before Georges
   Enlarge
   Chandeleur Islands before Georges

   Georges's strong storm surge caused extensive beach erosion and
   flooding on the Chandeleur Islands, the first line of protection for
   the coasts of Louisiana and Mississippi. The long island chain was
   reduced to a few banks of sand in the Gulf. Grand Gosier, the home to a
   flock of the endangered Brown Pelicans, experienced severe flooding,
   destroying their habitats.
   Chandeleur Islands after Georges
   Enlarge
   Chandeleur Islands after Georges

   Upon making landfall, Hurricane Georges brought a storm surge peaking
   at 8.9 feet (2.4 m) in Pointe a la Hache, Louisiana, along with higher
   waves on top of it. Located on the weaker side of the storm, rainfall
   totals were low, and amounted to a maximum of 3 inches (8 cm). Winds
   were generally light, peaking at 45 mph (70 km/h). Overall, damage was
   minimal in Louisiana. High winds downed power lines, leaving 160,000
   without electricity across the state. In the state, Hurricane Georges
   caused $25 million (1998 USD, $29 million 2005 USD) in damage, but no
   deaths due to well-executed evacuations.

Mississippi

   Total rainfall in the United States from Georges
   Enlarge
   Total rainfall in the United States from Georges

   Upon making landfall, Hurricane Georges brought a storm surge of up to
   8.9 feet (2.7 m) in Biloxi, Mississippi. While stalling over the
   southern portion of the state, it produced torrential rainfall,
   amounting to 16.7 inches (420 mm) in Pascagoula. The heavy flooding
   caused significant river overflowing, including the Tchoutacabouffa
   River at D'Iberville, which set a record crest of 19 feet (5.7 m). The
   overflown rivers in the southern portion of the state flooded homes and
   forced more to evacuate just days after the hurricane came through. In
   addition, squall lines spawned multiple tornadoes, damaging evacuation
   shelters in Pascagoula and Gautier.

   Beach erosion occurred along the coastline, resulting in some property
   damage on beach houses. Around Biloxi, coastal casinos and the
   shipyards experienced little from the storm. Inland, high winds and
   flooding caused extensive damage to homes. Georges's winds downed power
   lines, leaving 230,000 without power after the storm. After the storm,
   over 6,800 people stayed in 49 different shelters. One shelter in
   Forrest County was damaged, forcing the citizens to another camp. The
   shelters experienced roof damage and severe power outages, though one
   problem that could not be overcome was the language barrier with
   immigrants. Overall, Hurricane Georges caused $665 million (1998 USD,
   $770 million 2005 USD) in damage, though no deaths due to well-executed
   evacuations.

Alabama

   Upon making landfall, Georges brought a strong storm surge peaking at
   11.9 feet (3.6 m) in Fort Morgan, along with 25 foot (7.6 m) waves on
   top of it. While moving slowly through the state, it dropped torrential
   rainfall, peaking at 29.66 inches (75 cm) in Bay Minette. Outer squalls
   spawned tornadoes in the southeast portion of the state, though damage
   from them was minimal. Along the coastline, heavy rainfall and strong
   waves caused extensive property damage. In Gulf Shores, for example,
   251 houses, 16 apartment buildings, and 70 businesses experienced
   significant damage. On the barrier island, Dauphin Island, the
   hurricane destroyed 50 houses and left 40 uninhabitable. Further
   inland, high winds downed power lines and trees, leaving 177,000 people
   without power after the storm. 17 shelters housed 4,977 people in the
   aftermath of the storm. Damage to the buildings were minimal to
   non-existent, with the only direct effect from the hurricane being a
   brief interruption of electricity.

   Overall, damage in Alabama amounted to $125 million (1998 USD, $145
   million 2005 USD). Freshwater flooding in Mobile resulted in one death,
   the only death in the United States.

Florida Panhandle

   Upon making landfall, Hurricane Georges produced a storm surge of up to
   10 feet (3 m), with higher waves on top of it. As it moved slowly
   through the northern Gulf Coast, it produced torrential rainfall
   amounting to a maximum of 38 inches (960 mm) in Munson, with other
   locations reporting over 20 inches (510 mm). Winds were light, peaking
   at 50 mph (80 km/h) along the coast, though Eglin Air Force Base
   recorded a wind gust of 90 mph (145 km/h). Outer squalls produced a
   tornado outbreak of 28 twisters, most of which occurred in northwestern
   Florida.

   6,525 people stayed in 34 shelters in the Florida Panhandle, though the
   shelters experienced little from the hurricane. Damage amounted to
   $100 million (1998 USD, $116 million 2005 USD), though no deaths were
   reported.

Georgia

   In Georgia, the remnants of Georges dropped 4 inches of rain across
   Franklin County. In Appling County however, rainfall of 5-7 inches
   closed several roads and left $10,000 (1998 USD) in damage. Atkinson
   County also reported flood damage of $15,000 (1998 USD) in damage.
   Stewart County, received over 5 inches of rain which caused extensive
   flooding that left several roads impassable. Damage from the storm
   totaled to $33,000 (1998 USD). In the town of Lumpkin, a funnel cloud
   was reported but there were no damage. In addition to the flooding, the
   remnants of Georges spawned numerous tornadoes across the state of
   Georgia. In Randolph County, an F1 tornado uprooted several trees and
   injured one person. Damage from the tornado totaled up to $500,000
   dollars (1998 USD)

Retirement

   The name Georges was retired in the spring of 1999 and will never again
   be used in the Atlantic basin. It was replaced with Gaston in the 2004
   season.

Trivia

   From September 25 to September 26, Hurricane Georges was one of four
   simultaneous hurricanes in the Atlantic basin. Previously, the last
   recorded occurrence of this was in the 1893 season.

   Georges greatly affected the 1998 college football season. Undefeated
   UCLA had been originally been scheduled to play the University of Miami
   at the Miami Orange Bowl in late September, but the game was postponed
   until December due to the danger that Georges posed to Florida. UCLA
   entered the game against Miami in December with a #1 ranking and a 10-0
   record, but were defeated by the Hurricanes, eliminating them from the
   national championship race.

   Hurricane Georges was also mentioned in comedian Ron White's comedy
   special, They Call Me Tater Salad, as was Hurricane Carla.

   The wreck of the Eagle at the Florida Keys was torn in two parts by
   Georges.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hurricane_Georges"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
