   #copyright

Hurricane John (2006)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Natural Disasters

   CAPTION: Hurricane John

   Category 4 hurricane ( SSHS)
   Hurricane John on August 31.
   Hurricane John on August 31.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Formed August 28, 2006
   Dissipated September 4, 2006
   Highest
   winds
   135 mph (215 km/h) (1-minute sustained)
   Lowest pressure 948 hPa ( mbar)
   Damage $60.8 million (2006 USD)
   Fatalities 6 direct
   Areas
   affected Guerrero, Michoacán, Baja California Sur, Arizona, California,
   New Mexico, Texas
   Part of the
   2006 Pacific hurricane season

   Hurricane John was the tenth named storm, sixth hurricane, and fourth
   major hurricane of the 2006 Pacific hurricane season. The hurricane
   threatened large portions of Mexico's western coastline, resulting in
   the evacuation of tens of thousands of people. Hurricane John developed
   on August 28 from a tropical wave to the south of Mexico. Favorable
   conditions allowed the storm to quickly intensify, and John attained
   peak winds of 135 mph (215 km/h) on August 30. Eyewall replacement
   cycles and land interaction with western Mexico weakened the hurricane,
   and John made landfall on southeastern Baja California with winds of
   110 mph (180 km/h) on September 1. It slowly weakened as it moved
   northwestward through Baja California, and dissipated on September 4.
   Moisture from the remnants of the storm entered the southwest United
   States.

   In coastal portions of western Mexico, strong winds downed trees, while
   heavy rain resulted in mudslides. Hurricane John caused moderate damage
   on Baja California, including destroying 4 houses and thousands of
   flimsy shacks. The hurricane killed six people in Mexico. In the
   southwest United States, moisture from the remnants of John produced
   heavy rainfall. The rainfall aided drought conditions in portions of
   northern Texas, though it was detrimental in locations that had
   received above-normal rainfall throughout the year.

Storm history

   Storm path
   Enlarge
   Storm path

   A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on August 17. It entered
   the eastern Pacific Ocean on August 24, and quickly showed signs of
   organization. That night, Dvorak classifications began on the system
   while it was located just west of Costa Rica, and it moved
   west-northwestward at 10-15 mph (15-25 km/h). Conditions appeared
   favorable for further development,, and convection increased late on
   the 26th over the area of low pressure. Early on August 27, the system
   became much better organized while located 250 miles (400 km)
   south-southwest of Guatemala, though convection remained minimal while
   located 470 miles (750 km) southeast of Acapulco. Early on August 28,
   banding increased within its organizing convection, and the system
   developed into Tropical Depression Eleven-E.
   Hurricane John as it was rapidly intensifying
   Enlarge
   Hurricane John as it was rapidly intensifying

   Due to low amounts of vertical shear, very warm waters, and abundant
   moisture, steady intensification was forecast, and the depression
   strengthened to Tropical Storm John later on August 28. Deep convection
   continued to develop over the storm, while an eye feature developed
   within the expanding central dense overcast. The storm continued to
   intensify, and John attained hurricane status on August 29 while
   located 190 miles (305 km) south-southeast of Acapulco. Banding
   features continued to increase as the hurricane moved
   west-northwestward around the southwest periphery of a mid- to
   upper-level ridge over northern Mexico. The hurricane underwent rapid
   intensification, and John attained major hurricane status twelve hours
   after after becoming a hurricane. Shortly thereafter, the eye became
   obscured, and the intensity remained at 115 mph (185 km/h) due to an
   eyewall replacement cycle. Another eye formed, and based on
   Reconnaissance data, it is estimated the hurricane strengthened to
   attain Category 4 status on August 30 while located 160 miles (260 km)
   west of Acapulco, or 95 miles (155 km) south of Lázaro Cárdenas,
   Michoacán. Hours later, the hurricane underwent another eyewall
   replacement cycle, and subsequently weakened to Category 3 status as it
   paralleled the Mexican coastline a short distance offshore.
   John just prior to landfall on Baja California
   Enlarge
   John just prior to landfall on Baja California

   Due to land interaction and its eyewall replacement cycle of its
   interaction with land, Hurricane John weakened to a 105 mph (170 km/h)
   hurricane by late on August 31, but restrengthened to a major hurricane
   shortly after as its eye became better defined. After completing
   another eyewall replacement cycle, the hurricane weakened again to
   Category 2 status, and made landfall on Cabo del Este on the southern
   tip of Baja California as a 110 mph (180 km/h) hurricane on September
   1. John passed near La Paz as a weakening Category 1 hurricane on
   September 2, and weakened to a tropical storm shortly thereafter over
   land. John continued to weaken, and late on September 3 the system
   deteriorated to a tropical depression while still over land. By
   September 4, most of the convection decoupled from the circulation
   towards mainland Mexico, and a clear circulation had not been
   discernable for 24 hours. Based on the disorganization of the system,
   the National Hurricane Centre issued its last advisory on the system.

Preparations

   The Mexican army and emergency services were stationed near the coast,
   while public schools in and around Acapulco were cancelled. Officials
   in Acapulco advised low-lying residents to be on alert, and also urged
   boats to return to harbour. Authorities in the twin resort cities of
   Ixtapa and Zihuatanejo closed the port to small ocean craft. Government
   officials in the state of Jalisco declared a mandatory evacuation for
   8,000 citizens in low-lying areas to 900 temporary shelters. Temporary
   shelters were also set up near Acapulco. The state of Michoacán was on
   a yellow alert, the middle of a five level alert system. Carnival
   Cruise Lines diverted the path of one cruise ship travelling along the
   Pacific waters off Mexico.

   On August 31, the Baja California Sur state government ordered the
   evacuation of over 10,000 residents. Those who refuse to follow the
   evacuation order will be forced to evacuate by the army. Shelters have
   been set up to allow local residents and tourists to ride out the
   storm. Just weeks after a major flood in the area, officials evacuated
   hundreds of citizens in Las Presas in northern Mexico area near a dam.
   All public schools in the area were closed, as well.

   The National Weather Service issued flood watches and warnings for
   portions of Texas and the southern two-thirds of New Mexico.

Impact

Mexico

   The powerful winds of Hurricane John produced heavy surf and downed
   trees near Acapulco. The hurricane produced a 10 foot (3 m) storm surge
   in Acapulco, which flooded coastal roads. In addition, John caused
   heavy rainfall along the western coast of Mexico, peaking at 12.5
   inches in Los Planes, Jalisco. The rainfall resulted in mudslides in
   the Costa Chica region of Guerrero, leaving around 70 communities
   isolated.

   In La Paz, capital of Baja California Sur, the hurricane downed 40
   power poles. Authorities cut off the power supply to the city to
   prevent electrocutions from downed wires. Strong winds downed trees and
   destroyed many advertisement signs.Heavy rainfall totaling to over 20
   inches (500 mm) in isolated areas resulted in ankle-deep flooding,
   closing many roads and the airport in La Paz. In La Paz, 500 families
   experienced damage to their homes, of which 200 were completely
   destroyed. The combination of winds and rain destroyed thousands of
   flimsy houses along Baja California. The rainfall also destroyed large
   areas of crops, and also killed many livestock. The rainfall caused the
   Iguagil dam in Comondu to overflow, isolating 15 towns due to 4 feet
   (1.5 m) floodwaters. In the coastal city of Mulegé, flash flooding
   caused widespread damage throughout the town and the death of a United
   States citizen. Over 250 homes were damaged or destroyed in the town,
   leaving many people homeless. Severe flooding blocked portions of
   Mexican Federal Highway 1, and also caused damage to an aqueduct in the
   region.

   In all, Hurricane John destroyed hundreds of houses, blew off the roofs
   of 160 houses in Baja California, and killed six people. Damage in
   Mexico amounted to $60.8 million (2006 USD, 663 million 2006 MXN).

   In Ciudad Juarez across the border from El Paso, Texas, rainfall from
   the storm's remnants flooded 20 neighborhoods, downed power lines, and
   resulted in several traffic accidents. Rainfall from John, combined
   with continual precipitation since two weeks prior to the storm, left
   thousands of people homeless.

United States

   John's moisture over the Southwestern United States.
   Enlarge
   John's moisture over the Southwestern United States.

   The remnants of John produced moderate amounts of rainfall across the
   southwest United States, including more than 3 inches (70 mm) in El
   Paso, Texas. The rainfall flooded many roads, forcing the closure of
   some roads including a 1/2 mile (800 m) portion of Interstate 10 in El
   Paso. A slick runway at El Paso International Airport delayed a
   Continental Airlines jet when its tires were stuck in mud. Rainfall
   from John in El Paso, combined with an unusually wet year, resulted in
   twice the normal annual rainfall, and caused 2006 to be the ninth
   wettest year on record. In northern Texas, moisture from the storm
   combined with cold front produced heavy rainfall peaking at 4.84 inches
   to the southwest of Sundown, helping alleviate a severe drought and
   causing Lake Alan Henry to overflow.

   Moisture derived from John also produced rainfall across southern New
   Mexico, peaking at 5.25 inches at Ruidoso. The rainfall overflowed
   rivers, forcing people to evacuate along the Rio Ruidoso. The rainfall
   also caused isolated road flooding. Rainfall in New Mexico cancelled an
   annual wine festival in Las Cruces and caused muddy conditions at the
   All American Futurity at the Ruidoso Downs, the biggest day of horse
   racing in New Mexico. Flooding was severe in Mesquite, Hatch, and
   Rincon, where many homes experienced four feet of flooding and mud.
   Some homeowners lost all they owned. Tropical moisture from the storm
   also produced rainfall in Arizona and southern California. In
   California, the rainfall produced eight separate mudslides, trapping 19
   vehicles but causing no injuries.

Aftermath

   Branches of the Mexican Red Cross in Guerrero, Oaxaca and Michoacán
   were been put on alert. The organization's national emergency response
   team was on stand-by to assist the most affected areas. Navy
   helicopters delivered food and water to remote areas of Baja
   California. The Mexican Red Cross dispatched 2,000 food parcels to the
   southern tip of Baja California. In the city of Mulegé, gas supply,
   which was necessary to run generators, was low, drinking water was
   gone, and the airstrip was covered with mud. Many homeless residents
   initially stayed with friends or government-run shelters. Throughout
   the Baja California peninsula, thousands remained without water or
   electricity by two days after the storm, though a pilot from Phoenix
   prepared to fly to the disaster area with 100 gallons of water. Other
   pilots were expected to execute similar flights, as well. The office of
   Baja California Sur Tourism stated that minimal damage occurred to the
   tourism infrastructure, with only minimal delays to airports, roads,
   and maritime facilities. The Episcopal Relief and Development delivered
   food, clothing, medicine, and transportation to about 100 families, and
   gave matresses to about 80 families.

   Many residents in Tucson, including over 50 students, delivered
   supplies to flood victims in New Mexico, including clothing and other
   donations.
   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hurricane_John_%282006%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
