   #copyright

Hurricane Alex (2004)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Natural Disasters

   CAPTION: Hurricane Alex (2004)

   Category 3 hurricane ( SSHS)
   Satellite image of Hurricane Alex just off the Outer Banks of North
   Carolina on August 3.
   Satellite image of Hurricane Alex just off the Outer Banks of North
   Carolina on August 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Formed July 31, 2004
   Dissipated August 6, 2004
   Highest
   winds
   120 mph (190 km/h) (1-minute sustained)
   Lowest pressure 957 mbar ( hPa)
   Damage $7.5 million (2004  USD)
   Fatalities 1 direct
   Areas
   affected Outer Banks of North Carolina
   Part of the
   2004 Atlantic hurricane season

   Hurricane Alex was the first named storm, the first hurricane, and the
   first major hurricane of the 2004 Atlantic hurricane season. It never
   made landfall, but the centre approached within 10 miles (16 km) of the
   North Carolina coast. Alex, the first storm of the season, formed
   unusually late in the season, the 5th latest since 1954. Unusually,
   Alex strengthened to a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson
   Hurricane Scale while off the coast of New England.

   The hurricane produced light damage in the Outer Banks, primarily from
   flooding and high winds. Over 100 houses were damaged, while numerous
   cars were disabled from the flooding. Damage totaled about $7.5 million
   (2004 USD). Alex produced strong waves and rip tides along the East
   Coast of the United States, causing one death and several injuries.

Storm history

   Storm path
   Enlarge
   Storm path

   A weak surface trough, located to the west of an upper level low,
   developed convection to the east of the Bahamas on July 26. A tropical
   wave entered the area two days later, resulting in an increase of
   convective organization and area. It moved to the northwest and
   steadily organized, developing a surface area of low pressure on the
   30th. On July 31, the system continued to organize, and developed into
   Tropical Depression One while located 200 miles (320 km) to the east of
   Jacksonville, Florida.

   As the depression drifted erratically, the system remained weak, due to
   its large circulation and lack of deep convection near the centre. The
   centre relocated to the south , closer to the centre. An approaching
   upper level trough lessened the shear over the system, allowing the
   depression to intensify into Tropical Storm Alex on August 1. The
   trough also caused Alex to increase its forward motion to the
   northeast. Deep convection continued to build over the centre due to
   low shear and warm waters from the Gulf Stream, and Alex intensified
   into a hurricane on August 3 while 75 miles (120 km) southeast of Cape
   Fear, North Carolina. Hurricane Alex continued to strengthen, and
   attained Category 2 hurricane status just hours after becoming a
   hurricane. The hurricane approached the Outer Banks of North Carolina,
   coming within 10 miles (16 km) of Cape Hatteras later on the 3rd. The
   western eyewall was over land, but the centre remained offshore.
   Alex strengthening over Gulf Stream
   Enlarge
   Alex strengthening over Gulf Stream

   Alex turned to the east-northeast after passing the Outer Banks in
   response to becoming embedded within the west-southwesterly flow. The
   hurricane briefly weakened to a Category 1, but restrengthened due to
   warm waters of the Gulf Stream. Water temperatures remained 2º C above
   normal, resulting in Alex to intensify into a 120 mph (195 km/h) major
   hurricane on August 5 while only 450 miles (710 km) south of Halifax,
   Nova Scotia. Due to low vertical shear and favorable conditions, Alex
   remained a Category 3 hurricane until passing over cooler waters late
   on the 5th while 290 miles (465 km) south of Newfoundland. Alex rapidly
   weakened, degrading into tropical storm status on August 6. Later on
   the 6th, Alex became extratropical while 950 miles east of Cape Race,
   Newfoundland, and lost its identity shortly thereafter.

Preparations

   Initially, forecasters believed Alex would remain weak, with the storm
   making landfall as a minimal tropical storm. However, when
   strengthening became apparent, the National Hurricane Centre issued a
   Hurricane Warning from Cape Lookout to Oregon Inlet about 20 hours
   before hurricane conditions were experienced. In addition, a tropical
   storm warning existed for much of the North Carolina coastline as Alex
   moved by.

   Despite Tropical Storm Warnings, tourists on the Outer Banks remained
   to enjoy the beach. However, many planned to leave if Alex would come
   closer or become stronger. Because Alex was expected to be relatively
   minor, about 3,500 tourists remained on the Outer Banks. In addition,
   there was no evacuation order. Due to Hurricane Isabel hitting the area
   less than a year earlier, officials recommended residents to take
   precautions for the approaching hurricane. The National Weather Service
   in Morehead City issued a flash flood watch a day before the hurricane
   moved passed the Outer Banks. They also issued flash flooding warnings
   on the 3rd for Craven and Carteret Counties.

   In preparation for the hurricane, the Cape Lookout National Seashore
   was closed and evacuated. The National Park Service also closed Cape
   Point Campground.

Impact

   Alex rainfall totals
   Enlarge
   Alex rainfall totals

   The worst of Hurricane Alex's effects occurred along the Outer Banks,
   primarily near Ocracoke. Damage totaled to $7.5 million, and was
   limited to flooded cars and houses. The hurricane caused strong waves
   and rip currents for days, causing one death and several injuries.

North Carolina

   While drifting off the coast of Florida, Alex produced rip currents and
   strong waves along the North Carolina, resulting in nine lifeguard
   rescues from the surf. Upon moving by the Outer Banks, a storm surge of
   up to 6 feet (1.8 m) occurred on the Pamlico Sound side of Buxton and
   Ocracoke Village. The flooding on Ocracoke Island was the worst since
   Hurricane Gloria nineteen years earlier. Elsewhere on the Outer Banks,
   waters rose 2 to 4 feet (.6 to 1.2 m) above normal. Rainfall directly
   along the coast amounted to over 5 inches (127 mm), while Okracoke
   experienced 7.55 inches (192 mm). Maximum sustained winds peaked at 77
   mph (124 km/h), while gusts peaked at 105 mph (169 km/h) in Hatteras
   Village. Beach erosion was minor along much of North Carolina's
   coastline, with the exception of Okracoke Island where erosion was
   significant.

   Cape Fear experienced minor beach erosion. The erosion, combined with
   waves, washed out a portion of a roadway. The heavy rainfall in the
   Outer Banks disabled over 200 cars, and flooded nearly 500. Strong wind
   gusts left around 10,000 buildings without power . Many places were not
   restored for 2 to 3 days after the storm. Wind and storm surge damaged
   over 100 houses and buildings. Damage totaled to about $7.5 million
   (2004 USD). Two days after the storm passed, strong rip currents and
   waves off of Nags Head, North Carolina drowned a man, the only direct
   casualty from the storm.

Elsewhere

   Alex's outer rainbands produced heavy rainfall across Virginia, peaking
   at over 7 inches (178 mm) in the centre of the state. The rainfall
   caused localized flooding throughout the state, but no reported damage.

   In Rehoboth Beach, Delaware, rip currents produced by the storm injured
   three people. A few young children had to be rescued when they were
   trapped by a jetty. In New Jersey, the strong surf and rip currents
   hospitalized at least five swimmers.

   Alex's extratropical remnants sank the Pink Lady, a rowboat carrying
   four British rowers attempting to break the record for fastest crossing
   from St. John's, Newfoundland to Falmouth, Cornwall. They were rescued
   by a Danish cargo ship, and injuries were limited to a mild concussion
   and a case of hypothermia. The rowers were roughly two weeks and 370
   miles (595 km) from their destination. The group had been on track to
   break the 1896 record of 54 days by 10 days.

Aftermath

   On Ocracoke Island, officials ordered for the evacuation of the
   thousands of tourists who stayed, believing that keeping tourists in
   the island would hinder cleanup efforts. The tourists were evacuated in
   school buses to Hatteras Island, where they could rent a car if needed.
   The island was re-opened to visitors on the 6th, three days after the
   storm passed through. Dare County requested aid from the National Guard
   for the cleanup process, while the North Carolina Department of
   Transportation was ready to clear the roads once the storm exited the
   area.

   Due to the low damage, the name Alex was not retired and it will next
   be used in 2010.

Records

   Category 3 Hurricane Alex north of 40º North
   Enlarge
   Category 3 Hurricane Alex north of 40º North

   Alex marked the fifth-latest start to a hurricane season since 1954.
   The latest start to a hurricane season since 1954 was Hurricane Anita
   of the 1977 season, forming on August 29. However, during the 1914
   season, the only known storm of the season formed on September 14.

   Alex is only the second hurricane on record to have reached Category 3
   strength north of 38°N latitude. The other storm was Hurricane Ellen in
   the 1973 Atlantic hurricane season; Alex was the stronger of the two.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hurricane_Alex_%282004%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
