   #copyright

Hurricane Floyd

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Storms

   CAPTION: Hurricane Floyd

   Category 4 hurricane ( SSHS)
   Hurricane Floyd over The Bahamas on September 14, 1999
   Hurricane Floyd over The Bahamas on September 14, 1999
     __________________________________________________________________

   Formed September 7, 1999
   Dissipated September 19, 1999
   Highest
   winds
   155  mph (250  km/h) (1-minute sustained)
   Lowest pressure 921  mbar ( hPa)
   Damage $4.5 billion (1999 USD)
   $5.1 billion (2005 USD)
   Fatalities 57 direct, 20–30 indirect
   Areas
   affected The Bahamas, U.S. East Coast from Florida to Maine
   (particularly North Carolina), Atlantic Canada
   Part of the
   1999 Atlantic hurricane season

   Hurricane Floyd was the sixth named storm, fourth hurricane, and third
   major hurricane in the 1999 Atlantic hurricane season. The Cape
   Verde-type hurricane formed off the coast of Africa and lasted from
   September 7 to September 19, peaking in strength as a very strong
   Category 4 hurricane — just short of the highest possible rating — on
   the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale. It was among the largest Atlantic
   hurricanes of its strength ever recorded.

   Floyd struck The Bahamas at peak strength, causing heavy damage. It
   then paralleled the East Coast of the United States, causing massive
   evacuations and costly preparations. The storm weakened significantly,
   however, before making landfall in North Carolina as a Category 2
   hurricane, and caused further damage as it traveled up the Mid-Atlantic
   region and into New England.

   The hurricane produced torrential rainfall in eastern North Carolina,
   adding more rain to an area hit by Hurricane Dennis just weeks earlier.
   The rains caused widespread flooding over a period of several weeks;
   nearly every river basin in the eastern part of the state exceeded
   500-year flood levels. In total, Floyd was responsible for 57
   fatalities and $4.5 billion ($5.1 billion in 2005 U.S. dollars) in
   damage, mostly in North Carolina.

Storm history

   Storm path
   Enlarge
   Storm path

   Floyd originated as a tropical wave that exited the coast of Africa on
   September 2. It moved steadily westward and remained disorganized and
   devoid of deep convection until September 7, when a curved band of deep
   convection developed over the centre in response to a developing
   anticyclone. At this point, the National Hurricane Centre designated it
   as Tropical Depression Eight, while it was approximately 1,000 miles
   (1600 km) east of the Lesser Antilles. A strong ridge of high pressure
   to its north forced the developing tropical cyclone westward over
   warmer waters, allowing it to strengthen to Tropical Storm Floyd on the
   8th.
   Satellite image of Hurricane Floyd
   Enlarge
   Satellite image of Hurricane Floyd

   Although a large storm, Floyd initially lacked a well-defined inner
   core, resulting in slow strengthening and preventing rapid
   intensification. On September 10 it organized enough to reach hurricane
   status, and on the 11th Floyd approached major hurricane strength with
   winds of 110 mph (175 km/h) while north of the Leeward Islands. The
   central Atlantic upper tropospheric trough, along with an upper-level
   low in the eastern Caribbean Sea, produced shear over the hurricane and
   caused its winds to weaken to 85 mph (135 km/h). A turn to the west,
   caused by building of high pressures, was followed by a period of rapid
   intensification: in 24 hours maximum sustained winds increased from
   110 mph (175 km/h) to 155 mph (250 km/h), while the pressure dropped to
   921  mbar ( hPa) by morning on the 13th. One contributor to the
   intensification was the high oceanic heat content along the storm's
   path.
   Hurricane Floyd at its North Carolina landfall
   Enlarge
   Hurricane Floyd at its North Carolina landfall

   Hurricane Floyd remained just below Category 5 status on the
   Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale for 12 hours while crossing the Bahamas,
   making landfalls on Eleuthera and Abaco islands, before an eyewall
   replacement cycle weakened it to a Category 3 hurricane with winds of
   120 mph (195 km/h). The new, larger eyewall contracted slightly, and
   the hurricane briefly re-intensified to Category 4 status. A strong
   mid- to upper-level trough eroded the western portion of the
   high-pressure ridge, steering Floyd to the northwest. It paralleled the
   eastern Florida coast 110 miles (175 km) off shore, and steadily
   weakened because of entrainment of dry air and upper-level shear. The
   storm remained extremely large, however; at its peak, tropical
   storm-force winds spanned a diameter of 580 miles (935 km), making
   Floyd one of the largest Atlantic hurricanes of its intensity ever
   recorded.

   Floyd accelerated to the north and northeast, and weakened greatly to a
   Category 2 hurricane with 105 mph (165 km/h) winds at its Cape Fear
   landfall on September 16. After crossing over North Carolina and
   southeastern Virginia, it briefly re-entered the western Atlantic Ocean
   before reaching Long Island on the 17th. The storm gradually lost its
   tropical characteristics due to an approaching frontal zone and became
   extratropical over southern Maine late on the 17th. The extratropical
   storm continued to the northeast, and after passing over the Canadian
   Maritimes, it was absorbed by a cold front to the east of Newfoundland.

Preparations

   Although Floyd's track prediction was above average while out at sea,
   the forecasts as it approached the coastline were merely average
   compared to forecasts from the previous ten years. The official
   forecasts did not predict Floyd's northward track nor its significant
   weakening before landfall. Nearly all of the East Coast, from Florida
   City, Florida, to Plymouth, Massachusetts, was under a Hurricane
   Warning at some point; however, only a fraction of this area actually
   received hurricane-force winds. The last time such widespread hurricane
   warnings occurred was during Hurricane Donna in 1960, although in that
   storm the warnings were accurate.
   Visual comparison of Floyd with Hurricane Andrew while at similar
   positions and nearly identical intensities
   Enlarge
   Visual comparison of Floyd with Hurricane Andrew while at similar
   positions and nearly identical intensities

   Initial fears were of a direct hit as a large Category 4 hurricane in
   Florida, potentially costlier and deadlier than Hurricane Andrew had
   been in 1992. In preparation for a potentially catastrophic landfall,
   more than one million Florida residents were told to evacuate, of which
   272,000 were in Miami-Dade County. U.S. President Bill Clinton declared
   a federal state of emergency in both Florida and Georgia in
   anticipation of the storm's approach. As the storm turned to the north,
   more people were evacuated as a progressively larger area was
   threatened. The massive storm caused the largest peacetime evacuation
   ever in the U.S., with around 2.6 million evacuating coastal areas in
   Florida, Georgia, and the Carolinas.

   With the storm predicted to hit near Cape Canaveral with winds of over
   140 mph (225 km/h), all but 80 of Kennedy Space Centre's 12,500-man
   workforce were evacuated. The hangars that house three space shuttles
   can withstand winds of only 105 mph (170 km/h), and a direct hit could
   have resulted in potentially billions of dollars in damage of space
   equipment, draining funds of an already money-strained government
   organization. In the theoretical scenario, the damage would be caused
   by water, always a potential problem in an area only nine feet above
   sea level. If water entered the facility, it would damage the
   electronics as well as requiring a complete inspection of all hardware.
   When Floyd actually passed by the area, Kennedy Space Centre only
   reported light winds with minor water intrusion. Damage was minor
   overall, and was repaired easily.

   A hurricane warning was issued for the North Carolina coastline 27
   hours prior to landfall. However, due to the size of the storm, initial
   forecasts predicted nearly all of the state would be affected in one
   form or another. School systems and businesses as far west as Asheville
   shut down for the day landfall was predicted, but, as it turned out,
   only the Coastal Plain sustained significant damage; much of the state
   west of Raleigh escaped unscathed.

Impact

   CAPTION: Death toll by area

   State/country  Deaths
   The Bahamas    1
   North Carolina 35
   Virginia       3
   Delaware       2
   Pennsylvania   6
   New Jersey     6
   New York       2
   Connecticut    1
   Vermont        1
       Total        57

   With a death toll of 57, Hurricane Floyd was the deadliest United
   States hurricane since Hurricane Agnes in 1972. The storm also was one
   of the costliest in the nation's history, amounting to $4.5 billion
   (1999 USD; $5.1 billion in 2005 U.S. dollars). Most of the deaths and
   damage were from inland, freshwater flooding in eastern North Carolina.

Bahamas

   Hurricane Floyd lashed the Bahamas with winds of 155 mph (250 km/h) and
   waves up to 50 feet (15 m) in height. A 20-foot (6 m) storm surge
   inundated many islands with over five feet (1.5 m) of water throughout.
   The wind and waves toppled power and communication lines, severely
   disrupting electricity and telephone services for days. Damage was
   greatest at Abaco Island, Cat Island, San Salvador Island, and
   Eleuthera Island, where Floyd uprooted trees and destroyed a
   significant number of houses. Numerous restaurants, hotels, shops, and
   homes were devastated, severely limiting in the recovery period tourism
   on which many rely for economic well-being. Damaged water systems left
   tens of thousands across the archipelago without water, electricity, or
   food. Despite the damage, however, few deaths were reported, as only
   one person drowned in Freeport, and there were few injuries reported.

   To help the affected citizens, the Bahamian Red Cross Society opened 41
   shelters, though within one week many returned home. The Bahamas
   required $435,000 in aid following the storm, much of it in food
   parcels. The Inter-American Development Bank loaned $21 million to the
   archipelago to restore bridges, roads, seawalls, docks, and other
   building projects in the aftermath of the hurricane.

Southeastern United States

   Although over a million Florida residents were evacuated, the state was
   only lightly affected by Hurricane Floyd. Strong waves and tropical
   storm-force winds resulted in significant beach erosion on the east
   coast of Florida, as well as the loss of some boat piers in Brevard and
   Volusia Counties. Moderate rainfall occurred along the coastline,
   amounting to a maximum of 3.2 inches (81 mm) in Sanford. Floyd's winds
   downed hundreds of trees, damaging 357 houses. Damage in northeast
   Florida amounted to $46.5 million, a fraction of what was originally
   expected.

   The states of Georgia and South Carolina, although threatened by the
   storm, were largely spared when it turned northward. Some areas of
   eastern South Carolina reported up to 16 inches (400 mm) of rain.

North Carolina

   Coastal property damage at Pine Knoll Shores, North Carolina
   Enlarge
   Coastal property damage at Pine Knoll Shores, North Carolina

   North Carolina received the brunt of the storm's destruction. In all,
   Hurricane Floyd caused 35 fatalities in North Carolina, much of them
   from freshwater flooding, as well as billions in damage.
   Radar imagery of Hurricane Floyd making landfall in North Carolina.
   Enlarge
   Radar imagery of Hurricane Floyd making landfall in North Carolina.

   The storm surge from the large hurricane amounted to 9–10 feet
   (2.7–3 m) along the southeastern portion of the state. The hurricane
   also spawned numerous tornadoes, most of which caused only minor
   damage. Damage to power lines left over 500,000 customers without
   electricity at some point during the storm's passage.

   Just weeks prior to Floyd hitting, Hurricane Dennis brought up to
   15 inches (38 cm) of rain to southeastern North Carolina. When
   Hurricane Floyd moved across the state in early September, it produced
   torrential rainfall, amounting to a maximum of 19.06 inches (48 cm) in
   Wilmington. Though it moved quickly, the extreme rainfall was due to
   Floyd's interaction with an approaching cold front across the area.

   Extensive flooding led to overflowing rivers; nearly every river basin
   in eastern North Carolina reached 500 year or greater flood levels.
   Flooding occurred very slowly as the rainfall accumulated in rivers and
   moved downstream; some areas did not reach peak flood levels for
   several weeks after the storm (see flood graphic at right). The passage
   of Hurricane Irene four weeks later contributed an additional six
   inches (150 mm) of rain over the still-saturated area, causing further
   flooding.
   Flooded areas from Floyd along the Tar and  Neuse rivers
        Flooded areas along the Tar and Neuse Rivers
    — as of September 17
    — as of September 23
    — as of September 30

   The Tar River suffered the worst flooding, exceeding 500-year flood
   levels along its lower stretches; it crested 24 feet (7.3 m) above
   flood stage. Flooding began in Rocky Mount, as much as 30% of which was
   underwater for several days. In Tarboro, much of the downtown was under
   several feet of water. Nearby, the historic town of Princeville was
   largely destroyed when the waters of the Tar poured over the town's
   levee, covering the town with over 20 feet (6 m) of floodwater for ten
   days. Further downstream, Greenville suffered very heavy flooding;
   damages in Pitt County alone were estimated at $1.6 billion (1999 USD).
   Washington, where the peak flood level was observed, was likewise
   devastated.

   The Neuse River, Roanoke River, Waccamaw River, and New River exceeded
   500-year flood levels, although damage was lower in these areas
   (compared to the Tar River) because of lower population densities.
   Because most of the Cape Fear River basin was west of the peak rainfall
   areas, the city of Wilmington was spared the worst flooding despite
   having the highest localized rainfall; however, the Northeast Cape Fear
   River (a tributary) did exceed 500-year flood levels. Of the state's
   rivers, only the Lumber River escaped catastrophic flooding.

   Rainfall and strong winds affected many homes across the state,
   destroying 7,000, leaving 17,000 uninhabitable, and damaging 56,000.
   Ten thousand people resided in temporary shelters following the storm.
   The extensive flooding resulted in significant crop damage. As quoted
   by North Carolina Secretary of Health and Human Services H. David
   Bruton, "Nothing since the Civil War has been as destructive to
   families here. The recovery process will be much longer than the
   water-going-down process." Around 31,000 jobs were lost from over
   60,000 businesses through the storm, causing nearly $4 billion in lost
   business revenue. In much of the affected area, officials urged people
   to either boil water or buy bottled water during Floyd's aftermath.

   In contrast to the problems eastern North Carolina experienced, much of
   the western portion of the state remained under a severe drought.

Virginia

   Flooding in Franklin, Virginia
   Enlarge
   Flooding in Franklin, Virginia

   As in North Carolina, Floyd produced torrential rainfall in Virginia,
   amounting to a peak of 16.57 inches (42 cm) in Newport News. The
   rainfall led to overflowing rivers in the Chowan River Basin, some of
   which exceeded 500-year flood levels. The Blackwater River reached
   100-year flood levels and flooded Franklin with 12 feet (3.6 m) of
   water. Extensive road damage occurred there, isolating the area from
   the rest of the state. Some 182 businesses and 150 houses were
   underwater in Franklin from the worst flooding in 60 years. In
   addition, two dams along the Rappahannock River burst from the extreme
   flooding. Throughout all of Virginia, Floyd damaged 9,250 houses,
   killed 3 people, and caused $101 million in damage.

Mid-Atlantic

   Rainfall from Floyd
   Enlarge
   Rainfall from Floyd

   By the time Floyd hit the shore, it was significantly weaker than it
   was at sea, due to the collapsing of its concentric eyes. This had
   little effect on the inland damage caused by the storm, however, and
   Floyd produced torrential rains and high winds throughout the
   Mid-Atlantic as far north as New York City and Long Island.

   Chestertown, Maryland, reported a maximum rainfall total of 14 inches
   (350 mm), with other locales reporting similar values. Extreme river
   flooding caused moderate damage to bridges and roads, resulting in a
   damage toll of $7.9 million (1999 USD). In addition, over 250,000
   residents were without electricity because of high winds blowing down
   power lines.

   Rainfall amounts peaked at 13.34 inches (339 mm) in Somerville, New
   Jersey, and 12.36 inches (314 mm) in Vernon, Delaware. The Raritan
   River basin experienced record flooding as a result of Floyd's heavy
   rains, four and one-half feet higher than the previous record flood
   crest.
   Floyd's rain affecting the Mid-Atlantic.
   Enlarge
   Floyd's rain affecting the Mid-Atlantic.

   Bound Brook, New Jersey, was especially hard hit by a record flooding
   event: a 42.13-foot flood crest , 14.13-feet above flood stage (which
   is 28 feet), sent 12-feet of water on Main Street and drowned three
   people .

   Manville, New Jersey was hit nearly as hard, with record-breaking
   floods coming from the Raritan River and the nearby Millstone River,
   which join in Manville.

   Still a large tropical cyclone when it hit the Mid Atlantic states,
   Floyd produced a strong storm surge, peaking at 2.8 feet (0.8 m) with a
   storm tide of 9.34 feet (2.85 m) in Philadelphia with effects felt in
   parts of northern Pennsylvania including the Wilkes-Barre/Scranton
   metro area. Some 1,260,000 citizens across the three states lost power
   because of the storm, and flooding left many in Pennsylvania homeless.

New England and Canada

   Floyd caused large power outages and flood damage across New England,
   with over five inches (130 mm) of rain being dropped over most of the
   area. Because the storm lost tropical characteristics as it entered
   coastal Canada, effects there were minor, amounting to gusty winds and
   seas of up to 30 feet (9 m) in height.

Aftermath

Criticism of FEMA

   Flooding in Greenville, North Carolina on the Tar River
   Enlarge
   Flooding in Greenville, North Carolina on the Tar River

   The Hurricane Floyd disaster was followed by what many judged to be a
   very slow federal response. Fully three weeks after the storm hit,
   Jesse Jackson complained to FEMA Director James Lee Witt on his CNN
   program Both Sides Now, "It seemed there was preparation for Hurricane
   Floyd, but then came Flood Floyd. Bridges are overwhelmed, levees are
   overwhelmed, whole towns under water ... [it's] an awesome scene of
   tragedy. So there's a great misery index in North Carolina." Witt
   responded, "We're starting to move the camper trailers in. It's been so
   wet it's been difficult to get things in there, but now it's going to
   be moving very quickly. And I think you're going to see a — I think the
   people there will see a big difference [within] this next weekend!"

Ecological effects

   Runoff in the aftermath of the hurricane
   Enlarge
   Runoff in the aftermath of the hurricane

   Runoff from the hurricane created significant problems for the ecology
   of North Carolina's rivers and sounds.

   In the immediate aftermath of the storm, freshwater runoff, sediment,
   and decomposing organic matter caused salinity and oxygen levels in
   Pamlico Sound and its tributary rivers to drop to nearly zero. This
   raised fears of massive fish and shrimp kills, as had happened after
   Hurricane Fran and Hurricane Bonnie, and the state government responded
   quickly to provide financial aid to fishing and shrimping industries.
   Strangely, however, the year's shrimp and crab harvests were extremely
   prosperous; one possible explanation is that runoff from Hurricane
   Dennis caused marine animals to begin migrating to saltier waters, so
   they were less vulnerable to Floyd's ill effects.

   Pollution from runoff was also a significant fear. Numerous pesticides
   were found in low but measurable quantities in the river waters,
   particularly in the Neuse River. Overall, however, the concentration of
   contaminants was slightly lower than had been measured in Hurricane
   Fran, likely because Floyd simply dropped more water to dilute them.

Parental stress and child abuse

   A 2004 study by the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
   published in the American Journal of Preventive Medicine, found some
   evidence that small children living in the hardest-hit part of North
   Carolina suffered increased rates of child abuse during the six months
   following the storm. This is likely due to parental stress in
   rebuilding and grieving their losses in the aftermath of a catastrophe.
   Dr. Heather T. Keenan, co-author of the study, said, "This information
   may be useful in future disaster planning. To the extent possible,
   vulnerable families should receive additional support—both immediately
   after a disaster and during the recovery period."

Retirement

   Because of the hurricane's destruction in North Carolina and elsewhere
   in the United States, the World Meteorological Organization retired the
   name Floyd in the spring of 2000; it will never again be used for an
   Atlantic hurricane. The name was replaced with Franklin in the 2005
   season.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hurricane_Floyd"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
