   #copyright

Hurricane Charley

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Natural Disasters

   CAPTION: Hurricane Charley

   Category 4 hurricane ( SSHS)
   Hurricane Charley at landfall in Florida.
   Hurricane Charley at landfall in Florida.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Formed August 9, 2004
   Dissipated August 14, 2004
   Highest
   winds
   150 mph (240 km/h) (1-minute sustained)
   Lowest pressure 941 mbar ( hPa)
   Damage $16 billion (2004  USD)

   $16.4 billion (2005  USD)
   Fatalities 15 direct, 20 indirect
   Areas
   affected Jamaica, Cayman Islands, Cuba, Florida, South Carolina, North
   Carolina
   Part of the
   2004 Atlantic hurricane season

   Hurricane Charley was the third named storm, the second hurricane, and
   the second major hurricane of the 2004 Atlantic hurricane season.
   Charley lasted from August 9 to August 14, peaking as a 150 mph (240
   km/h) Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale. The
   hurricane made landfall in southwestern Florida at peak intensity, the
   strongest hurricane to hit the United States since Hurricane Andrew
   twelve years prior.

   After moving briskly through the Caribbean Sea, Charley crossed Cuba as
   a Category 3 hurricane, causing heavy damage and 4 deaths. On August
   13, the hurricane crossed over the Dry Tortugas, just 22 hours after
   Tropical Storm Bonnie struck northwestern Florida. This was the first
   time in history that two tropical cyclones struck the same state in a
   24 hour time period. Charley was one of two major hurricanes to hit
   Florida in 2004 and one of four hurricanes to directly affect the
   state.

   At its peak intensity of 150 mph (240 km/h) Hurricane Charley struck
   the northern tip of Captiva Island and the southern tip of North
   Captiva Island, causing severe damage. The strongest hurricane to hit
   the area since Hurricane Donna in 1960, Charley continued to produce
   severe damage as it made landfall near Port Charlotte. The hurricane
   continued to the northeast, and passed through East Orlando while
   retaining wind gusts of up to 106 mph. Damage in the state totaled to
   over $13 billion (2004 USD). Charley, initially expected to hit further
   north in Tampa, caught many Floridians off-guard from a sudden change
   of track to the northeast. Throughout the United States, Charley caused
   10 casualties and $15 billion in damage (2004), making Charley the
   fourth costliest hurricane in United States history.

Storm history

   Storm path
   Enlarge
   Storm path

   Charley began as a tropical wave that moved off the coast of Africa on
   August 4. It moved quickly westward and steadily organized, with
   convection developing in curved bands. The wave continued to organize
   as it approach the Lesser Antilles, and it developed into Tropical
   Depression Three on August 9 while 115 miles south-southeast of
   Barbados. Low upper-level shear and well-defined outflow contributed to
   further development, and the depression intensified into Tropical Storm
   Charley on August 10 in the typically unfavorable eastern Caribbean
   Sea.
   Charley making landfall on August 13, 2004.
   Enlarge
   Charley making landfall on August 13, 2004.

   A strong ridge of high pressure to the system's north forced Charley to
   track quickly to the west-northwest. Steady strengthening continued,
   and Charley intensified into a hurricane on August 11 while 90 miles
   (150 km) south of Kingston, Jamaica. The hurricane moved around the
   periphery of high pressure, and its track turned to the northwest. On
   August 12, Charley passed just south of Jamaica, then passed 17 miles
   northeast of Grand Cayman as a Category 2 hurricane. The hurricane
   continued to strengthen as it turned to the northwest, and hit southern
   Cuba near Playa del Cajio as a 120 mph (190 km/h) major hurricane on
   the 13th. Charley weakened while crossing the island, and passed just
   west of downtown Havana before weakening to a 110 mph (180 km/h)
   hurricane.

   Hurricane Charley accelerated to the north-northeast in response to the
   approach of an unseasonal mid-tropospheric trough, resulting in the
   hurricane passing over the Dry Tortugas on August 13. This occurred 22
   hours after Tropical Storm Bonnie, the first time two tropical cyclones
   hit the same state in a 24 hour period . Charley rapidly intensified,
   strengthening from a 110 mph (180 km/h) hurricane with a pressure of
   965 mbar to a 145 mph (230 km/h) hurricane with a pressure of 941 mbar
   in just 6 hours. The hurricane continued to intensify as it turned more
   to the northeast, and Charley made landfall near the island of Cayo
   Costa, Florida as a 150 mph (240 km/h) hurricane on the 13th. An hour
   later, the hurricane struck Port Charlotte as a 145 mph (230 km/h)
   hurricane.
   Hurricane Charley, just after its second US landfall in South Carolina
   Enlarge
   Hurricane Charley, just after its second US landfall in South Carolina

   Charley weakened slightly over land, but still retained sustained winds
   of well over 85 mph as it passed directly over Orlando between 8:20 and
   9:40 p.m. on August 13; gusts of up to 106 mph were recorded at Orlando
   International Airport. The hurricane emerged into the Atlantic Ocean
   near Daytona Beach, Florida as a minimal hurricane, but restrengthened
   slightly over open waters. Continuing to move rapidly to the
   north-northeast, Charley struck near Cape Romain, South Carolina, moved
   offshore briefly, and made landfall again near North Myrtle Beach as a
   minimal hurricane. Charley interacted with an approaching frontal
   boundary, and the storm became extratropical after exiting into the
   Atlantic Ocean near Virginia Beach on August 15. The extratropical
   storm continued to move to the northeast, and was absorbed by the front
   later on the 15th near southeastern Massachusetts.

Preparations

   On August 10, 2 days before the hurricane passed by the area, Jamaican
   governmental officials issued a Tropical Storm Warning, which was
   upgraded to a hurricane warning a day later. In Jamaica, the threat of
   the storm forced the country's two airports to close and rerouted two
   cruise ships. The Cayman Islands issued a hurricane warning on the
   11th, a day before the hurricane passed near the area.

   Cuban government officials issued a Hurricane Watch for the southern
   coastline on August 11, two days before the hurricane struck the
   island. This was upgraded to a hurricane warning on the 12th, 13 ½
   hours before Charley made landfall. Because of the threat, the
   government issued a mandatory evacuation for 235,000 citizens and
   159,000 animals in the area of expected impact. 3,800 were evacuated
   from offshore islands, while 47,000 in Havana were transported from
   old, unsafe buildings to safer areas. The people were transported to
   shelters with supplies there. In addition, the power grid in southern
   Cuba was turned off to avoid accidents.
   NEXRAD image of Hurricane Charley over Charlotte Harbor, Florida just
   after landfall. (animated version)
   Enlarge
   NEXRAD image of Hurricane Charley over Charlotte Harbour, Florida just
   after landfall. ( animated version)

   The National Hurricane Centre issued Hurricane warnings for the Florida
   Keys and from Cape Sable to the mouth of the Suwannee River a day prior
   to Charley passed through the area, while tropical storm warnings were
   issued elsewhere throughout Florida. Because of the threat, 1.9 million
   people along the Florida west coast were urged to evacuate , including
   380,000 residents in the Tampa Bay area and 11,000 in the Florida Keys.
   . It was the largest evacuation order for Pinellas County history , and
   the largest evacuation request in Florida since Hurricane Floyd five
   years prior. Many Floridians, estimated from about 400,000 to 800,000,
   remained despite the evacuation order. They boarded up their home and
   bought supplies to ride out the storm. Power companies mobilized
   workers to prepare for the expected widespread power outages. MacDill
   Air Force Base, the U.S. military centre for the War on Iraq, severely
   limited its staff. Similarly, Kennedy Space Centre, which usually has a
   staff of 13,000, reduced its staff to only 200 people in preparation
   for the hurricane. All space shuttles were sealed tight in hangars.
   Many amusement parks in the Orlando area closed early, while Walt
   Disney World's Animal Kingdom remained closed. This was the only the
   second time in history after Hurricane Floyd that a Disney park was
   closed due to a hurricane. The approaching hurricane also forced
   several cruise ships to reroute their paths.

   The rapid strengthening of Charley in the eastern Gulf of Mexico caught
   many by surprise. Around five hours before its actual landfall, Charley
   was a strong Category 2 hurricane predicted to strengthen to a 115 mph
   (185 km/h) hurricane with a landfall in the Tampa- Saint Petersburg,
   Florida area. Around two hours before its actual landfall, the National
   Hurricane Centre issued a special advisory with Charley as a 145 mph
   (230 km/h) Category 4 hurricane with predicted landfall in the Port
   Charlotte area. As a result, numerous people in the Charlotte County
   area were unprepared for the hurricane, despite the fact that the track
   was well within the forecast's margin of error. National Hurricane
   Centre forecaster intern Robbie Berg publicly blamed the media for
   misleading residents of a Tampa landfall. In addition, he also stated
   that residents had ample warning , as a Hurricane Warning existed for
   the landfall area for 23 hours with a Hurricane Watch for 35 hours.

   Several local meteorologists, however, did break with national news
   predictions of a Tampa Bay landfall as early as Friday morning. Robert
   Van Winkle of WBBH and Jim Reif of WZVN in Fort Myers, and Tom Terry of
   WFTV in Orlando, all broke with their national news forecasts and
   stated at around 11am EDT that Charley was going to turn early,
   striking around Charlotte Harbour and travelling over Orlando . This
   was its eventual course.

   In South Carolina, Governor Mark Sanford declared a state of emergency
   as Charley neared its final landfall. Two coastal counties were forced
   to evacuate, with state troopers redirecting traffic further inland
   from Myrtle Beach. In all, 138,000 evacuated from the Grand Strand
   area.

Impact

   CAPTION: Storm deaths by region

      Region    Direct Indirect Total
   Jamaica      1      0        1
   Cuba         4      0        4
   Florida      9      20       29
   Rhode Island 1      0        1
      Total       15      20     35
   Costliest U.S. Atlantic hurricanes

   Cost refers to total estimated property damage.
   Rank Hurricane Season Cost (2005 USD)
   1 Katrina 2005 $81.2 billion
   2 Andrew 1992 $44.9 billion
   3 Wilma 2005 $20.6 billion
   4 Charley 2004 $15.4 billion
   5 Ivan 2004 $14.6 billion
   Main article: List of notable Atlantic hurricanes

   One death in Jamaica, four deaths in Cuba, and ten deaths in the United
   States were directly attributed to Charley. Numerous injuries were
   reported, as well as twenty indirect deaths in the U.S.

   Property damage from Charley in the United States was estimated by the
   NHC at $15 billion ( 2004 USD) . This made Charley the second costliest
   hurricane in United States history behind Hurricane Andrew's $43.7
   billion in the 1992 season, though has since dropped to forth due to
   the 2005 season's Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Wilma.

Caribbean Sea

   On Jamaica, strong winds caused moderate damage to the agricultural
   sector, with crop and livestock damage totaling to $1.44 million (2004
   USD) Damage was heaviest in Saint Elizabeth Parish, where 100 people
   had to be housed in six shelters. Strong winds downed trees and power
   lines, causing power outages and blocking roads. In the country,
   Charley caused $4.1 million (2004 USD) in damage and one fatality.
   Charley greatly spared the Cayman Islands, resulting in little damage.
   Rainfall was light, peaking at .9 inches in Grand Cayman, while Cayman
   Brac reported tropical storm force winds.

   Operationally, forecasters estimated that Charley struck southern Cuba
   as a 105 mph (170 km/h) Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson
   scale In post-analysis, Charley struck southern Cuba as a 120 mph (190
   km/h) hurricane, based on a report of 118 mph in Playa Baracoa. The
   hurricane produced a storm surge of up to 13.1 feet (4 meters) in Playa
   Cajio, while Charley's quick passage dropped light rainfall totaling to
   5.87 inches (149 mm) in Mariel.

   Strong wind gusts downed nearly 1,500 power lines and knocked over 28
   large, high tension wire towers at a power plant in Mariel. As a
   result, more than half of power customers in Havana Province were
   without power by 12 days after the storm, and all of Pinar del Rio
   Province was without power for over 11 days. Blackouts continued in
   areas where power returned. The power outages resulted in lack of water
   for numerous people, including no water in the city of Havana for four
   days. As a result, the Cuban government sent water tanks to satisfy the
   short term need. Similarly, there was a lack of gas for cooking for
   over a week. However, one Cuban government official stated that it
   could take up to two months for basic utilities to be returned to many
   isolated villages.

   Near its landfall location, Charley destroyed 290 of the 300 houses in
   the village, while over 70,000 homes in Havana were either damaged or
   destroyed. Numerous hotels reported damage, potentially impacting the
   important tourism industry in the country. Agricultural damage was
   heavy, with the hurricane damaging more than 3,000 agricultural
   institutions. Citrus officials estimated a loss of 15,000 metric tons
   of grapefruit on the Isle of Youth, while strong winds ruined 66,000
   metric tons off citrus trees in the Havana area. Charley also destroyed
   around 57,000 acres of fruit trees in the Havana area. In all, Charley
   caused four deaths on Cuba and $923 million (2004 USD) in damage,
   primarily from agricultural losses.

Florida

   Damage in Captiva Island
   Enlarge
   Damage in Captiva Island

   While moving northward to the west of the Florida Keys, Charley
   produced moderate winds of 48 mph (77 km/h) with gusts to 60 mph (97
   km/h) in Key West. The winds downed a few trees, power lines, and
   unreinforced signs. A boat knocked loose by strong waves struck a power
   transmission line, causing widespread power outages from Marathon to
   Key West. On Fort Jefferson in the Dry Tortugas, the hurricane produced
   an estimated storm surge of up to 6 feet (2 meters). The surge,
   combined with waves, caused extensive flooding in the park and damaged
   numerous docks. Damage was minimal in the area, totaling to $160,000
   (2004 USD).

   Hurricane Charley passed directly over Captiva Island near Cayo Costa
   with peak winds of 150 mph. The Category 4 hurricane produced an
   estimated storm surge of up to 6.5 feet (2 m) on the island, a lower
   than expected amount due to the hurricane's small size. The storm
   surge, combined with the strong pressure gradient, produces a 1/4 mile
   (450 m) inlet on North Captiva Island, known as Charley's Cut. Strong
   waves and storm surge caused severe beach erosion and dune damage at
   various different locations. The storm severely damaged five houses,
   lightly damaged many others, and downed many trees on Gasparilla
   Island. At least half of the 300 homes on North Captiva Island were
   substantially damaged, including 10 that were destroyed. On Captiva
   Island the strong winds severely damaged most houses on the island, as
   well as several recreational buildings. Throughout the rest of the
   islands in Sarasota, Charlotte, Lee, and Collier counties, strong winds
   from Hurricane Charley caused severe damage to hundreds of buildings
   and trees.
   President George W. Bush, aboard Marine One, surveys hurricane damage
   at a mobile home park in Fort Myers, Florida.
   Enlarge
   President George W. Bush, aboard Marine One, surveys hurricane damage
   at a mobile home park in Fort Myers, Florida.

   On mainland Florida, Charley produced a storm surge peaking at 10-13
   feet (3-4 meters) at Vanderbilt Beach near Naples, along with a much
   lower surge at its Punta Gorda landfall. The hurricane dropped
   generally light rainfall across Florida, peaking at 9.88 inches (251
   mm) in Bud Slough in Sarasota County. In Punta Gorda, where the
   hurricane made landfall, winds were measured up to 90 mph with gusts of
   up to 111 mph (180 km/h) before the instrument failed. Unofficially,
   the Charlotte County Medical Center recorded a peak wind gust of 172
   mph (277 km/h). Due to the compact nature of the hurricane, peak winds
   in the storm only extended a short distance from its centre. Fort
   Myers, which is only 25 miles (38 km) from where Charley made landfall,
   experienced sustained winds of only 61 mph (98 km/h) with gusts of 78
   mph (125 km/h). In South Florida, Charley spawned several tornadoes,
   including a long-lived F2 that struck Clewiston and five weak tornadoes
   near where the hurricane made landfall.

   The worst damage from Hurricane Charley occurred in Charlotte County.
   In Boca Grande, numerous houses sustained extensive roof damage, while
   thousands of trees and power lines were uprooted or snapped. In Port
   Charlotte and Punta Gorda, many buildings, RVs, and mobile homes were
   completely destroyed, while other buildings were uproofed due to the
   powerful winds.

   Charley devastated Southwest Florida, causing $14.6 billion in damages
   on the peninsula of Florida alone. Many towns such as Punta Gorda and
   Port Charlotte were simply leveled by the hurricane. Trailer parks were
   obliterated as far as Orlando, and trees and utility poles were downed
   as far as Daytona Beach.

   Other Florida school systems were also severely disrupted: Orange
   County Public Schools opened their doors on August 9, 2004, only to
   close them on August 12 as Charley approached from the southwest.
   Damage was so extensive that schools remained closed to students until
   August 24, only to close again after Hurricane Frances and Hurricane
   Jeanne. The storm resulted in several non-federal built-in holidays
   being cancelled, and the tradition of releasing students one hour early
   on Wednesday being cancelled for the rest of the year to make up for
   over two weeks of lost class time.

   The storm cut off power to as many as two million people in Florida.
   One week after landfall it was estimated that about 240,000 were still
   without power.

   Public schools in some counties in the path of the hurricane were
   scheduled to be closed for two weeks. In some areas this was necessary
   because the school buildings were damaged or destroyed (especially in
   Charlotte County). In other parts of Florida, no power or water was yet
   available.

   Agricultural losses were heavy. In Florida, the second-largest producer
   of oranges in the world, damage to the citrus crop was estimated at
   $150 million, perhaps as much as 25% of the total crop. Other crops and
   agricultural buildings and equipment also suffered.

   Due to its path across the central part of the Florida peninsula,
   Charley is sometimes referred to as the " I-4 Hurricane."

Rest of United States

   Storm total Rainfall from Charley
   Enlarge
   Storm total Rainfall from Charley

   Upon making landfall on northeastern South Carolina, Charley
   unofficially produced a storm tide of up to 7.19 feet (2.19 meters) in
   Myrtle Beach. Wind gusts were moderate, peaking at 60 mph (95 km/h) in
   North Myrtle Beach, though there were several unofficial hurricane
   force gusts. Charley produced moderate rainfall along its path, peaking
   at over 7 inches (178 mm). Moderate winds knocked down numerous trees.
   Flash flooding occurred in Charleston County, causing drainage
   problems. Damage in South Carolina totaled to $20 million (2004 USD).

   In North Carolina, Charley produced an estimated storm surge of 2 to 3
   feet (.5-1 meters), along with waves of up to 8 feet (2.5 meters) in
   height. This produced minor beach erosion along the coastline. Winds
   gusted from 60 to 70 mph (95 to 110 km/h), causing minor wind damage.
   Rainfall was moderate, ranging from 4 to 6 inches (100 to 150 mm),
   causing flooding across 7 North Carolina counties. The hurricane
   spawned five weak tornadoes across the state, including an F1 in Nags
   Head that damaged twenty structures. Charley destroyed 40 houses and
   damaged 2231, 231 severely, including 221 damaged beach homes in Sunset
   Beach. Damage was greatest in Brunswick County, where wind gusts peaked
   at 85 mph (137 km/h). Crop damage was severe in Brunswick County, with
   50% of the tobacco crop lost and 30% of the corn and vegetable fields
   destroyed. Strong winds downed trees and power lines, leaving 65,000
   without power. Damage in North Carolina totaled to $25 million (2004
   USD).

   Tropical Storm Charley produced wind gusts of up to 72 mph (116 km/h)
   at Chesapeake Light, causing scattered power outages. Rainfall was
   light, ranging from 2 to 3.7 inches (50 to 94 mm). Charley produced one
   tornado in Chesapeake and one in Virginia Beach. In Rhode Island, one
   man drowned in a rip current.

Aftermath

   President George W. Bush declared Florida a federal disaster area. He
   also said "...the job of the federal government and the state
   government is to surge resources as quickly as possible to disaster
   areas. And that's exactly what's happening now. We choppered over and
   saw the devastation of this area. A lot of people's lives are turned
   upside down. We've got ice and water moving in, trailers for
   people...are moving in. The state is providing security...There's a lot
   of compassion moving in the area, the Red Cross is here."

Retirement

   Because of its effects in the United States, the name Charley was
   retired in the spring of 2005 by the World Meteorological Organization
   and will never again be used for an Atlantic hurricane. The name was
   replaced by Colin for the 2010 season.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hurricane_Charley"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
