   #copyright

Hurricane Felix (1995)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Natural Disasters

   CAPTION: Hurricane Felix

   Category 4 hurricane ( SSHS)
   Hurricane Felix near peak intensity
   Hurricane Felix near peak intensity
     __________________________________________________________________

   Formed August 8, 1995
   Dissipated August 22, 1995
   Highest
   winds
   140 mph (220 km/h) (1-minute sustained)
   Lowest pressure 929 mbar ( hPa)
   Damage $132,000 (1995 USD)
   $174,000 (2006 USD)
   Fatalities 8 direct
   Areas
   affected Bermuda, U.S. East Coast beaches
   Part of the
   1995 Atlantic hurricane season

   Hurricane Felix was the sixth named tropical cyclone and the third
   hurricane of the unusually active 1995 Atlantic hurricane season.
   Though it never made landfall, Felix stalled off the coast of North
   Carolina, resulting in great uncertainty over its track. The hurricane
   caused 8 deaths and severe beach erosion from North Carolina to
   Massachusetts.

Storm history

   Storm path
   Enlarge
   Storm path

   A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on August 6. Deep
   convection quickly organized around a centre, and the system developed
   into Tropical Depression Seven on August 8 while a short distance
   southwest of the Cape Verde islands. The depression moved to the
   west-northwest, and 18 hours after forming it strengthened into a
   tropical storm, receiving the name Felix. It continued to slowly
   intensify as it headed west-northwestward, a motion caused by the
   subtropical ridge, and attained hurricane status on the 11th, while
   620 miles (1000 km) east-northeast of Guadeloupe.

   A split in the deep-layered trough over the western Atlantic Ocean
   resulted in Felix turning to the northwest. There, where warm sea
   surface temperatures and little upper-level shear provided conditions
   favorable for intensification, the hurricane began to rapidly intensify
   to its peak strength, with maximum sustained winds of 140 mph
   (225 km/h) on August 12. An eyewall replacement cycle, combined with
   upper level shear from its anticyclone being displaced over the
   hurricane, caused Felix to weaken and develop a broader inner core. Its
   northwest motion continued, bringing Felix, then an 85 mph (135 km/h)
   hurricane, within 75 miles (120 km/h) of Bermuda on the 15th.
   Felix off the coast of North Carolina
   Enlarge
   Felix off the coast of North Carolina

   The subtropical ridge built to the west, forcing Felix to take a
   west-northwest track. Initially, it appeared that the westward motion
   would cause Felix to strike the mid-Atlantic coastline, though a
   weakness in the ridge caused the hurricane to stall just 165 miles
   (265 km) east of the Outer Banks from August 17 to August 19. Cooler,
   drier air weakened Felix to a minimal hurricane, and while stationary,
   it presented an eye 60 to 80 miles (95–130 km/h) in diameter. After one
   shortwave trough failed to pull the hurricane towards open sea on the
   18th, Felix drifted eastward, and executed a clockwise loop before
   another shortwave trough brought the hurricane to the northeast. Cooler
   waters weakened Felix to a tropical storm on the August 20, and after
   passing to the east of Newfoundland, the storm became extratropical on
   the 22nd. As an extratropical storm, Felix persisted until August 25
   when it dissipated between Iceland and Ireland.

Preparations

   Initial forecasts predicted a landfall on the Outer Banks of North
   Carolina, with winds of 100 mph (160 km/h); however, these forecasts
   were made with great uncertainty. While Felix was still near Bermuda,
   officials in the United States issued hurricane warnings from Little
   River, South Carolina to Chincoteague, Virginia, and tropical storm
   warnings from Chincoteague to near Manasquan, New Jersey on August 15.
   Also that same day, officials in Dare County, North Carolina, ordered a
   mandatory evacuation for the Outer Banks, a decision that would caused
   $4 million (1995 USD) in daily losses for local businesses. At the
   time, over 200,000 tourists and residents were in the evacuation zone,
   including 5,000 to 8,000 in Hatteras, the city furthest from the
   mainland by road. Had the hurricane continued on its path, it would
   have made landfall on the night of August 16. For this same reason,
   schools were cancelled throughout Dare County; further inland in North
   Carolina, shelters were opened in schools in Roanoke Rapids and Rocky
   Mount.

   In southeastern Virginia, officials feared a repeat of the 1933
   Chesapeake Potomac Hurricane, which caused a deadly storm surge in
   downtown Norfolk. Contrary to typical North Carolina hurricanes, which
   parallels the coast, Felix was predicted to make landfall head on, a
   situation known to exacerbate storm surge. The large size of the
   hurricane, potential for re-strengthening, and slow forward motion,
   caused a worst-case scenario in which 7 to 9 feet (2.1–2.7 m) of water
   would be pushed onshore and cause wide-spread flooding throughout
   southeastern Virginia. The projected path caused 66 U.S. Navy ships to
   depart the Norfolk Naval Base for safer waters.

Impact

   Though Felix did not make landfall, its large circulation caused large
   swells across much of the western Atlantic Ocean. In Puerto Rico, 8 to
   12 foot waves caused minor coastal flooding in Cataño. Strong waves and
   rip currents were responsible for the deaths of eight people.

Bermuda

   In Bermuda, officials issued Hurricane Warnings about one day prior to
   moving past the island. The Bermuda International Airport cancelled
   flights during the storm's onslaught, and gusty winds downed numerous
   trees and power lines. Although no wind reports are available,
   estimates indicate that Felix produced winds of 80-85 mph at the
   surface of the island. The hurricane's passage postponed the scheduled
   vote for Bermuda's independence. The winds left 20,000 without power
   initially, though power was quickly restored. Rough surf from Felix
   destroyed a few boats and damaged hotels on the island's southern
   shore, though damage was minor.

East Coast of the United States

   While stalling offshore, Hurricane Felix generated strong waves of up
   to 15 feet in Martha's Vineyard. In addition, persistent cyclonic winds
   caused strong rip currents along the coastline. The rip currents and
   strong waves caused three drowning deaths in North Carolina and five in
   New Jersey. The winds caused extensive beach erosion in North Carolina
   and New Jersey, especially in Ocean City, New Jersey where 240 feet of
   beach was lost and 10 foot cliffs were formed. In Atlantic City,
   beaches were closed for the first time since Hurricane Gloria in 1985.
   Flooding was also present in Virginia with tides 4 feet above normal.
   Numerous other beaches from North Carolina to Massachusetts were
   closed, as well. Storm tides were 2.5 feet above normal in most
   locations, including the Outer Banks where North Carolina Highway 12
   was flooded sporadically for four days.

   Because Hurricane Felix remained offshore, it caused little property
   damage. Two houses in The Hamptons were washed away by the strong
   waves. In North Carolina, 20 to 30 houses experienced minor damage,
   totaling to $57,000 in damage (1995 USD, $70,000 2005 USD). Strong
   waves from the hurricane sunk two boats with one person each off the
   coast of Maine, with damage to the boats totaling to $75,000 (1995
   USD). Both men swam to shore, one of whom suffered minor injuries after
   the crash. Strong waves also swept a woman out to sea in Bailey Island,
   Maine. She was rescued, but not after suffering from hypothermia and
   cuts over her body.

Canada

   In Nova Scotia, authorities closed several beaches due to swells of up
   to 20 feet (6 m). Buoys near the Newfoundland coast recorded wave
   heights of 49 feet (15 m), while buoys further offshore reported wave
   heights of 82 feet (25 m). Upon moving past Nova Scotia, the hurricane
   dropped light rainfall of up to 1.5 inches (40 mm).

Aftermath

   Due to the extensive beach erosion, government officials questioned
   whether to rebuild on barrier islands. In Virginia Beach, $10 million
   (1995 USD) was required to replenish the sand, the first restoration
   project since 1962. Geologists say it is a losing battle, believing it
   is pointless to replace the sand lost due to nature. Others argue the
   beach is helping small towns with tourism, many times their primary
   source of income. In addition, one estimate indicated it would cost
   less to replace the beach than to pay for the disaster-relief when a
   storm might destroy unprotected houses. The name Felix was not retired.
   It was used during the 2001 season and is on the list for the 2007
   season.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hurricane_Felix_%281995%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
