   #copyright

Hurricane David

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Natural Disasters

   CAPTION: Hurricane David

   Category 5 hurricane ( SSHS)
   Hurricane David as a strong Category 4
   Hurricane David as a strong Category 4
     __________________________________________________________________

   Formed August 25, 1979
   Dissipated September 8, 1979
   Highest
   winds
   175  mph (280  km/h) (1-minute sustained)
   Lowest pressure 924  mbar ( hPa)
   Damage $1.54 billion (1979  USD) $4.36 billion (2005 USD)
   Fatalities 2,068+ direct
   Areas
   affected Windward Islands, Haiti, Dominican Republic, Cuba, Bahamas,
   Florida, Georgia, most of eastern North America
   Part of the
   1979 Atlantic hurricane season

   Hurricane David was the fourth tropical cyclone, second hurricane, and
   first major hurricane of the 1979 Atlantic hurricane season. A Category
   5 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale, David was among the
   deadliest hurricanes in the latter half of the 20th century, killing
   over 2,000 people in its path, mostly in the Dominican Republic.

   David was a Cape Verde-type hurricane, traversing through the Lesser
   Antilles, Greater Antilles, and East Coast of the United States during
   late August and early September. With winds of 175 mph, Hurricane David
   was the strongest hurricane to strike the Dominican Republic since the
   1930 Dominican Republic Hurricane. Also, the hurricane was the
   strongest to hit Dominica in the 20th century, and was the deadliest
   Dominican tropical cyclone since a hurricane killed over 200 in
   September of the 1834 season. David was the second male name for a
   tropical storm in Atlantic history.

Storm history

   Storm path
   Enlarge
   Storm path

   A tropical wave that moved off the coast of Africa on August 22
   developed into a tropical depression in the central Atlantic on August
   25 about 800 miles (1300 km) east of the Windward Islands. The strong
   subtropical ridge to the north forced the new depression westward,
   where favorable conditions allowed it to strengthen to a tropical storm
   on the 26th. David continued to strengthen, becoming a hurricane on the
   27th. As it moved west-northwestward on the 27th and 28th, it rapidly
   intensified to a 150 mph (240 km/h) major hurricane. It weakened
   slightly to a 140 mph (225 km/h) hurricane, but restrengthened by the
   time David ravaged the tiny Leeward Island of Dominica on the 29th.

   David continued west-northwest through the islands where it caused
   heavy damage, and became a Category 5 hurricane in the northeast
   Caribbean Sea, reaching peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of
   175 mph (280 km/h) and minimum central pressure of 924 mbar (hPa) on
   August 30. An upper-level trough pulled David northward into Hispaniola
   as a Category 5 hurricane on the 31st. The eye passed almost directly
   over Santo Domingo, capital of the Dominican Republic with over a
   million people. The storm crossed over the island and emerged as a weak
   hurricane after drenching the islands.
   David at Florida landfall
   Enlarge
   David at Florida landfall

   After crossing the Windward Passage, David struck eastern Cuba as a
   minimal hurricane on September 1. It weakened to a tropical storm over
   land, but quickly re-strengthened as it again reached open waters.
   David turned to the northwest along the western periphery of the
   subtropical ridge, and re-intensified to a 100 mph (160 km/h) Category
   2 hurricane while over the Bahamas. Despite initial forecasts of a
   Miami, Florida landfall, the hurricane turned to the north-northwest
   just before landfall to strike near West Palm Beach, Florida on the
   3rd. It paralleled the Florida coastline just inland until emerging
   into the western Atlantic Ocean at New Smyrna Beach, Florida later on
   the 3rd. David continued to the north-northwest, and made its final
   landfall just south of Savannah, Georgia as a minimal hurricane on the
   5th. It turned to the northeast while weakening over land, and became
   extratropical on the 6th over New York. As an extratropical storm David
   continued to the northeast over New England and the Canadian Maritimes,
   and dissipated on September 8 to the northeast of Newfoundland.

Preparations

   David was originally expected to hit Barbados and spare Dominica in the
   process. However, even as it became increasingly clear that David was
   headed for the island, residents did not appear to take the situation
   seriously. This can be partly attributed to the fact that local radio
   warnings were minimal and disaster preparedness schemes were
   essentially non-existent. Furthermore, Dominica had not experienced a
   major hurricane since 1930, thus leading to complacency amongst much of
   the population. This proved to have disastrous consequences for the
   island nation.

   Some 400,000 people evacuated in the United States in anticipation of
   David, including 300,000 in southeastern Florida due to a predicted
   landfall between the Florida Keys and Palm Beach. Of those, 78,000 fled
   to shelters, while others either stayed at a friend's house further
   inland or travelled northward. Making landfall during Labor Day
   weekend, David forced the cancellations of many activities in the
   greater Miami area.

Impact

                                                         Deaths from David
                                                    (totals may not match)
                                                             Region Deaths
                                                           Dominica     56
                                                        Puerto Rico      7
                                                 Dominican Republic 2,000+
                                                      United States      5
                                                              Total 2,068+

   David is believed to have been responsible for 2,068 deaths, making it
   one of the deadliest hurricanes of the modern era. It caused torrential
   damage across its path, most of which occurred in the Dominican
   Republic where the hurricane made landfall as a Category 5 hurricane.

Dominica

   In the days prior to hitting Dominica, forecasters thought David would
   spare Dominica and hit Barbados instead. However, a turn in the hours
   before moving through the area caused the 150 mph (240 km/h) hurricane
   to make a direct hit on the southern part of Dominica. During the
   storm's onslaught, David dropped up to 10 inches (250 mm) of rain,
   causing numerous landslides on the mountainous island. Hours of
   hurricane force winds severely eroded the coastlines and washed out
   coastal roads. Damage was greatest in the southwest portion of the
   island, especially in the capital city, Roseau, which resembled an air
   raid target after the storm's passage. David's strong winds destroyed
   or damaged 80% of the homes on the island, leaving 75% of the
   population homeless, with many others temporarily homeless in the
   immediate aftermath. In addition, the rainfall turned rivers into
   torrents, sweeping away everything in their path to the sea. Power
   lines were completely ripped out, causing the water system to stop as
   well.

   Most severely damaged was the agricultural industry. About 75% of the
   nation's banana and coconut crop was destroyed. In addition, David's
   winds uprooted many trees on the tops of mountains, leaving them bare
   and damaging the ecosystem by disrupting the water levels.

   In all, 56 people died in Dominica and 180 were injured. Damage figures
   are not known.

Lesser Antilles

   Aside from Dominica, other islands in the Lesser Antilles experienced
   minor to moderate damage. Just to the south of Dominica, David brought
   Martinique winds of up to 100 mph (160 km/h). The capital,
   Fort-de-France reported wave heights of 15 feet (4.5 m). David's strong
   winds caused severe crop damage, mostly to bananas, amounting to $50
   million ($140 million in 2005 USD) in losses. Though no deaths were
   reported, the hurricane caused 20 to 30 injuries and left 500 homeless.

   In addition, Guadeloupe experienced moderate to extensive damage on the
   island of Basse-Terre. There, the banana crop was completely destroyed,
   and combined with other losses, crop damage amounted to $100 million
   ($280 million in 2005 USD). David caused no deaths, a few injuries, and
   left several hundred homeless. Nearby, Marie-Galante and Les Saintes
   reported extreme damage.

   Also, the island of St. Croix in the USVI experienced significant
   rainfall amounting to 10–12 inches (250–300 mm).

Puerto Rico

   Rainfall Totals in Puerto Rico
   Enlarge
   Rainfall Totals in Puerto Rico

   Though it did not hit Puerto Rico, Hurricane David passed less than 100
   miles (160 km) south of the island, bringing strong winds and heavy
   rainfall to the island. Portions of southwestern Puerto Rico
   experienced sustained winds of up to 85 mph (135 km/h), while the rest
   of the island received tropical storm-force winds. While passing by the
   island, the hurricane caused strong seas and torrential rainfall,
   amounting to 19.9 inches (505 mm) in Mayagüez, Puerto Rico and up to 20
   inches (510 mm) in the central mountainous region.

   Despite remaining offshore, most of the island felt David's effects.
   Agricultural damage was severe, and combined with property damage, the
   hurricane was responsible for $70 million in losses ($200 million in
   2005 USD). Following the storm, the FEMA declared the island a disaster
   area. In all, Hurricane David killed seven people in Puerto Rico, four
   of which resulted from electrocutions.

Dominican Republic

   Upon making landfall in the Dominican Republic, David turned
   unexpectedly to the northwest, causing 125 mph winds in Santo Domingo
   and Category 5 winds elsewhere in the country. The storm caused
   torrential rainfall, resulting in extreme river flooding. The flooding
   swept away entire villages and isolated communities during the storm's
   onslaught. A rail-mounted container crane collapsed in Rio Haina at the
   sea-land terminal. Many roads in the country were either damaged or
   destroyed from the heavy rainfall, especially in the towns of
   Jarabocoa, San Cristobal, and Baní.

   Nearly 70% of the country's crops were destroyed from the torrential
   flooding. Extreme river flooding resulted in most of the country's
   2,000 fatalities. One particularly deadly example of this was when a
   rampaging river in the mountainous village of Padre las Casas swept
   away a church and a school, killing several hundred people who were
   sheltering there. The flooding destroyed thousands of houses, leaving
   over 200,000 homeless in the aftermath of the hurricane. President
   Antonio Guzmán Fernández estimated the combination of agricultural,
   property, and industrial damage to amount to $1 billion ($2.8 billion
   in 2005 USD)

   Neighboring Haiti experienced very little from David, due to the
   hurricane's weakened state upon moving through the country.

Bahamas

   While passing through the Bahamas, David brought 70–80 mph (115–130
   km/h) winds to Andros Island as the eye crossed the archipelago. David,
   though still disorganized, produced heavy rainfall in the country
   peaking at 8 inches (200 mm). Strong wind gusts uprooted trees, and
   overall damage was minimal.

United States

   David produced widespread damage across the United States amounting to
   $320 million ($900 million in 2005 USD). Prior to the hurricane's
   arrival, 400,000 evacuated from coastal areas. In total, David directly
   killed 5 in the United States, and was responsible for 10 indirect
   deaths.

Florida

   David Rainfall in U.S.
   Enlarge
   David Rainfall in U.S.

   Upon making landfall, David brought a storm surge of only 2–4 feet
   (0.6–1.2 m), due to its lack of strengthening and the obtuse angle at
   which it hit. In addition, David caused strong surf and moderate
   rainfall, amounting to a maximum of 8.92 inches (227 mm) in Vero Beach.
   Though it made landfall as a Category 2 storm, the strongest winds were
   localized, and the highest reported wind occurred in Fort Pierce, with
   70 mph (115 km/h) sustained and 95 mph (155 km/h) gusts.

   Because the hurricane remained near the coastline, Hurricane David
   failed to cause extreme damage in Florida. The storm's winds shattered
   windows in stores near the coast and caused property damage, including
   blowing the frame of the Palm Beach Jai Alai front on and downing the
   186 foot (57 m) WJNO AM radio tower in West Palm Beach into the
   Intracoastal Waterway. A few roofs were torn off, and numerous
   buildings were flooded from over 6 inches (150 mm) of rainfall. A
   450-foot crane was even snapped in two at the St. Lucie nuclear power
   plant. The hurricane spawned over 10 tornadoes while passing over the
   state, though caused no deaths or injuries. Total damages in Florida
   amounted to $95 million ($270 million in 2005 USD), of which $30
   million occurred in Palm Beach County, mostly from crop damage.

Georgia

   Hurricane David at landfall in Georgia
   Enlarge
   Hurricane David at landfall in Georgia

   Hurricane David made landfall in Georgia as a quickly weakening minimal
   hurricane, bringing a 3–5 foot (0.9–1.5 m) storm surge and heavy surf.
   Its inner core remained away from major cities, though Savannah
   recorded sustained winds of 58 mph (93 km/h) and wind gusts of 68 mph
   (109 km/h). No major damage occurred in Savannah. High winds downed
   numerous power lines, leaving many without power for up to 2 weeks
   after the storm. Offshore, strong seas disrupted a portion of the
   coastal reef by moving a sunken ship 300 feet (90 m). Overall,
   Hurricane David was responsible for minor damage and two casualties
   from its heavy surf.

Mid-Atlantic and New England

   Upon entering South Carolina, David retained winds of up to hurricane
   force, though the highest recorded was 43 mph (69 km/h) sustained in
   Charleston and a 70 mph (113 km/h) wind gust in Hilton Head Island.
   Similar winds occurred in North Carolina, and lesser readings were
   recorded throughout further northeast, excluding a 174 mph (280 km/h)
   wind gust on Mount Washington. In addition, David dropped heavy
   rainfall along its path, peaking at 10.73 inches (273 mm) in Cape
   Hatteras, North Carolina with widespread reports of over 5 inches (130
   mm). Storm surge was moderate, peaking at 8.8 feet (2.7 m) in
   Charleston and up to 5 feet (1.5 m) along much of the eastern United
   States coastline.

   Overall, damage was light in most areas, though it was very widespread.
   High winds and rain downed power lines in the New York City area,
   leaving 2.5 million people without electricity during the storm's
   passage. David also caused minor to moderate beach erosion, as well as
   widespread crop damage from the flooding. In addition, the hurricane
   spawned numerous tornadoes while moving through the Mid-Atlantic and
   New England. In Virginia 8 tornadoes formed across the southeastern
   portion of the state, of which 6 were F2's or greater on the Fujita
   scale. The tornadoes caused one death, 19 injuries, damaged 270 homes,
   and destroyed 3 homes, amounting to $6 million ($20 million in 2005
   USD) in losses. In Maryland, David's outer bands formed 7 tornadoes. In
   New Castle County, Delaware, 1 tornado damaged numerous homes and
   injured 5.

Aftermath

Dominica

   Immediately after the storm, lack of power prevented communications and
   the outside world had little knowledge of the extent of the damage in
   Dominica. A citizen named Fred White ended that by using a
   battery-operated ham radio to contact the world.

   In response to the severe agricultural damage, the government initiated
   a food ration. By two months after the storm, assistance pledges
   amounted to over $37 million (1979 USD) from various groups around the
   world. Similar to the aftermath of other natural disasters, the
   distribution of the aid raised concerns and accusations over the amount
   of food and material, or lack thereof, for the affected citizens.

   Another occurrence less typical of the aftermath of other natural
   disasters was the looting. In supermarkets, seaports, and homes, what
   wasn't destroyed by the hurricane was stolen in the weeks after the
   storm. This kind of lawlessness is occasionally seen, particularly in
   economically poor areas, in the aftermath of catastrophes such as
   Hurricane Hugo, Hurricane Jeanne, and Hurricane Katrina.

United States

   Despite the casualties and damages attributed to David, the storm's
   effects were not as bad as in other countries. In particular, South
   Florida escaped relatively lightly. Because of this, NHC Director Neil
   Frank was accused of overly stirring up panic before the arrival of
   David: two local psychiatrists even claimed that the experience would
   make residents more complacent towards future storms. However, the NHC
   defended their methods, with Neil Frank stating: "If we hadn't [raised
   public alarm] and our predictions had been more accurate, the
   consequences would have been disastrous."

Retirement

   The name David was retired following this storm, and will never again
   be used for an Atlantic hurricane. It was replaced with Danny in the
   1985 season.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hurricane_David"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
