   #copyright

Hyena

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mammals

                     iHyenas
   Spotted Hyena
   Spotted Hyena

                             Conservation status

   Vulnerable (VU)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Mammalia
   Order:   Carnivora
   Family:  Hyaenidae
            Gray, 1821

                                   Genera

   Crocuta
   Hyaena
   Parahyaena
   Proteles

   Hyenas or Hyænas are moderately large terrestrial carnivores native to
   Africa and the Indian Subcontinent. They are members of the family
   Hyaenidae.

Physiology

   Although hyenas bear some physical resemblance to wild dogs, they make
   up a separate biological family which is most closely related to
   Herpestidae (the family of mongooses and meerkats). The hyena has one
   of the strongest jaws in the animal kingdom and an adult of the species
   has only the large cats of the family Felidae (Lions, Tigers, etc.) to
   fear. An adult hyena's bite pressure can reach 800 lb per square inch;
   it can crush bone.

   Hyenas range in length from 1.2–1.5 meters (3.9–4.9 ft) including the
   tail, which is 30 cm (12 inches) in length. An adult hyena weighs
   between 25 and 55 kg (55–120 lb). The pelt can be light to dark-brown
   on brown hyenas, while the color can be grey, sometimes nearly white on
   striped hyenas. Aardwolves have a warm, sand-colored coat, while the
   coats of spotted hyenas can range from dark-brown fur to amber and
   reddish in colour. However, some Hyenas have spots.

   Their front legs are longer than their back legs, giving them their
   distinctive gait. This feature, along with the fact that they have a
   heart twice the size of an adult lion's, allows them to stalk their
   prey for many miles at about 6 mph, waiting for their prey to become
   exhausted from the chase, and then they can move in very quick at
   speeds of up to 30 mph.

   In ancient times, large hyenas ranged over much of Europe and Asia, but
   they are much reduced in range and diversity today. Only four species
   survive: the spotted, brown, and striped hyenas (which together make up
   the subfamily Hyaeninae), and the aardwolf, which is the only member of
   the subfamily Protelinae.
   Spotted Hyena, Crocuta crocuta
   Enlarge
   Spotted Hyena, Crocuta crocuta

   Hyenas are highly intelligent predators, and some scientists claim they
   are of equal intelligence to certain apes. One indication of hyena
   intelligence is that they will move their kills closer to each other to
   protect them from scavengers; another indication is their strategic
   hunting methods.

   One unusual feature of the hyena is that females have an enlarged
   clitoris called a Pseudo-penis. Female hyenas give birth, copulate, and
   urinate through their protruding genitalia, which stretches to allow
   the male penis to enter for copulation, and it also stretches during
   birth. The anatomical position of the genitalia gives females total
   sexual control over who is allowed to mate with them. Researchers
   originally thought that one of the things that causes this
   characteristic of the genitals is androgens that are expressed to the
   fetus very early on in its development. However, it was discovered that
   when the androgens are held back from the fetus, the development of the
   female genitalia was not altered.

Hunting

   The spotted hyenas are an example of how the cooperative form of
   hunting can be dictated by the type of prey, as well as the predator’s
   ability to hunt and kill the different types of prey. When hyenas hunt
   an animal that is bigger than themselves, they may hunt in packs and
   take down the prey by biting and dragging it to the ground. If they are
   after smaller prey, they will hunt alone in a fox-like matter.

   Like dogs, but unlike some other animals in the same habitat, hyenas do
   not kill their prey directly. Having chased their prey to exhaustion,
   their prey is unable to mount any further defence of itself, and is
   captured and eaten while still alive. Although somewhat distasteful
   from the human perspective, the speedy disembowelment of the prey means
   that death often comes sooner than with the methods employed by other
   predators (for example, suffocation) and is an efficient means of
   eating which lessens the probability of the kill being lost to another
   predator.

   Hyenas adapt their specific hunting strategy to the environment in
   which they live. In the Ngorogoro Crater, there is a very rich and
   concentrated amount of prey, and there are relatively many great beasts
   such as wildebeest or zebras. These animals are very much bound to one
   place and don’t migrate. Here, hyenas live in large clans (between 10
   and 100 members per clan) and have established hunting territory which
   they often defend against neighbouring clans. The amount of large prey
   animals makes cooperative hunting more necessary than in the Serengeti,
   for example, where the clans often aren’t that large and must follow
   the herds when they migrate. Hyenas following migrating prey are less
   territorial, and will often hunt small animals individually as well as
   large ones in packs. Hunting in packs is proven to be more effective
   and fast than hunting alone, especially with large prey animals.

   It is also common to see that some hyena clans actually have
   specialized in hunting certain types of prey. One clan may have
   specialized in hunting wildebeest, whilst another has specialized in
   hunting zebras. For instance, the “wildebeest hunters” often hunt in
   small groups (often 2–7 hyenas). When they approach the wildebeest
   herd, one of them runs into the herd and causes confusion. Then, it
   picks out a certain animal (usually the oldest, youngest or one that is
   wounded or weak) it begins to hunt down. The other hyenas then join it,
   scaring all other wildebeest away and concentrating on the unfortunate
   chosen one. Such a hunt can go for a couple of kilometres, with a speed
   up to 64 km/h in short bursts. When the prey is down, the hyenas share
   the food according to rank and dominance usually without any major
   fights. In spite of the fact that they are equally hungry, they are
   tolerant and respect each others’ ranks. The more is usually the
   better, since the prey can be effectively defended against other
   predators, such as lions.

   The hunting of zebras is slightly different, however, since the social
   structure of wildebeest and zebra are different. The zebras huddle
   together when they spot the hyenas, and run away close to each other. A
   group of hyenas that are after zebras will find this hunt difficult,
   because the leading stallion fiercely defends his herd with kicks and
   bites. Again, one single hyena must run up in front and distract the
   stallion, while another picks out an animal. As soon as this hyena
   bites, the others will join in, while two hyenas constantly distract
   the stallion, until it gives up.

   An average number of 11 hyenas is often required for such a hunt, but
   the number doubles up when it is feeding time. There are most often 6
   hyenas hunting a wildebeest, but the number on feeding time is the same
   as with zebras.

   The difference in numbers when hunting is connected to how well the
   prey is able to defend itself. Hyenas only hunt the prey they are able
   to at the specific time (four hyenas, for example, wouldn‘t try hunting
   down a zebra). The size and behaviour of the hunting parties is
   therefore directly connected to the size and behaviour of the prey
   animals.

Fighting

   Hyenas within the same clan rarely fight in a way that can damage them
   seriously. Most bickering is settled quickly, even by members that have
   similar ranking in the social hierarchy. Some loud noises and a couple
   of light bites is usually enough, and if the fight ever gets out of
   hand, it is quite normal for a hyena of a higher rank to step in and
   interrupt the fight.

   Even hyenas that are strange to each other would rather avoid battle
   than recklessly try to kill each other. Usually, scent marking
   territories avoids conflicts: if a lone hyena should enter a hostile
   territory anyway, it keeps a low profile and stays out in the borders.
   Female hyenas are treated with more hostility than males, since males
   from different clans are needed for breeding in the clan. Strangers are
   rarely accepted in a clan, but if so, they are usually placed at the
   bottom of the ranking system.

   If a clan member spots an intruder, it will quickly start scent
   marking, to make the intruder aware of that he is not welcome.
   Furthermore, the clan member will raise tail and make a whooping noise
   to warn the rest of the clan. Typically, the intruder will slink away
   before any physical contact is made.

   The situation is different, however, when it comes to two clans
   fighting each other. The rules are much the same if it is one clan
   intruding into hostile territory. Hyena clans may try to take over
   weaker clans' territories, because of lack of prey or peace in their
   own territory. Human interaction is among the reasons hyena clans do
   this, because human activities often cause hyena territories to shrink
   or reduce the available prey population.

   When a member of the defending clan spots an enemy clan that has come
   too close, it calls the whole clan together. Cubs are sent down to
   their dens and some selected adult females stay and guard them. The
   other adults, male and female, huddle together with bristling manes and
   raised tails, making a rumbling "giggle". They form a kind of a wall,
   to keep the intruders from reaching further into their territory and
   most importantly, their cubs. The defenders stand their ground and
   occasionally, one defending hyena rushes out and attacks the enemies.
   More defenders typically follow, while there are always some hyenas
   holding their ground, making sure no intruders pass through. The
   attackers try to push themselves forward as well as possible. If the
   defenders try to spread them, they typically lunge over the hyena that
   started the attack to provoke the others and make them unsure.

   Fights between clans actually are based on a strict set of rules, and
   while often portrayed as brutal and reckless, hyena clans will often
   co-ordinate their attacks. The winning clan is usually the bigger, more
   numerous one, but not necessarily: If a clan has few members, but those
   members are extremely bold, they may gain the upper hand.

   The rules are slightly different when it comes to two clans on neutral
   territory. Then it typically is about defending or stealing a kill, but
   since this isn't as valuable as a territory or young cubs, battles (if
   there are any) are normally very short and the winner is often the
   group with most members.

   Nevertheless, under normal circumstances, these clan confrontations are
   rare compared to the many confrontations clans have with lions. When
   defending territories and dens, the behaviour is similar to when the
   clan is attacked by other hyenas. There is increased attention on the
   cubs, though, since lions often pay visits to hyena territory to kill
   their offspring.

   Again, the hyenas huddle together to form a wall. It is naturally
   easier for the lions to break this wall, because of their bulk, but the
   hyenas quickly form it again as soon as they are spread. If the hyenas
   are too few, they will not attack the lions, but stay in defense,
   trying to tire the big cats out.

   If the hyenas are numerous enough, however, they lunge forward and aim
   for the lions' hindquarters and try to rip their haunches and bite
   their tails off. Since lions have both teeth and claws to fight with,
   hyenas are more likely to attack from the behind and drag the lion down
   on the ground, where they attempt to tear the soft belly apart.

   If it is the hyenas that are the attackers and are out to kill the
   lions' offspring, they come in large numbers, distracting most of the
   adult lions while a couple of quick hyenas snatch the cubs. At least
   four hyenas are needed to chase off a lioness, while at least six
   hyenas are required to even up a confrontation with an adult male lion.
   Again, biting and tearing from behind is preferred rather than facing
   the big cats' deadly claws.

   Similar behaviour is seen when stealing a kill, which hyenas are quite
   successful at. When defending a kill, the hyenas can be the losers when
   lions are involved, since they don't hunt in extremely large groups but
   rather prefer to kill several times the same night. The lions often
   come in large raiding parties to make sure they can steal the hyenas'
   prey. However, hyenas have learned to deal with this and usually they
   are fortunate enough to call more of the clan together and take their
   prey back, unless an adult male lion is present, as male lions seem to
   truly terrify hyenas and hyenas rarely challenge them.

   Stealing kills from cheetahs and leopards and other loners, on the
   other hand, rarely requires fighting and calling the clan. It can get a
   bit dramatic when a hyena clan faces a pack of African wild dogs, but
   not nearly as violent as encounters with lions. Usually, it is the wild
   dogs that back out. In spite of being fierce killers, wild dogs are
   more docile than the aggressive hyenas.

Digestion

   Hyenas have extremely strong jaws and compared to their body size, they
   are one of the most powerful of the mammals. They also have a very
   powerful digestive system with highly acidic fluids. This makes them
   capable of eating and digesting their entire prey, including skin,
   teeth, horns, hooves and even bones. Since they eat carcasses, their
   digestion system deals very well with bacteria.

Life within the clan

   A group of spotted hyenas (called a "clan") can include 5–90 members
   and is led by a single alpha female called the matriarch. A complicated
   social hierarchy governs the clan, which cubs often learn before they
   begin to walk. Females are the dominant members, followed in rank by
   cubs, while adult males rank lowest. Male hyenas, which are usually
   smaller and less aggressive than females, often leave the clan when
   they are about two years old. Females tend to mate with males from
   other clans, thereby preventing inbreeding. Female hyenas very rarely
   mate with highly aggressive males. Instead, calmer and more patient
   males are selected. Patience is especially important since courtship
   can last as long as a year. For this reason, dominant and impatient
   males have difficulty finding mates. Despite the complicated courtship,
   the female raises her pups without the male. Infanticide is common.
   "Prior to the mother's return, another adult female (a full sister to
   the new mother) arrived and methodically killed both newborns with
   crushing bites to the head" (Paula A. White)
   Skull of Hyaena eximia
   Enlarge
   Skull of Hyaena eximia
   Lower jaw of Hyaena eximia
   Enlarge
   Lower jaw of Hyaena eximia

   Hyenas are born with teeth, which means that sometimes when the cubs
   fight they can kill each other. BBC's Carnivore! has footage showing
   the deadly infighting of cubs from the moment they are born. When Paula
   A. White studied the correlation of cub survival with maternal rank,
   she found that primary causes of cub death were "intraclan infanticide,
   disease, orphaning, predation by lions, and a mechanism of filial
   infanticide" . Hyenas produce milk high in nutrients, so, unlike lions
   and wild dogs, they can leave their cubs for about a week without
   feeding them. This allows them to follow the herds of wildebeest, thus
   ensuring that they can obtain the best prey.

Scavenger

   Despite common belief, only some species belonging to this family are
   scavengers, and most of the prey consumed by hyenas was killed by
   hyenas. The brown and the striped hyena are the only true scavengers,
   deriving most of their food from others, and the spotted hyena is a
   true predator, and the most effective predator on the African Savannah.

Hyenas in popular culture

   Hyenas are frequently portrayed as villains in film. This, however, is
   understandable: even in the early researches of these animals,
   naturalists knew little about them. They were mysterious, lived in
   groups, hunted at night and made sounds that are quite human-like (for
   example the "laughing"). There was much folklore about hyenas because
   they typically scavenge most during the day, where the humans have
   possibility to see it. At night, they were feared because this was
   their natural hunting time and they come out in great numbers.
   Nocturnal animals often are mysterious in folklore as well as real
   life. The carrion-eating made the hyena even more unpopular and it
   didn't make it better that the animals often dug up graves to eat the
   remains of corpses down there. This behaviour made them seem unclean
   and cowardly, and because of the usual bickering between the ranks and
   their enormous appetite, they were thought to be greedy and selfish. In
   local folklore, it was believed that the sight of a hyena's shadow
   could strike dogs dumb with fear and the sight of its skin would even
   make the leopard's fur fall out in fright.

   Early naturalists thought hyenas were hermaphrodites or the result of
   the mating of a dog with a wolf. According to early writings such as
   Ovid's Metamorphoses and the Physiologus, the hyena continually changed
   its sex and nature from male to female and back again. It, therefore,
   became an image of sexual deformity, prostitution, and deviant sexual
   behaviour.

   It was believed to have powers of divination and fascination and to
   know the secrets of magic, the dead, and various hidden or demonic
   forces. It was thought to imitate human voices and call its victims by
   name. This talent made it a symbol of the Devil who disguised his
   tempting voice as that of an angel. He caused confusion in his prey and
   hypnotized them with his shadow or the touch of his paw. It was
   believed that the souls of humans it had eaten remained forever visible
   in the eyes of the hyena who devoured them. Sorcerers hunted with hyena
   packs and became hyenas themselves in order to tear their enemies
   apart. Witches and ghosts were thought to ride upon these beasts.

   In modern culture, these images still stick on to the hyenas. Hyenas,
   especially spotted ones, are hard to train for movies. Their wild
   instincts are difficult to tame and they are proven to be too
   intelligent for their own good and refuse to constantly do the same
   trick, simply because it bores them. They have, however, been used in
   animated movies many times. Mostly, they are portrayed as savage,
   unintelligent, hungry and cowardly brutes, opposing the "royal lion".
   The three hyenas Shenzi, Banzai and Ed play this role in the Disney
   movie The Lion King. They are still vicious and greedy, but extremely
   cowardly, only daring to attack when they are many. They are popularly
   used henchmen or spies by greater animals (as in Kimba the White Lion)
   or as cannonfodder in battle. Sometimes, they are even placed randomly
   in movies, only to oppose a lion character. In Disney's The Chronicles
   of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, a hyena is seen
   snapping at Aslan the lion's feet, when he walks to the Stone Table.
   C.S. Lewis, author of the popular books, never mentioned a hyena, and
   the movie character never had a bigger role than the snapping, so this
   proves excellently how media still portrays the hyenas as bad guys,
   despite the evidence of their admirable traits.

   Devilish CGI hyenas were used for Exorcist: The Beginning where they
   were supposed to attack a young boy.

   However, their laughing can also make them excellent comic reliefs -
   they are not necessarily villains, but random characters (as in several
   episodes of the TV cartoon Cow and Chicken), idiotic and humouristic.
   Sometimes, the laughing is a cover and the hyena behind is a serious,
   intelligent or even depressed character, like the real life clowns. A
   very depressed sidekick, named Hardy Har Har, is shown in
   Hanna-Barbera's Lippy the Lion. This hyena hardly ever smiles and never
   actually laughs, making him a bit of an odd-ball.

Classification

   Family Hyaenidae
     * Subfamily Hyaeninae
          + Spotted Hyena Crocuta crocuta (this is the "Laughing Hyena")
          + Brown Hyena Parahyaena brunnea (formerly Hyaena brunnea)
          + Striped Hyena Hyaena hyaena
     * Subfamily Protelinae
          + Aardwolf Proteles cristatus

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyena"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
