   #copyright

Ibn Battuta

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Ancient History,
Classical History and Mythology; Religious figures and leaders

         International scholar
   Medieval era
         Name:       Ibn Battuta
        Birth:       February 24, 1304
        Death:       1368 or 1377
   School/tradition: Sunni Shafi'i

   Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibn Batuta ( Arabic: أبو عبد الله محمد ابن بطوطة)
   (born February 24, 1304; year of death uncertain, possibly 1368 or
   1377) was a Moroccan Berber Sunni Islamic scholar and jurisprudent from
   the Maliki Madhhab (a school of Fiqh, or Sunni Islamic law), and at
   times a Qadi or judge. However, he is best known as an extensive
   traveler or explorer, whose account documents his travels and
   side-excursions over a period of almost thirty years, covering some
   73,000 miles (117,000 km). These journeys covered almost the entirety
   of the known Islamic world, extending also to present-day India, the
   Maldives, Sri Lanka, Southeast Asia and China, a distance readily
   surpassing that of his predecessor, near-contemporary and traveler
   Marco Polo.

   At the instigation of the Sultan of Morocco, Abu Inan Faris, several
   years after his return, Ibn Battuta dictated an account of his journeys
   to a scholar named Ibn Juzayy, whom he had met while in Granada. This
   account, recorded by Ibn Juzayy and interspersed with the latter's own
   comments, is the primary source of information for his adventures. The
   title of this initial manuscript may be translated as A Gift to Those
   Who Contemplate the Wonders of Cities and the Marvels of Travelling,
   but is often simply referred to as the Rihla, or "Journey". Whilst
   apparently fictional in places, the Rihla still gives as complete an
   account as exists of some parts of the world in the 14th century.

   Almost all that is known about Ibn Battuta's life comes from one source
   – Ibn Battuta himself (via Ibn Juzayy). In places the things he claims
   he saw or did are probably fanciful, but in many others there is no way
   to know whether he is reporting or story-telling. The following account
   assumes the latter where it is not obviously the former.

The Hajj

   Ibn Batuta was born in Tangier, Morocco some time between 1304 and
   1307, during the time of Merinid Sultanate rule in the Hijri calender
   year 703, into a Berber family. At the age of (approximately) twenty
   Ibn Battuta went on a hajj — a pilgrimage to Mecca. Once done, however,
   he continued traveling, eventually covering about 75,000 miles over the
   length and breadth of the Muslim world, and beyond (about 44 modern
   countries). Batutta started his journeys in 1325.

   Returning to Cairo he took a second side trip, to Damascus (then also
   controlled by the Mameluks), having encountered a holy man during his
   first trip who prophesied that Ibn Battuta would only reach Mecca after
   a journey through Syria. An additional advantage to the side journey
   was that other holy places were along the route – Hebron, Jerusalem,
   and Bethlehem, for example – and the Mameluke authorities put special
   effort into keeping the journey safe for pilgrims.

   After spending Ramadan in Damascus, Ibn Battuta joined up with a
   caravan travelling the 800 miles from Damascus to Medina, burial place
   of Muhammad. After four days, he then journeyed on to Mecca. There he
   completed the usual rituals of a Muslim pilgrim, and having graduated
   to the status of al-Hajji as a result, now faced his return home. Upon
   reflection, he decided to continue journeying instead. His next
   destination was the Il-Khanate in modern-day Iraq and Iran.

To Iran and the Silk Roads

   Once again joining up with a caravan he crossed the border into
   Mesopotamia and visited al-Najaf, the burial place of the fourth Caliph
   Ali. From there he journeyed to Basra, then Isfahan, which was only a
   few decades away from being nearly destroyed by Central Asian warlord
   Timur. Next were Shiraz and Baghdad, the latter of which was in bad
   shape after being sacked by Hulagu Khan.

   There he met Abu Sa'id, the last ruler of the unified Il-Khanate. Ibn
   Battuta travelled with the royal caravan for a while, then turned north
   to Tabriz on the Silk Road. The first major city in the region to open
   its gates to the Mongols, it had become an important trading centre
   after most of its nearby rivals were razed.

Second Hajj and East Africa

   After this trip, Ibn Battuta returned to Mecca for a second hajj, and
   lived there for a year before embarking on a second great trek, this
   time down the Red Sea and the Eastern African coast. His first major
   stop was Aden, where his intention was to make his fortune as a trader
   of the goods that flowed into the Arabian Peninsula from around the
   Indian Ocean. Before doing so, however, he determined to have one last
   adventure, and signed on for a trip down the coast of Africa.

   Spending about a week in each of his destinations, he visited Eritrea,
   Ethiopia, Mogadishu, Mombassa, Zanzibar, and Kilwa, among others. With
   the change of the monsoon, he and the ship he was aboard then returned
   to south Arabia. Having completed his final adventure before settling
   down, he then immediately decided to go visit Oman and the Straits of
   Hormuz. This done, he journeyed to Mecca again.

Byzantine Empire, Anatolia, Central Asia and India

   Spending another year there, he then resolved to seek employment with
   the Muslim Sultan of Delhi. Needing a guide and translator if he was to
   travel there, he went to Anatolia, then under the control of the Seljuk
   Turks, to join up with one of the caravans that went from there to
   India. A sea voyage from Damascus on a Genoese ship landed him in
   Alanya on the southern coast of modern-day Turkey. From there he
   travelled by land to Konya and then Sinope on the Black Sea coast.

   Crossing the Black Sea, Ibn Battuta landed in Caffa (now Theodosia), in
   the Crimea, and entered the lands of the Golden Horde. There he bought
   a wagon and fortuitously joined the caravan of Ozbeg, the Golden
   Horde's Khan, on a journey as far as Astrakhan on the Volga River.

   Upon reaching Astrakhan, the Khan allowed one of his pregnant wives to
   go give birth back in her home city – Constantinople. It is perhaps of
   no surprise to the reader that Ibn Battuta talked his way into this
   expedition, his first beyond the boundaries of the Islamic world.

   Arriving there towards the end of 1332, he met the emperor Andronicus
   III Palaeologus and saw the outside of Hagia Sophia. After a month in
   the city, he retraced his route to Astrakhan, then carried on past the
   Caspian and Aral Seas to Bokhara and Samarkand. From there he journeyed
   south to Afghanistan, the mountain passes of which he used to cross
   into India.

   The Sultanate of Delhi was a relatively new addition to Dar al-Islam,
   and Sultan Muhammed Tughlaq had resolved to import as many Muslim
   scholars and other functionaries as possible to consolidate his rule.
   On the strength of his years of studies while in Mecca, Ibn Battuta was
   employed as a qadi ("judge") by the sultan.

   Tughlaq was erratic even by the standards of the time, and Ibn Battuta
   veered between living the high life of a trusted subordinate, aiding in
   the converting of the people that lived along the trade routes that he
   travelled, and being under suspicion for a variety of reasons against
   the chinese government. Eventually he resolved to leave on the pretext
   of taking another hajj, but the Sultan offered the alternative of being
   ambassador to China. Given the opportunity to both get away from the
   Sultan and visit new lands, Ibn Battuta took it.

Southeast Asia and China

   En route to the coast, he and his party were attacked by Hindus, and
   separated from the others he was robbed and nearly lost his life.
   Nevertheless, he managed to catch up with his group within two days,
   and continued the journey to Cambay. From there they sailed to Calicut.
   While Ibn Battuta visited a mosque on shore, however, a storm blew up
   and two of the ships of his expedition were sunk. The third then sailed
   away without him, and ended up seized by a local king in a Kingdom of
   Samudra, Aceh province of Sumatra a few months later, local myth says
   he was the one who always referred to the kingdom of Samudra but
   pronounced in a way that sounded more like the modern day Sumatra,
   which then became the name of the whole island, previously the island
   was called Andalas.

   Fearful of returning to Delhi as a failure, he stayed for a time in the
   south under the protection of Jamal al-Din, but when that worthy was
   overthrown it became necessary for Ibn Battuta to leave India
   altogether. He resolved to carry on to China, with a detour near the
   beginning of the journey to the Maldives.

   In the Maldives he spent nine months, much more time than he had
   intended to. As a qadi his skills were highly desirable in the
   backwards islands and he was half-bribed, half-kidnapped into staying.
   Appointed chief judge and marrying into the royal family, he became
   embroiled in local politics, and ended up leaving after wearing out his
   welcome by imposing strict judgments in the laissez-faire island
   kingdom. From there he carried on to Ceylon for a visit to Sri Pada
   (Adam's Peak).

   Setting sail from Ceylon, his ship nearly sank in a storm, then the
   ship that rescued him was attacked by pirates. Stranded on shore, Ibn
   Battuta once again worked his way back to Calicut, from where he then
   sailed to the Maldives again before getting onboard a Chinese junk and
   trying once again to get to China.

   This time he succeeded, reaching in quick succession Chittagong,
   Sumatra, Vietnam, and then finally Quanzhou in Fujian Province, China.
   From there he went north to Hangzhou, not far from modern-day Shanghai.
   He also travelled even further north, through the Grand Canal to
   Beijing, although there has been some doubt about whether this actually
   occurred.

Return home and the Black Death

   Returning to Quanzhou, Ibn Battuta decided to return home – though
   exactly where "home" was a bit of a problem. Returning to Calicut once
   again, he pondered throwing himself on the mercy of Muhammed Tughlaq,
   but thought better of it and decided to carry on to Mecca once again.
   Returning via Hormuz and the Il-Khanate, he saw that state dissolved
   into civil war, Abu Sa'id having died since his previous trip there.

   Returning to Damascus with the intention of retracing the route of his
   first Hajj, he learned that his father had died. Death was the theme of
   the next year or so, for the Black Death had begun, and Ibn Battuta was
   on hand as it spread through Syria, Palestine, and Arabia. After
   reaching Mecca, he decided to return to Morocco, nearly a quarter
   century after leaving it. During the trip he made one last detour to
   Sardinia, then returned to Tangier to discover that his mother had also
   died, a few months before.

Andalus and North Africa

   Having settled in Tangier for all of a few days, Ibn Battuta then set
   out for a trip to al-Andalus – Muslim Spain. Alfonso XI of Castile was
   threatening the conquest of Gibraltar, and Ibn Battuta joined up with a
   group of Muslims leaving Tangier with the intention of defending the
   port. By the time he arrived the Black Death had killed Alfonso and the
   threat had receded, so Ibn Battuta decided to visit for pleasure
   instead. He travelled through Valencia, and ended up in Granada.

   Leaving Spain he decided to travel through one of the few parts of the
   Muslim world that he had never explored: Morocco. On his return home he
   stopped for a while in Marrakesh, which was nearly a ghost town after
   the recent plague and the transfer of the capital to Fez.

   Once more he returned to Tangier, and once more he moved on. Two years
   before his own first visit to Cairo, the Malian king Mansa Musa had
   passed through the same city on his own Hajj and had caused a sensation
   with his extravagant riches -- West Africa contained vast quantities of
   gold, previously unknown to the rest of the world. While Ibn Battuta
   never mentions this specifically, hearing of this during his own trip
   must have planted a seed in his mind, for he decided to set out and
   visit the Muslim kingdom on the far side of the Sahara Desert.

Mali

   In the fall of 1351, Ibn Battuta set out from Fez, reaching the last
   Moroccan town ( Sijilmasa) a bit more than a week later. When the
   winter caravans began a few months later, he joined one, and within a
   month he was in the Central Saharan town of Taghaza. A centre of the
   salt trade, Taghaza was awash with salt and Malian gold, though Ibn
   Battuta did not have a favorable impression of the place. Another 500
   miles through the worst part of the desert brought him to Mali,
   particularly the town of Walata.

   From there he travelled southwest along a river he believed to be the
   Nile (it was actually the Niger River) until he reached the capital of
   the Mali Empire. There he met Mansa Suleyman, king since 1341. Dubious
   about the miserly hospitality of the king, he nevertheless stayed for
   eight months before journeying back up the Niger to Timbuktu. Though in
   the next two centuries it would become the most important city in the
   region, at the time it was small and unimpressive, and Ibn Battuta soon
   moved on. Partway through his journey back across the desert he
   received a message from the Sultan of Morocco commanding him to return
   home. This he did, and this time it lasted.

   After the publication of the Rihla, little is known about Ibn Battuta's
   life. He may have been appointed a qadi in Morocco. Ibn Battuta died in
   Morocco some time between 1368 and 1377 from the same diesease that
   claimed his mother's life, the Black Plague. For centuries his book was
   obscure, even within the Muslim world, but in the 1800s it was
   rediscovered and translated into several European languages. Since then
   Ibn Battuta has grown in fame, and is now a well-known figure in the
   Middle East, not only for being a extensive traveller and author but
   also for aiding in the conversion of the people along the trade routes
   that he took.

Trivia

     * Ibn Battuta traveled about twice the distance of Marco Polo

Other possible items

     * Ibn Battuta (crater) for the Lunar crater named after him
     * Ibn Battuta (shopping centre) - Dubai UAE named after him

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ibn_Battuta"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
