   #copyright

Imagism

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Literature types

   Ezra Pound, one of the prime movers of Imagism.
   Enlarge
   Ezra Pound, one of the prime movers of Imagism.

   Imagism was a movement in early 20th century Anglo-American poetry that
   favored precision of imagery, and clear, sharp language. The Imagists
   rejected the sentiment and artifice typical of much Romantic and
   Victorian poetry. This was in contrast to their contemporaries, the
   Georgian poets, who were by and large content to work within that
   tradition. Group publication of work under the Imagist name in
   magazines and in four anthologies appearing between 1914 and 1917
   featured writing by many of the most significant figures in Modernist
   poetry in English, as well as a number of other Modernist figures who
   were to be prominent in fields other than poetry.

   Based in London, the Imagists were drawn from Britain, Ireland and the
   United States. Though somewhat unusual for the time, the Imagists
   featured a number of women writers amongst their major figures.
   Historically, Imagism is also significant because it was the first
   organised Modernist English-language literary movement or group. In the
   words of T.S. Eliot; "The point de repère usually and conveniently
   taken as the starting-point of modern poetry is the group denominated
   'imagists' (sic) in London about 1910."

   At the time Imagism emerged, Longfellow and Tennyson were considered
   the paragons for poetry, and the public valued the sometimes moralising
   tone of their writings. In contrast to this, Imagism called for a
   return to what were seen as more Classical values, such as directness
   of presentation, and economy of language, as well as a willingness to
   experiment with non-traditional verse forms. The focus on the "thing"
   as "thing" (an attempt at isolating a single image to reveal its
   essence) also mirrors contemporary developments in avant-garde art,
   especially Cubism. Although Imagism isolates objects through the use of
   what Ezra Pound called "luminous details", Pound's Ideogrammic Method
   of juxtaposing concrete instances to express an abstraction, is similar
   to the way in which Cubism synthesizes a single image from multiple
   perspectives.

Pre-Imagism

   In the first ten years of the 20th century, Alfred Austin was the
   serving British Poet Laureate. Poetry still had a large audience, and
   volumes of verse published during the decade included Thomas Hardy's
   The Dynasts, Christina Rossetti's posthumous Poetical Works, Ernest
   Dowson's Poems, George Meredith's Last Poems, Robert Service's Ballads
   of a Cheechako and John Masefield's Ballads and Poems. Future Nobel
   Prize for literature winner William Butler Yeats was devoting much of
   his energy to the Abbey Theatre and writing for the stage, producing
   relatively little lyric poetry during this period. In 1907, the Nobel
   Prize for Literature was awarded to Rudyard Kipling. In general, the
   poetry of the period was formally traditionalist and decorous in
   content. These literary figures and values provided the context that
   Imagists emerged in as a self-consciously avant-garde movement.

   The origins of Imagism are to be found in two poems, Autumn and A City
   Sunset by T. E. Hulme. These were published in January 1909 by the
   Poets' Club in London in a booklet called For Christmas MDCCCCVIII.
   Hulme was a student of mathematics and philosophy; he had been involved
   in the setting up of the Club in 1908 and was its first secretary.
   Around the end of 1908 he presented his paper A Lecture on Modern
   Poetry at one of the Club's meetings. Writing in A. R. Orage's magazine
   The New Age, the poet and critic F. S. Flint (a champion of free verse
   and modern French poetry) was highly critical of the club and its
   publications. From the ensuing debate, Hulme and Flint became close
   friends. In 1909 Hulme left the Poets' Club, and started meeting with
   Flint and other poets in a new group which Hulme referred to as the
   'Secession Club'; they met at the Eiffel Tower restaurant in Soho to
   discuss plans to reform contemporary poetry through free verse and the
   tanka and haiku and the removal of all unnecessary verbiage from poems.
   The interest in Japanese verse forms can be placed in a context of the
   late Victorian and Edwardian revival of interest in Chinoiserie and
   Japonism as witnessed in the 1890s vogue for William Anderson's
   Japanese prints donated to the British Museum, performances of Noh
   plays in London, and the success of Gilbert and Sullivan's operetta The
   Mikado. Direct literary models were available from a number of sources,
   including F. V. Dickins’s 1866 Hyak nin is’shiu, or, Stanzas by a
   Century of Poets, Being Japanese Lyrical Odes, the first
   English-language version of the Hyakunin isshu, a 13th century
   anthology of 100 tanka, the early 20th-century critical writings and
   poems of Sadakichi Hartmann, and contemporary French-language
   translations. This group included F. W. Tancred, Joseph Campbell,
   Edward Storer, Desmond FitzGerald and the writer and actor Florence
   Farr, who also worked with W. B. Yeats on performances of poetry to a
   musical accompaniment on the psaltery.

   In April 1909, the American poet Ezra Pound was introduced to this
   group and found that their ideas were close to his own. In particular,
   Pound's studies of Romance literature had led him to an admiration of
   the condensed, direct expression that he detected in the writings of
   Arnaut Daniel, Dante, and Guido Cavalcanti, amongst others. For
   example, in his 1911/12 series of essays I gather the limbs of Osiris,
   Pound writes of Daniel's line "pensar de lieis m'es repaus" ("it rests
   me to think of her") (from the canzone En breu brizara'l temps braus):
   "You cannot get statement simpler than that, or clearer, or less
   rhetorical". These criteria of directness, clarity and lack of rhetoric
   were to be amongst the defining qualities of Imagist poetry. Through
   his friendship with Laurence Binyon, Pound had already developed an
   interest in Japanese art and he quickly became absorbed in the study of
   Japanese verse forms.

   In a 1928 letter to the French critic and translator René Taupin, Pound
   was keen to emphasise another ancestry for Imagism, pointing out that
   Hulme was, in many ways, indebted to a Symbolist tradition, linking
   back via W. B. Yeats, Arthur Symons and the '90s generation of British
   poets to Mallarmé. In 1915, Pound edited the poetry of another 90's
   poet, Lionel Johnson for the publisher Elkin Mathews. In his
   introduction, he wrote "no one has written purer Imagisme than
   [Johnson] has, in the line 'Clear lie the fields, and fade into blue
   air.' It has a beauty like the Chinese."

Early publications and statements of intent

   H.D. Imagiste
   Enlarge
   H.D. Imagiste

   In 1911, Pound introduced two other poets to the Eiffel Tower group,
   his ex-fiancée Hilda Doolittle (who had started signing her work H.D.)
   and her future husband Richard Aldington. These two were interested in
   exploring Greek poetic models, especially Sappho, an interest that
   Pound shared. The compression of expression that they achieved by
   following the Greek example complemented the proto-Imagist interest in
   Japanese poetry, and, in 1912, during a meeting with them in the
   British Museum tea room, Pound told H.D. and Aldington that they were
   Imagistes, and even appended the signature H.D. Imagiste to some poems
   they were discussing.
   Richard Aldington
   Enlarge
   Richard Aldington

   When Harriet Monroe started her Poetry magazine in 1911, she had asked
   Pound to act as foreign editor. In October 1912, he submitted three
   poems each by H.D. and Aldington under the Imagiste rubric. That same
   month, Pound's book Ripostes was published with an appendix called The
   Complete Poetical Works of T. E. Hulme which carried a note that saw
   the first appearance of the word Imagiste in print. Aldington's poems,
   Choricos, To a Greek Marble, and Au Vieux Jadrin, were in the November
   issue of Poetry and H.D.'s, Hermes of the Ways, Orchard, and Epigram,
   appeared in the January 1913 issue; Imagism as a movement was launched.
   The April issue published what was, in the words of J.T. Barbarese,
   "Imagism's enabling text", the haiku-like poem of Ezra Pound entitled
   "In a Station of the Metro":

          The apparition of these faces in the crowd:
          Petals on a wet, black bough.

   The March issue of Poetry also contained Pound's A Few Don'ts by an
   Imagiste and Flint's Imagisme. The latter contained this succinct
   statement of the group's position:
    1. Direct treatment of the "thing", whether subjective or objective.
    2. To use absolutely no word that does not contribute to the
       presentation.
    3. As regarding rhythm: to compose in sequence of the musical phrase,
       not in sequence of the metronome.

   Pound's note opened with a definition of an image as that which
   presents an intellectual and emotional complex in an instant of time.
   Pound goes on to state that It is better to present one Image in a
   lifetime than to produce voluminous works. His list of don'ts
   reinforced Flint's three statements, while warning that they should not
   be considered as dogma but as the result of long contemplation. Taken
   together, these two texts comprised the Imagist programme for a return
   to what they saw as the best poetic practice of the past.

Des Imagistes

   Determined to promote the work of the Imagists, and particularly of
   Aldington and H.D., Pound decided to publish an anthology under the
   title Des Imagistes. This was published in 1914 by the Poetry Bookshop
   in London. In addition to ten poems by Aldington, seven by H.D. and six
   by Pound, the book included work by Flint, Skipwith Cannell, Amy
   Lowell, William Carlos Williams, James Joyce, Ford Madox Ford, Allen
   Upward and John Cournos.

   Pound's editorial choices were based on what he saw as the degree of
   sympathy that these writers displayed with Imagist precepts, rather
   than active participation in a group as such. Williams, who was based
   in the United States, had not participated in any of the discussions of
   the Eiffel Tower group. However, he and Pound had long been
   corresponding on the question of the renewal of poetry along similar
   lines. Ford was included at least partly because of his strong
   influence on Pound as the younger poet made the transition from his
   earlier, Pre-Raphaelite influenced, style towards a harder, more modern
   way of writing.

   The inclusion of a poem by Joyce, I Hear an Army which was sent to
   Pound by W.B. Yeats, took on a wider importance in the history of
   literary modernism as the subsequent correspondence between the two led
   to the serial publication, at Pound's behest, of A Portrait of the
   Artist as a Young Man in The Egoist. Joyce's poem is not written in
   free verse, but in rhyming quatrains. However, it does strongly reflect
   Pound's interest in poems written to be sung to music, such as the
   troubadours and Cavalcanti.

   The book met with little popular or critical success, at least partly
   because it had no introduction or commentary to explain what the poets
   were attempting to do, and a number of copies were returned to the
   publisher.

Some Imagist Poets

   The following year, Pound and Flint fell out over their different
   interpretations of the history and goals of the group arising from an
   article on the history of Imagism written by Flint and published in The
   Egoist in May 1915. Flint was at pains to emphasise the contribution of
   the Eiffel Tower poets, especially Storer. Pound, who believed that the
   "Hellenic hardness" that he saw as the distinguishing quality of the
   poems of H.D. and Aldington was likely to be diluted by the "custard"
   of Storer, was to play no further direct role in the history of the
   Imagists. He went on to co-found the Vorticists with his friend the
   painter and writer Wyndham Lewis. Around this time, the American
   Imagist Amy Lowell moved to London, determined to promote her own work
   and that of the other Imagist poets. Lowell was a wealthy heiress from
   Boston who loved Keats and cigars. She was also an enthusiastic
   champion of literary experiment who was willing to use her money to
   publish the group. Lowell was determined to change the method of
   selection from Pound's autocratic editorial attitude to a more
   democratic manner. This new editorial policy was stated in the Preface
   to the first anthology to appear under her leadership: "In this new
   book we have followed a slightly different arrangement to that of our
   former Anthology. Instead of an arbitrary selection by an editor, each
   poet has been permitted to represent himself by the work he considers
   his best, the only stipulation being that it should not yet have
   appeared in book form."

   The outcome was a series of Imagist anthologies under the title Some
   Imagist Poets. The first of these appeared in 1915, planned and
   assembled mainly by H.D. and Aldington. Two further issues, both edited
   by Lowell, were published in 1916 and 1917. These three volumes
   featured most of the original poets with the exception of Pound, who
   had tried to persuade her to drop the Imagist name from her
   publications and who sardonically dubbed this phase of Imagism
   "Amy-gism."

   Lowell persuaded D. H. Lawrence to contribute poems to the 1915 and
   1916 volumes, making him the only writer to publish as both a Georgian
   poet and an Imagist. Marianne Moore also became associated with the
   group during this period. However, with World War I as a backdrop, the
   times were not easy for avant-garde literary movements (Aldington, for
   example, spent much of the war at the front), and the 1917 anthology
   effectively marked the end of the Imagists as a movement.

The Imagists after Imagism

   In 1929, Walter Lowenfels jokingly suggested that Aldington should
   produce a new Imagist anthology. Aldington, by now a successful
   novelist, took up the suggestion and enlisted the help of Ford and H.D.
   The result was the Imagist Anthology 1930, edited by Aldington and
   including all the contributors to the four earlier anthologies with the
   exception of Lowell, who had died, Cannell, who had disappeared, and
   Pound, who declined. The appearance of this anthology initiated a
   critical discussion of the place of the Imagists in the history of
   20th-century poetry.

   Of the poets who were published in the various Imagist anthologies,
   Joyce, Lawrence and Aldington are now primarily remembered and read as
   novelists. Marianne Moore, who was at most a fringe member of the
   group, carved out a unique poetic style of her own that retained an
   Imagist concern with compression of language. William Carlos Williams
   developed his poetic along distinctly American lines with his variable
   foot and a diction he claimed was taken from "the mouths of Polish
   mothers". Both Pound and H.D. turned to writing long poems but retained
   much of the hard edge to their language as an Imagist legacy. Most of
   the other members of the group are largely forgotten except inasmuch as
   they contributed directly to the history of Imagism.

Legacy

   Despite being so short-lived as a movement, Imagism was to prove to be
   deeply influential on the course of modernist poetry in English.
   Aldington, in his 1941 memoir, writes: "I think the poems of Ezra
   Pound, H.D., Lawrence, and Ford Madox Ford will continue to be read.
   And to a considerable extent T. S. Eliot and his followers have carried
   on their operations from positions won by the Imagists." Wallace
   Stevens on the other hand, voiced his shortcomings in the Imagist
   approach; he wrote "Not all objects are equal. The vice of imagism was
   that it did not recognize this."

   The influence of Imagism can be seen clearly in the work of the
   Objectivist poets, who came to prominence in the 1930s under the
   auspices of Pound and Williams. The Objectivists worked mainly in free
   verse. Clearly linking Objectivism's principles with Imagism's,
   Zukovsky insisted, in his introduction to the 1931 Objectivist issue of
   Poetry, on writing "which is the detail, not mirage, of seeing, of
   thinking with the things as they exist, and of directing them along a
   line of melody."

   The influence of Imagism can be seen in a number of 1950s poetic groups
   and movements, especially the Beat generation, the Black Mountain
   poets, and others associated with the San Francisco Renaissance. In his
   seminal 1950 essay, Projective Verse, Charles Olson, the theorist of
   the Black Mountain group, wrote "ONE PERCEPTION MUST IMMEDIATELY AND
   DIRECTLY LEAD TO A FURTHER PERCEPTION", a credo that derives directly
   from the Imagists.

   Among the Beats, Gary Snyder and Allen Ginsberg in particular were
   influenced by the Imagist emphasis on Chinese and Japanese poetry.
   William Carlos Williams was another who had a strong impact on the Beat
   poets, encouraging poets like Lew Welch and writing an introduction for
   the book publication of Ginsberg's Howl. One poet associated with the
   Objectivist group, Louis Zukofsky, was a major influence on the
   Language poets, who carried the Imagist focus on formal concerns to a
   high level of development. Another, Basil Bunting, was a key figure in
   the early development of the British Poetry Revival, a loose movement
   that also absorbed the influence of the San Francisco Renaissance
   poets.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imagism"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
