   #copyright

Indus River

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Asia

   The position of the Sindhu River in Iron Age Vedic India.
   Enlarge
   The position of the Sindhu River in Iron Age Vedic India.

   The Indus ( Urdu: دریائے سندھ;Sanskrit: सिंधु Sindhu; Sindhi: سنڌو
   Sindh; Hindi: सिन्धु नदी; Tibetan: Sengge Chu ("Lion River"); Persian:
   Hindu or Mehran (an older name); Greek: Sinthos; Pashto: Abaseen ("The
   Father of Rivers"); Chinese: Shendu) is the longest and most important
   river in Pakistan. Originating in the Tibetan plateau in the vicinity
   of Lake Mansarovar, the river runs a course through Jammu and Kashmir
   in both Indian Kashmir and Northern Areas, flowing through the North in
   a southernly direction along the entire length of country, to merge
   into the Arabian Sea near the city of Pakistan's national city Karachi.
   The total length of the river is 3200 km (1988 miles). The river has a
   total drainage area exceeding 450,000 square miles. The river's
   estimated annual flow stands at around 207 cubic kilometres. Beginning
   at the heights of the world with glaciers, the river feeds the
   ecosystem of temperate forests, plains and arid countryside. Together
   with the rivers Chenab, Ravi, Sutlej, Jhelum, Beas and the extinct
   Sarasvati River, the Indus forms the Sapta Sindhu ("Seven Rivers")
   delta in the Sindh province of Pakistan. It has 20 major tributaries.

   The Indus provides the key water resources for the economy of Pakistan
   - especially the breadbasket of Punjab province, which accounts for
   most of the nation's agricultural production, and Sindh. It also
   supports many heavy industries and provides the main supply of potable
   water in Pakistan.
   Satellite image of the Indus River basin.
   Enlarge
   Satellite image of the Indus River basin.

   The ultimate source of the Indus is in Tibet; it begins at the
   confluence of the Sengge and Gar rivers that drain the Nganglong Kangri
   and Gangdise Shan mountain ranges. The Indus then flows northwest
   through Ladakh- Baltistan into Gilgit, just south of the Karakoram
   range. The Shyok, Shigar and Gilgit streams carry glacieral waters into
   the main river. It gradually bends to the south, coming out of the
   hills between Peshawar and Rawalpindi. The Indus passes gigantic gorges
   (15,000-17,000 feet) near the Nanga Parbat massif It swiftly flows
   across Hazara, and is dammed at the Tarbela Reservoir. The Kabul River
   joins it near Attock. The remainder of its route to the sea is in
   plains of the Punjab and Sind, and the river becomes slow-flowing and
   highly braided. It is joined by Panjnad River at Mithankot. Beyond this
   confluence, the river, at one time, was named as Satnad River (sat =
   seven, nadi = river) as the river was now carrying the waters of Kabul
   River, Indus River and the five Punjab rivers. Passing by Hyderabad, it
   ends in a large delta to the east of Karachi.

   The Indus is, by volume, the largest exotic river (one that mainly
   flows through a country from which it receives no water) in the world.
   It is one of the few rivers in the world that exhibit a tidal bore. The
   Indus system is largely fed by the snows and glaciers of the Karakoram,
   Hindu Kush and Himalayan ranges of Tibet, Kashmir and Northern Areas of
   Pakistan. The flow of the river is also determined by the seasons - it
   diminishes greatly in the winter, while flooding its banks in the
   monsoon months from July to September. There is also evidence of a
   steady shift in the course of the river since prehistoric times - it
   deviated westwards from flowing into the Rann of Kutch. It is the
   Official and National River of Pakistan in Urdu as Qaumi Daryaa.

History

   Archaeological sites in the Indus Valley.
   Enlarge
   Archaeological sites in the Indus Valley.

   Paleolithic sites have been discovered in Pothohar, with the stone
   tools of the Soan Culture. In ancient Gandhara, evidence of cave
   dwellers dated 15,000 years ago has been discovered at Mardan.

   The major cities of the Indus Valley Civilization (IVC), such as
   Harappa and Mohenjo Daro, date back to around 3300 BC, and represent
   some of the largest human habitations of the ancient world. The IVC was
   extended from Balochistan to Gujarat, with an upward reach to the
   Punjab from east of River Jhelum to Rupar on the upper Sutlej. The
   coast settlements extended from Sutkagan Dor at Iranian border to
   Lothal in Gujarat. There is an Indus site on the Oxus river at
   Shortughai in northern Afghanistan (Kenoyer 1998:96), and the Indus
   site Alamgirpur at the Hindon river is located only 28 km from Delhi
   (S.P. Gupta 1995:183). To date, over 1,052 cities and settlements have
   been found, mainly in the general region of the Ghaggar-Hakra River and
   its tributaries. Among the settlements were the major urban centers of
   Harappa and Mohenjo-daro, as well as Lothal, Dholavira, Ganeriwala, and
   Rakhigarhi. Only 90 to 96 of the over 800 known Indus Valley sites have
   been discovered on the Indus and its tributaries. The Sutlej, now a
   tributary of the Indus, in Harappan times flowed into the Ghaggar-Hakra
   River, in the watershed of which were more Harappan sites than along
   the Indus (S.P. Gupta 1995: 183).

   Settlements of Gandhara grave culture of the early Indo-Aryans
   flourished in Gandhara from 1700 to 600 BCE, when Mohenjo Daro and
   Harappa had already been abandoned. The name Indus is a Latinization of
   Hindu, in turn the Iranian variant of Sindhu, the name of the Indus in
   the Rigveda. Sanskrit sindhu generically means "river, stream",
   probably from a root sidh "to go, move"; sindhu is attested 176 times
   in the Rigveda, 95 times in the plural, more often used in the generic
   meaning. Already in the Rigveda, notably in the later hymns, the
   meaning of the word is narrowed to refer to the Indus river in
   particular, for example in the list of rivers of the Nadistuti sukta.
   This resulted in the anomaly of a river with masculine gender: all
   other Rigvedic rivers are female, not just grammatically, being
   imagined as goddesses and compared to cows and mares yielding milk and
   butter.

   The Indus has formed a natural boundary between the Indian hinterland
   and its frontier with Afghanistan and Iran. It has been crossed by the
   armies of Alexander the Great - Greek forces retreated along the
   southern course of the river at the end of the Indian campaign. The
   Indus plains have also been under the domination of the Persian empire
   and the Kushan empire. The Muslim armies of Muhammad bin Qasim, Mahmud
   of Ghazni and Babur also crossed the river to strike into the inner
   regions of Gujarat, Punjab and Rajputana.

Geography

Tributaries

   Confluence of Indus and Zanskar rivers.
   Enlarge
   Confluence of Indus and Zanskar rivers.
     * Beas
     * Kabul
     * Ravi
     * Wakha
     * Shingo
     * Sutlej
     * Astor
     * Gilgit
     * Ghizar
     * Hunza

               * Gumal
               * Zhob
               * Zanskar
               * Kunar
               * Gar
               * Shyok
               * Shigar
               * Chenab
               * Jhelum morning
               * Suru Chu
               * Swaan stream

Delta

   Indus River Delta
   Enlarge
   Indus River Delta

   The Indus River Delta occurs where the Indus River flows into the
   Arabian Sea in Pakistan. The delta covers an area of about 16,000
   square miles (41,440 km²), and is approximately 130 miles across where
   it meets the sea. Unlike many other deltas, the Indus River Delta
   consists of clay and other infertile soils, and is very swampy. The
   delta receives between 10 and 20 inches of rainfall in a normal year.

   Pakistan's fifth largest city, Hyderabad, lies about 130 miles north of
   the mouths of the Indus. Towns are found throughout the delta, but
   there are no large cities on the delta south of Hyderabad. Karachi,
   Pakistan's largest city, lies west of the delta on the coast of the
   Arabian Sea. Average temperatures for the delta region in July range
   from 70 - 85 °F, and 50 - 70 °F in January. The Indus River Delta is an
   important region for migrating water birds, and is an area rich in
   freshwater fauna. Fish found in the delta include the Hilsa, Indus
   baril, Indus garua (a catfish), and the giant snakehead.

Climate

   The Indus delta is one of the driest in the Indian subcontinent, lying
   just to the west of the Thar Desert of Rajasthan - and rainfall is
   extraordinarily erratic owing to the passage of cyclones from the
   Arabian Sea. The Punjab plains, however, receive considerable rainfall
   from the summer monsoon: at Abbottabad the average annual rainfall is
   around 1,200mm (47 inches) and at Murree around 1,700mm (67 inches)
   with as much as 730mm (28 inches) in July and August alone. The upper
   basin of the Indus receives 4-8 inches of rainfall (higher in the west)
   in the winter months owing to northwestern winds. Higher elevations in
   Kashmir and the Northern Areas receives a large amount of precipitation
   in the form of snow, but the lower valleys are extremely dry and quite
   warm in the summer. Annual temperatures fall below freezing in the
   northern mountainous regions in the winter, while exceeding 100 degrees
   Fahrenheit in the plains of Punjab and Sindh in the summer. Jacobabad,
   which is one of the hottest spots in the world, lies to the west of the
   river in Sindh.

Wildlife

   Accounts of the Indus valley from the times of Alexander's campaign
   indicate a healthy forest cover in the region, which has now
   considerably receded. The Mughal Emperor Babar writes of encountering
   rhinoceroses along its bank in his memoirs (the BaberNameh). Extensive
   deforestation and human interference in the ecology of the Shivalik
   Hills has led to a marked deterioration in vegetation and growing
   conditions. The Indus valley regions are arid with poor vegetation.
   Agriculture is sustained largely due to irrigation works.

   The Blind Indus River Dolphin (Platanista gangetica minor) is a
   sub-species of Dolphins found only in the Indus River. It formerly also
   occurred in the tributaries of the Indus river. Palla fish ( Hilsa
   ilisha) of the river is a delicacy for people living along the river.
   The population of fishes in the river is moderate, with Sukkur, Thatta
   and Kotri being the major fishing centres - all in the lower Sindh
   course. But damming and irrigation has made fish farming an important
   economic activity. Located southeast of Karachi, the large delta has
   been recognised by conservationists as one of the world's most
   important ecological regions. Here the river distributes into many
   marshes, streams and creeks and meets the sea at shallow levels. Here
   marine fishes are found in abundance, including pomfret and prawns.

Economy

   The Indus is the most important supplier of water resources to the
   Punjab and Sindh plains - it forms the backbone of agriculture and food
   production in Pakistan. The river is especially critical as rainfall is
   meagre in the lower Indus valley. Irrigation canals were first built by
   the peoples of the Indus valley civilization, and later by the
   engineers of the Kushan empire and the Mughal empire. Modern irrigation
   was introduced by the British East India Company in 1850 - the
   construction of modern canals accompanied with the restoration of old
   canals. The British supervised the construction of one of the most
   complex irrigation networks in the world. The Guddu Barrage is 4,450
   feet long - irrigating Sukkur, Jacobabad, Larkana and Kalat. The Sukkur
   Barrage serves over five million acres (20,000 km²).

   After partition, the Pakistan Water and Power Development Authority
   undertook the construction of the Chashma-Jhelum link canal - linking
   the waters of the Indus and Jhelum rivers - extending water supplies to
   the regions of Bahawalpur and Multan. Pakistan also constructed the
   Tarbela Dam near Rawalpindi - standing 9,000 feet long and 470 feet
   high, with a 50 mile-long reservoir. The Kotri Barrage near Hyderabad
   is 3,000 feet long and provides additional supplies for Karachi. The
   Taunsa Barrage near Dera Ghazi Khan produces 100,000 kilowatts of
   electricity. The extensive linking of tributaries with the Indus has
   helped spread water resources to the valley of Peshawar, the Northwest
   Frontier Province. The extensive irrigation and dam projects provide
   the basis for Pakistan's large production of crops such as cotton,
   sugarcane and wheat. The dams also generate electricity for heavy
   industries and urban centres.

People

   The Indus River near Skardu, Pakistan
   Enlarge
   The Indus River near Skardu, Pakistan

   The inhabitants of the regions through whom the Indus river passes and
   forms a major natural feature and resource are diverse in ethnicity,
   religion, national and linguistic backgrounds. On the northern course
   of the river in Kashmir live the Buddhist people of Ladakh, of Tibetan
   stock, with Kashmiris who practise both Islam and Hinduism. As it
   descends into Northern Areas of Pakistan, the Indus river forms a
   distinctive boundary of ethnicity and cultures - upon the western banks
   the population is largely Pashtun, Balochi, and of other Afghan stock,
   with close cultural, economic and ethnic ties to Iran and Afghanistan.
   The eastern banks are largely populated with peoples of the Punjabi
   stock, with smaller populations of Sindhis and people from regions in
   modern India. In northern Punjab and the NWFP, Pathan peoples and
   ethnic Pashtun tribes live alongside Punjabi peoples. In the southern
   portion of the Punjab province, the Serakai peoples speak a distinctive
   tongue and practise distinctive traditions. In the province of Sindh,
   peoples of Sindhi, Gujarati, Punjabi and Urdu-speaking Mohajir
   backgrounds form the local populations. Upon the western banks of the
   river live the Balochi and Pashtun peoples of Balochistan.

Modern issues

   A flooded Indus river inundates the Srinagar-Kargil-Leh highway.
   Enlarge
   A flooded Indus river inundates the Srinagar- Kargil- Leh highway.

   Due to its location and vast water resources, Indus is a strategically
   vital resource for Pakistan's economy and society. The river is also
   sacred for Hindus in both India and Pakistan, and India's control of
   the river in its Kashmir course has created conflict for the use of the
   river's resources between the two nations.

Indus Waters treaty

   After the partition of India in 1947, the use of the waters of the
   Indus and its five eastern tributaries became a major dispute between
   India and Pakistan. The irrigation canals of the Sutlej valley and the
   Bari Doab were split - with the canals lying primarily in Pakistan and
   the headwork dams in India - disrupting supply in some parts of
   Pakistan. The concern over India building large dams over various
   Punjab rivers that could undercut the supply flowing to Pakistan, as
   well as the possibility that India could divert rivers in the time of
   war, caused political consternation in Pakistan. Holding diplomatic
   talks brokered by the World Bank, India and Pakistan signed the Indus
   Waters Treaty in 1960. The treaty gave India the control of the three
   easternmost rivers of the Punjab, Sutlej, Beas and the Ravi, while
   Pakistan gained control of the three western rivers, Jhelum, Chenab and
   the Indus. India retained the right to use of the western rivers for
   non irrigation projects. (See discussion regarding a recent dispute
   about a hydroelectric project on the Chenab (not Indus) known as the
   Baghlighar project).

Pilgrimage

   Hindu pilgrimage to holy sites alongside the river has been a source of
   conflict between the nations. Pakistan does generally allow Indian
   citizens to visit the country for religious purposes, However, owing to
   the volatile nature of bilateral relations, most pilgrimage and
   religious ceremonies are performed by Hindus in Kashmir.

Conservation

   There are concerns that extensive deforestation, industrial pollution
   and global warming are affecting the vegetation and wildlife of the
   Indus delta, while affecting agricultural production as well. There are
   also concerns that the Indus river may be shifting its course westwards
   - although the progression spans centuries. On numerous occasions,
   Water-clogging owing to poor maintenance of canals has affected
   agricultural production and vegetation. In addition, extreme heat has
   caused water to evaporate leaving salt deposits that render lands
   useless for cultivation.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indus_River"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
