   #copyright

Inner Hebrides

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

   The Hebrides (Inner Hebrides in red)
   Enlarge
   The Hebrides (Inner Hebrides in red)

   The Inner Hebrides are an archipelago off the west coast of Scotland,
   to the south east of the Outer Hebrides. They are part of the Hebrides.
   In classical sources, they are referred to as the Ebudae or the Ebudes.
   Traditionally, the Inner Hebrides have been subdivided into two groups
   (northern and southern).

History

   The Hebrides began to come under Norse control and settlement already
   before the 9th century AD. The Norse control of the Hebrides was
   formalized in 1098 when Edgar of Scotland formally signed the islands
   over to Magnus III of Norway. The Scottish acceptance of Magnus III as
   King of the Isles came after the Norwegian king had conquered the
   Orkney Islands, the Hebrides and the Isle of Man in a swift campaign
   earlier the same year, directed against the local Norwegian leaders of
   the various islands. By capturing the islands Magnus III subdued the
   Norsemen who had seized the islands centuries earlier and imposed a
   more direct royal control.

   The Norwegian control of both the Inner and Outer Hebrides would see
   almost constant warfare until being ultimately resolved by the
   partioning of the Western Isles in 1156. The Outer Hebrides would
   remain under the Kingdom of Mann and the Isles while the Inner Hebrides
   broke out under Somerled, the Norse-Celtic kinsman of both Lulach and
   the Manx royal house. Although the Inner Hebrides, from 1156 known as
   the Kingdom of the Hebrides, still nominally was under the sovereignty
   of Norway, the leaders were Scottish in language and culture rather
   than Norse.

   After his victory of 1156 Somerled went on to two years later seize
   control over the Isle of Man itself and become the last King of the
   Isle of Man and the Isles to rule over all the islands the kingdom had
   once included. After Somerled's death in 1164 the rulers of Mann would
   no longer be in control of the Inner Hebrides.

   The Lord of the Isles would continue to rule the Inner Hebrides as well
   as part of the Western Highlands as a subject of the King of Scots
   until John MacDonald, fourth Lord of the Isles, squandered the family's
   power away. Through a secret treaty with Edward IV of England in 1462,
   he planned to make himself more or less an independent ruler. When
   James III of Scotland found out about the treaty in 1475, he forfeited
   MacDonald's lands. Some were restored for a promise of good behaviour,
   but MacDonald was unable to control his son who defeated him at the
   Battle of Bloody Bay (Mull, 1481) and his nephew whose rebellion in
   1493 provoked an exasperated James IV to forfeit the lands for the last
   time in 1493. MacDonald died in 1503.

Islands

Northern

   The northern Inner Hebrides comprise Skye, the Small Isles and some
   smaller islands surrounding Skye. They are part of the Highland unitary
   council region. The smaller islands include:
     * Ascrib Islands
     * Crowlin Islands
     * Isay
     * Longay
     * Ornsay
     * Raasay
     * Pabay
     * Scalpay, Soay, South Rona
     * Wiay

Southern

   The southern Inner Hebrides comprise Mull, Islay, Jura, the Slate
   Islands, the Treshnish Islands and some islands surrounding Mull. They
   are part of the Argyll and Bute council region. The smaller islands
   include:
     * Calve Island, Cara, Carna, Coll, Colonsay
     * Eileach an Naoimh, Eilean Dubh Mór, Eilean Macaskin, Eilean Righ,
       Eorsa, Erraid
     * Garbh Eileach, Gigha, Gometra, Gunna, Shuna
     * Iona, Inch Kenneth
     * Kerrera
     * Lismore, Little Colonsay, Luing, Lunga
     * Oronsay
     * Scarba, Seil, Shuna, Staffa
     * Texa, Tiree
     * Ulva

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inner_Hebrides"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
