   #copyright

Iraq

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; Middle Eastern
Countries

                           جمهورية العراق
   Jumhuriyat Al Iraq
   كۆماری عێراق
   Komara Iraqê
   Republic of Iraq

   Flag of Iraq Coat of arms of Iraq
   Flag         Coat of arms
   Motto: Arabic: الله أكبر
   ( Transliteration: Allahu Akbar)
   ( Translation: "God is Great")
   Anthem: Mawtini (new);
   Ardh Alforatain (previous)^
   Location of Iraq
            Capital           Baghdad^
                              33°20′N 44°26′E
          Largest city        Baghdad
       Official languages     Arabic, Kurdish^ , ( Assyrian (Syriac)^ and Iraqi
                              Turkmen^ )
   Government                 Parliamentary democracy
    - President               Jalal Talabani
    - Prime Minister          Nouri al-Maliki
          Independence
    - from the Ottoman Empire October 1, 1919
    - from the United Kingdom October 3, 1932
                                      Area
    - Total                   438,317 km² ( 58th)
                              169,234 sq mi
    - Water (%)               1.1
                                   Population
    - 2005 estimate           28,807,000 ( 40th)
    - Density                 66/km² ( 125th)
                              171/sq mi
           GDP ( PPP)         2005 estimate
    - Total                   $89.8 billion ( not ranked)
    - Per capita              $3,600 ( not ranked)
            Currency          Iraqi dinar ( IQD)
           Time zone          ( UTC+3)
    - Summer ( DST)           ( UTC+4)
          Internet TLD        .iq
          Calling code        +964
   1↑ The Kurds use Ey Reqîb.

   2↑ The capital of the Kurdistan Autonomous Region is Arbil.
   3↑ Official language in three Kurdish regions and an official language
   of Iraqi government. 4↑ According to Article 4, Section 4 of the Iraqi
   Constitution, the Syriac (a dialect of Aramaic) and Iraqi Turkmen (a
   dialect of Southern Azerbaijani) languages are official in areas where
   they form a majority.

   The Republic of Iraq (conventional short form: Iraq) (Arabic: ‎ العراق
     translit: 'al-‘Irāq, Kurdish: عيَراق), is a country in Southwest Asia
   encompassing most of Mesopotamia as well as the northwestern end of the
   Zagros mountain range and the eastern part of the Syrian Desert. It
   shares borders with Kuwait and Saudi Arabia to the south, Jordan to the
   west, Syria to the northwest, Turkey to the north, and Iran to the
   east. It has a very narrow section of coastline at Umm Qasr on the
   Persian Gulf.

Name

   There are several suggestions for the origin of the name of Iraq; - one
   dates back to the Sumerian city of Uruk (or Erech). Another suggestion
   is that Iraq comes from the Aramaic language, meaning "the land along
   the banks of the rivers." Another suggestion is Iraq is a reference to
   the root of a palm tree, as they are numerous in the country.

   Under the Persian Sassanid dynasty, there was a region called "Erak
   Arabi" referring to part of the south western region of the Persian
   Empire, which now is part of southern Iraq. Al-Iraq was the name used
   by the Arabs themselves for the land since the 6th century.

   Pronunciation of Iraq - (1) [ɪ.ˈɹɑ(ː)k], (2) [ɪ.ˈɹæk], (3) [aɪ.ˈɹæk]
   (1) is the preferred pronunciation in most dictionaries, and the only
   pronunciation listed in the Oxford English Dictionary. MQD lists (2)
   first. (3) is considered uneducated or unacceptable to some. It is the
   pronunciation which is least like the original Arabic pronunciation
   [ʕiˈrɑːq].

History

Ancient history

   The upper part of the stela of Hammurabi's code of laws
   Enlarge
   The upper part of the stela of Hammurabi's code of laws

   Iraq was historically known as Mesopotamia, which literally means
   "between the rivers" in Greek. This land was home to the world's first
   civilization, the Sumerian culture, followed by the Akkadian,
   Babylonian, and Assyrian cultures, whose influence extended into
   neighboring regions as early as 5000 BC. These civilizations produced
   the earliest writing and some of the first sciences, mathematics, laws
   and philosophies in the world, making the region the centre of what is
   commonly called the " Cradle of Civilization". Ancient Mesopotamian
   civilization dominated other civilizations of its time.

   In the sixth century BC, the region became a part of the Persian Empire
   under Cyrus the Great, before it was conquered by Alexander the Great
   and remained under Greek rule for nearly two centuries. A Central Asian
   tribe of Iranian peoples called Parthians then annexed the region,
   followed by the Sassanid Persians until the 7th century.

   Beginning in the seventh century AD, Islam spread to what is now Iraq.
   The prophet Mohammed's cousin and son-in-law moved his capital to Kufa
   "fi al-Iraq" when he became the fourth caliph. The Umayyads ruling from
   Damascus in the 7th century ruled the province of Iraq.

   Baghdad, the capital of the Abbasid Caliphate, was the leading city of
   the Arab and Muslim world for five centuries. In 1258, Baghdad was
   devastated by the Mongols and was later occupied by the Ottoman Turks.
   Ottoman rule over Iraq lasted until the Great War (World War I) when
   the Ottomans sided with Germany and the Central Powers. During World
   War I, the Ottomans were driven from much of the area by the United
   Kingdom during the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire.

Modern history

British occupation

   During World War I, the British and French divided the Middle East in
   the Sykes-Picot Agreement. The British would control Mesopotamia. At
   the end of World War I, the League of Nations granted the area to the
   United Kingdom as a mandate. It was formed out of three former Ottoman
   vilayets (regions): Mosul, Baghdad and Basra. However, for three out of
   four centuries of Ottoman Turkish rule, the vilayets of Baghdad, Mosul,
   and Basra were administered from Baghdad. During the British mandate,
   the country was ruled by British colonial administrators who used the
   British armed forces to put down rebellions against the government.
   They selected the Hashemite king, Faisal, who had been forced out of
   Syria by the French, to be their client ruler.

   Iraq was granted independence in 1932 by the urging of King Faisal,
   though the British retained military bases and transit rights for their
   forces in the country. King Ghazi of Iraq ruled as a figurehead after
   King Faisal died in 1933, while Iraq suffered from military coups
   (dictatorships) until he died in 1939. Iraq was invaded by the United
   Kingdom in 1941, for fears that the government of Rashid Ali might cut
   oil supplies to Western nations and because of his strong leanings to
   Nazi Germany. A military occupation followed after the restoration of
   the Hashemite monarchy, and the occupation ended on October 26, 1947.
   The rulers of the country during the occupation and the remainder of
   the Hashemite monarchy period were the autocratic prime minister Nuri
   al-Said who also ruled from 1930-1932 and the advisor 'Abd al-Ilah to
   the king Faisal II.

Hashemite monarchy

   The reinstalled Hashemite monarchy lasted until 1958, when it was
   overthrown through a coup d'etat by the Iraqi Army, known as the 14
   July Revolution. The coup brought Brigadier General Abdul Karim Qassim
   to power. He withdrew from the Baghdad Pact and established friendly
   relations with the Soviet Union but his government lasted only until
   1963, when it was overthrown by Colonel Abdul Salam Arif. Salam Arif
   died in 1966 and his brother, Abdul Rahman Arif, assumed the
   presidency. In 1968, Rahman Arif was overthrown by the Arab Socialist
   Ba'ath Party. This movement gradually came under the control of Saddam
   Hussein al-Majid al Tikriti who acceded to the presidency and control
   of the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC), then Iraq's supreme
   executive body, in July 1979, killing off many of his opponents in the
   process.

Saddam Hussein

   Saddam's rule lasted throughout the Iran-Iraq War (1980–1988) (in which
   the United States, Soviet Union, and France backed Saddam after 1982,
   at least in the open, see Iran Contra Affair), a war that ended in
   stalemate. In the late 1980s, Saddam Hussein's regime launched the
   al-Anfal campaign (Spoils of War), which led to the disappearance of
   tens of thousands of Kurds (182 000 is the number given by Kurdish
   authorities for the year 1988 alone) in northern Iraq when the military
   razed thousands of villages, launched poison gas attacks and rounded up
   men, women and children before shooting them or burying them alive in
   mass graves.

   In 1990 Iraq invaded Kuwait resulting in the Gulf War and United
   Nations economic sanctions imposed at the urging of the U.S. The
   economic sanctions were designed to compel Saddam to dispose of weapons
   of mass destruction (WMDs). Critics estimate that over 500,000 Iraqi
   children died as a result of the sanctions. The U.S. and the UK
   declared no-fly zones over Kurdish northern and Shiite southern Iraq to
   oversee the Kurds and southern Shiites.

   In July 2005, Hussein, and seven co-defendants were processed in
   Baghdad for the 1982 mass killing of 148 residents of the Shi'ite town
   of Dujail, a retaliation prompted by an assassination attempt against
   Saddam. The men faced charges of war crimes and crimes against
   humanity. On Sunday, November 5th, 2006, Saddam, his half-brother and
   former intelligence chief Barzan Hassan, and former chief judge of the
   Revolutionary Court Awad Bandar, were found guilty and sentenced to
   death by hanging. Taha Yassin, a former vice president of Iraq, was
   sentenced to life in prison. Abdullah Kadhem Ruwaid, Ali Dayem Ali, and
   Misher Abdullah Ruwaid were sentenced to 15 years each, and Mohammed
   Azzawi Ali, a former Dujail Baath Party official, was acquitted because
   of insufficient evidence against him.

   Saddam's death sentence is subject to an automatic appeal.

   According to the New York Times, Saddam's verdict and sentence would
   "come under review by the nine-judge appellate chamber of the trial
   court. There is no time limit for the appeal court's review, but Iraqi
   and American officials who work with the court said that the earliest
   realistic date for Saddam Hussein's execution, assuming it stood up to
   review, would be next spring." Iraqi law requires executions to take
   place within 30 days of the end of the appeal process; however it also
   forbids the executions of people aged over 70 years old, a status
   Saddam Hussein acquires on 28 April 2007.

Occupation by Coalition Forces

   Iraq was invaded in March 2003 by a United States-organized coalition
   with the stated reasons that Iraq had not abandoned its nuclear and
   chemical weapons development program according to United Nations
   resolutions. The justifications given for invasion included purported
   Iraqi government links to Al Qaeda, claims that Iraq had weapons of
   mass destruction, the opportunity to remove an oppressive dictator from
   power, and the bringing of democracy to Iraq. A range of other possible
   motives include control over Iraqi oil fields, a desire to make amends
   for failing to overthrow Saddam during the Gulf war, revenge for
   Saddam's effort to assassinate former President George Bush, and
   creating a counterbalance to a nuclear-armed Iranian theocracy.

   The United States established the Coalition Provisional Authority to
   govern Iraq. Government authority was transferred to an Iraqi Interim
   Government in 2004 and a permanent government was elected in October
   2005. Over 140,000 Coalition troops remain in Iraq in order to assist
   the government, although there is increasing media speculation on a
   complete handover to Iraqi government forces within the next 12 months.

Judging the success of the occupation

   Of the stated or assumed goals of the occupation, the coalition forces
   have been successful in removing Saddam Hussein from his position as a
   claimed oppressive dictator and in bringing democracy to Iraq. However,
   the occupation failed in its stated goal to destroy the country'
   weapons of mass destruction, and to date no use-ready weapons of mass
   destruction have been found by coalition forces although some chemical
   shells were found that were left over from the Iran-Iraq War. It is
   also probable that there was little or no pre-existing al-Qaeda
   presence in Iraq, where it had been suppressed by the secular Iraqi
   government. After the invasion, al-Qaeda was however able to exploit
   the insurgency to establish its organization in the country in
   concurrency with a Sunni-led insurgency and sectarian violence. In
   2006, Foreign Policy Magazine named Iraq as the fourth most unstable
   nation in the world. In October 2006 former U.S. Secretary of State
   James Baker referred to the situation in Iraq as being "a helluva
   mess".

Loss of life following occupation

   According to a recent epidemiologic study by Burnham et al in The
   Lancet medical journal, 655,000 Iraqis have died directly or indirectly
   as a result of the U.S. invasion of Iraq in 2003. The 95% confidence
   interval of this estimate spans from 393,000 to 943,000 dead. These
   numbers have been controversial and were immediately denounced both
   politically and within the statistical analysis community. The
   methodology used by Burham et al, known as cross-sectional
   population-based cluster sampling, is respected among epidemiologists
   for estimating mortality rates in war-torn countries. However,
   questions have arisen regarding the sufficiency of the sample size for
   the extrapolations made in the Lancet survey.

   The Lancet estimate is significantly higher than estimates from other
   organizations. In 2004, the United Nations Development Program (UNDP)
   used 2,200 cluster points of 10 interviews each for a total sample of
   21,688, to arrive at their estimate of between 18,000 and 29,000
   violent deaths during the first year after the invasion. The 2006
   Lancet survey used 47 cluster points, and a total of 1,849 households,
   to arrive at their estimate of 112,000 total excess Iraqi deaths for
   the first year and on until August 2004 (a period of a year and 4
   months).

   In an opinion piece published in the Wall Street Journal on October 18,
   2006, Steven E. Moore, of Gorton Moore International, wrote "What
   happens when you don't use enough cluster points in a survey? You get
   crazy results when compared to a known quantity, or a survey with more
   cluster points. There was a perfect example of this two years ago. The
   UNDP's survey, in April and May 2004, estimated between 18,000 and
   29,000 Iraqi civilian deaths due to the war. This survey was conducted
   four months prior to another, earlier study by the Johns Hopkins team,
   which used 33 cluster points and estimated between 69,000 and 155,000
   civilian deaths--four to five times as high as the UNDP survey, which
   used 66 times the cluster points."

   Concerning the 2004 UNDP study, Appendix C of the 2006 Lancet article
   supplement states: "Working for the U.N. Development Program, the
   highly regarded Norwegian researcher Jon Pederson led a survey that
   recorded between 18,000 and 29,000 violent deaths during the first year
   of occupation. The survey was not focused on deaths, but asked about
   them over the course of lengthy interviews that focused on access to
   services. While this was more than twice the rate recorded by IBC at
   the time, Pederson expressed concern for the completeness and quality
   of the data in a newspaper interview last year. The surveys reported in
   The Lancet were focused solely on recording deaths and count about two
   and a half times as many excess deaths from all causes over the same
   period."

   The 2006 Lancet article supplement also states: "In 2004 we estimated
   that somewhere in excess of 100,000 deaths had occurred from the time
   of the invasion until August 2004. Using data from the 2006 survey to
   look at the time included in the 2004 survey, we estimate that the
   number of excess deaths during that time were about 112,000. That these
   two surveys were carried out in different locations and two years apart
   from each other yet yielded results that were very similar to each
   other, is strong validation of both surveys. ... In the news media
   coverage of the 2004 survey report, much was made of the wide
   confidence intervals, which is a statistical technique that was
   frequently misunderstood. With the much larger sample of the 2006
   survey, the confidence intervals are narrowed significantly."

   The Iraq Body Count project, as of October 19 2006, reports a range of
   between 43,937 and 48,783 civilian deaths as a result of the U.S.
   invasion. Iraq Body Count relies solely upon passive surveillance of
   officially reported deaths in generating this number. The authors of
   The Lancet study criticize this methodology, writing "Aside from
   Bosnia, we can find no conflict situation where passive surveillance
   recorded more than 20% of the deaths measured by population-based
   methods. In several outbreaks, disease and death recorded by
   facility-based methods underestimated events by a factor of ten or more
   when compared with population-based estimates." Such a tenfold gap
   between the findings of active versus passive reporting is in line with
   the findings of The Lancet study.

Government

Politics

   Iraq was under Ba'ath Party rule from 1968 to 2003; in 1979 Saddam
   Hussein took control and remained president until 2003 after which he
   was unseated by a US-led invasion.

   On October 15, 2005, more than 63% of eligible Iraqis came out across
   the country to vote on whether to accept or reject the new
   constitution. On October 25, the vote was certified and the
   constitution passed with a 78% overall majority, with the percentage of
   support varying widely between the country's territories. The new
   constitution had overwhelming backing among the Shia and Ķurdish
   communities, but was overwhelmingly rejected by Sunnis. Three
   majority-Sunni provinces rejected it ( Salah ad Din with 82% against,
   Ninawa with 55% against, and Al Anbar with 97% against).

   Under the terms of the constitution, the country conducted fresh
   nationwide parliamentary elections on December 15 to elect a new
   government. The overwhelming majority of all three major ethnic groups
   in Iraq voted along ethnic lines, turning this vote into more of an
   ethnic census than a competitive election, and setting the stage for
   the division of the country along ethnic lines.

   Iraqi politicians have been under significant threat by the various
   factions that have promoted violence as a political weapon. The ongoing
   violence in Iraq has been incited by an amalgam of religious extremists
   that believe an Islamic Caliphate should rule, old sectarian regime
   members that had ruled under Saddam that want back the power they had,
   and Iraqi nationalists that are fighting against what they view as a
   foreign occupation.

Minority politics

   There are a number of ethnic minority groups in Iraq: Kurds, Assyrians,
   Mandeans, Iraqi Turkmen, Shabaks and Roma. These groups have not
   enjoyed equal status with the majority Arab populations throughout
   Iraq's eighty-five year history. Since the establishment of the "no-fly
   zones" following the First Gulf War, the situation of the Kurds has
   changed as they have established their own autonomous region. The
   remainder of these ethnic groups continue to suffer discrimination on
   religious or ethnic grounds.

Administrative divisions

   Iraq is divided into eighteen governorates (or provinces) (Arabic:
   muhafadhat, singular - muhafadhah, Kurdish: پاریزگه Pârizgah). The
   governorates are subdivided into qadhas (or districts).

                   1. Baghdad
                   2. Salah ad Din
                   3. Diyala
                   4. Wasit
                   5. Maysan
                   6. Al Basrah
                   7. Dhi Qar
                   8. Al Muthanna
                   9. Al-Qādisiyyah

                                    10. Babil
                                    11. Karbala
                                    12. An Najaf
                                    13. Al Anbar
                                    14. Ninawa
                                    15. Dahuk
                                    16. Arbil
                                    17. At Ta'mim (Kirkuk)
                                    18. As Sulaymaniyah

Geography

   Map of Iraq
   Enlarge
   Map of Iraq

   At 168,743 sq.mi (437,072 km²), Iraq is the 58th-largest country in the
   world, after Morocco. It is comparable in size to the US state of
   California, and somewhat larger than Paraguay.

   Large parts of Iraq consist of desert, but the area between the two
   major rivers (Euphrates and Tigris) is fertile, with the rivers
   carrying about 60 million cubic metres (78 million cu. yd) of silt
   annually to the delta. The north of the country is largely mountainous,
   with the highest point being a 3,611 metres (11,847 ft) point, unnamed
   on the map opposite, but known locally as Cheekah Dar (black tent).
   Iraq has a small coastline with the Persian Gulf. Close to the coast
   and along the Shatt al-Arab (known as arvandrūd: اروندرود among
   Iranians) there used to be marshlands, but many of these were drained
   in the 1990s.

   The local climate is mostly desert with mild to cool winters and dry,
   hot, cloudless summers. The northern mountainous regions experience
   cold winters with occasional heavy snows, sometimes causing extensive
   flooding. The capital of Baghdad is situated in the centre of the
   country, on the banks of the Tigris. Other major cities include Basra
   in the south and Mosul in the north.

   While its proven oil reserves of 112 billion barrels ranks Iraq second
   in the world behind Saudi Arabia, the United States Department of
   Energy estimates that up to 90 percent of the country remains
   unexplored. Unexplored regions of Iraq could yield an additional 100
   billion barrels. Iraq's oil production costs are among the lowest in
   the world. However, only about 2,000 oil wells have been drilled in
   Iraq, compared to about 1 million wells in Texas alone.

Economy

   An old 50 dinar bill
   Enlarge
   An old 50 dinar bill

   Iraq's economy is dominated by the oil sector, which has traditionally
   provided about 95 percent of foreign exchange earnings. In the 1980s
   financial problems caused by massive expenditures in the eight-year war
   with Iran and damage to oil export facilities by Iran led the
   government to implement austerity measures, borrow heavily, and later
   reschedule foreign debt payments. Iraq suffered economic losses from
   the war of at least US$100 billion. After hostilities ended in 1988,
   oil exports gradually increased with the construction of new pipelines
   and restoration of damaged facilities. A combination of low oil prices,
   repayment of war debts (estimated at around US$3 billion a year) and
   the costs of reconstruction resulted in a serious financial crisis
   which was the main short term motivation for the invasion of Kuwait.
   A Rendering of Tahrir Square, the first phase of the Baghdad
   Renaissance Plan, a private investment reconstruction effort.
   Enlarge
   A Rendering of Tahrir Square, the first phase of the Baghdad
   Renaissance Plan, a private investment reconstruction effort.

   On November 20, 2004, the Paris Club of creditor nations agreed to
   write off 80% ($33 billion) of Iraq's $42 billion debt to Club members.
   Iraq's total external debt was around $120 billion at the time of the
   2003 invasion, and had grown by $5 billion by 2004. The debt relief
   will be implemented in three stages: two of 30% each and one of 20%.

   At the end of 2005, and in the first half of 2006, Iraq implemented a
   restructuring of about $20 billion of commercial debt claims on terms
   comparable to that of its November 2004 Paris Club agreement (i.e. with
   an 80% writeoff). Iraq offered to its larger claimants a U.S. dollar
   denominated bond maturing in 2028. Smaller commercial claimants
   received a cash settlement of comparable value.

Reconstruction

   Reconstruction in Iraq has been difficult, due to the amount of damage
   done to the basic infrastructure of the region; the influx of US
   invasion and the strife among factions within the native populace.
   Large-scale reconstruction efforts have had, at best, limited success.

Demographics

   A July 2005 estimate of the total Iraqi population is 26,074,906.

   Seventy-five to eighty percent of Iraq's population are Arabs; the
   other major ethnic groups are the Kurds at 15-20%, Assyrians, Iraqi
   Turkmen and others (5%), who mostly live in the north and northeast of
   the country. The Kurds, Assyrians, and Turkmen differ from Arabs in
   many ways, including culture, history, clothing, and language. Other
   distinct groups are Persians and Armenians (possible descendants of the
   ancient Mesopotamian culture). About 20,000–50,000 Marsh Arabs live in
   southern Iraq.

   Arabic and Kurdish are official languages. Assyrian and Turkmen are
   official languages in areas where the Assyrians and Iraqi Turkmen are
   located respectively. Armenian and Persian are also spoken but to a
   lesser extent. English is the most commonly spoken Western language.

   Most of Iraqis are Shi'ite Muslims (55%), and Sunni represent one third
   of the total population (33%) made up of mostly Arabs and Kurds. Ethnic
   Assyrians (of the Chaldean rite) account for most of Iraq's sizable
   Christian population, along with Armenians. Bahá'ís, Mandaeans,
   Shabaks, and Yezidis also exist. Most Kurds are Sunni Muslims, although
   the Faili (Feyli) Kurds are largely Shi'a.

   Ethnic Composition:
     * Ethnic groups: Arab, 75–80%; Kurdish, 15-20%; Turkoman, Assyrian or
       other 5%.
     * Religions: Muslim, 97%; Christian or other, 3%.

   Proportions: There are no official figures available, mainly due to the
   highly politically charged nature of the subject. Source: Britannica:
   Shi'a 60%, Sunni 40% Source: CIA World Fact Book: Shi'a 60%-65%, Sunni
   32%-37%
     * Shi'a: mostly Arabs some Turkmen and Faili Kurds almost all are
       Twelver school
     * Sunni: composed of Arabs who are Hanafi school and Kurds who are
       Shafi school

Culture

   An Iraqi girl living next to Al Daura Oil Refinery
   Enlarge
   An Iraqi girl living next to Al Daura Oil Refinery

   In the most recent millennium, what is now Iraq has been made up of
   five cultural areas: Kurdish in the north centered on Arbil, Sunni
   Islamic Arabs in the centre around Baghdad, Shi'a Islamic Arabs in the
   south centered on Basra, the Assyrians, a Christian people, living in
   various cities in the north, and the Marsh Arabs, a nomadic people, who
   live on the marshlands of the central river. Markets and bartering are
   the common form of trade.

Music

   Iraq is known primarily for an instrument called the oud (similar to a
   lute) and a rebab (similar to a fiddle); its stars include Ahmed
   Mukhtar and the Assyrian Munir Bashir. Until the fall of Saddam
   Hussein, the most popular radio station was the Voice of Youth. It
   played a mix of western rock, hip hop and pop music, all of which had
   to be imported via Jordan due to international economic sanctions. Iraq
   has also produced a major pan-Arab pop star-in-exile in Kazem al Saher,
   whose songs include Ladghat E-Hayya, which was banned for its racy
   lyrics.

Gallery

   Tigris River near Mosul

   Ishtar Gate (Bab Ishtar) 604 to 562 B.C. Ancient Babylon

   The Malwiya Minaret in Samarra

   Hatra ruins

   Shrine of Imam Ali in Najaf

   Boat on the Euphrates River

   Printable map

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iraq"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
