   #copyright

Ireland King of Arms

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: British History 1500 and
before (including Roman Britain)

   Ireland King of Arms was the title of an Irish officer of arms from
   1392 until the accession of Henry VII as King of England in 1485. The
   office was replaced in 1552 by that of Ulster King of Arms, which in
   1943 was merged with Norroy King of Arms forming the present office of
   Norroy and Ulster King of Arms. In theory, Ireland King of Arms enjoyed
   heraldic jurisdiction in the whole of the Lordship of Ireland.

Origins of the office

   In 1392, King Richard II of England created the first in a succession
   of Ireland kings of arms. It is unknown why such an office was called
   into being. Froissart notes the creation of Chandos le Roy d'Ireland,
   but does not give any clues as to the reasoning. It does, however, fit
   into the general English policy in Ireland at the time. Richard II
   sought to re-establish English control in those areas of the colony
   where the native Irish had reasserted their independence. The
   appointment can be seen, then as a necessary part of the preparations
   for the appointment of the Duke of Gloucester as Lord Lieutenant of
   Ireland in 1392. Richard planned Gloucester to lead a major military
   campaign and such a campaign would necessitate the involvement of
   heralds to marshal arms and provide advice and evidence in case of
   heraldic disputes.

   Richard and Gloucester's campaign of 1392 never happened but Richard
   did leave for Ireland in 1394 with a large army and one John Othelake,
   who had succeeded Chandos as Ireland King of Arms in 1393. No details
   are given of Othelake's career as Ireland King of Arms, though he
   certainly had a connection with Ireland as an officer of arms to the
   Earl of March in 1381. The historical evidence does not even make clear
   how long Othelake served in this position.

   It is clear that Othelake was no longer enjoying the office by 1420. By
   this time, John Kitley had been appointed to the post, though the exact
   date of his appointment is unknown. He was appointed by King Henry V of
   England on the insistence of the Earl of Ormonde. There is no evidence
   to suggest that Kitley had any connection to Ireland, or even that he
   visited it, but his connection to Earl of Ormonde is interesting.
   Kitley was succeeded by Thomas Collyer, who had previously served as
   Clarenceux King of Arms and Lancaster Herald of Arms in Ordinary.
   Nothing is known of his career as Ireland, and he was succeeded by one
   Thomas Ashwell.

Walter Bellinger

   Walter Bellinger enjoyed the office of Ireland King of Arms from at
   least as early as 1468. This is proven by the fact that on 3 June 1469,
   King Edward IV granted Bellinger a pension of £20 per annum for his
   service as Ireland. The same writ states that he had been appointed 9
   June the year before. It has been established that Bellinger was a
   native of Dieppe and had served as a herald for fifty five years by
   1477. He accompanied his King to France and acted as an ambassador from
   him to the French court in the discussions preceding the Treaty of
   Picquigny. The King gave him the value of 200 silver marks for his
   services in this affair. He appears to have continued to hold the
   office of Ireland King of Arms until the reign of Henry VII of England.
   After Bellinger, no one was appointed to fill the office.

Impact and Legacy

   While the office existed, Ireland Kings of Arms made only three grants
   of arms. All of these were made by Bellinger and two of them were
   disallowed in the Court of Chivalry. It would seem that Ireland King of
   Arms was given no jurisdiction to make grants in England and the only
   grant that was upheld was made to one Jehan Baret of Picardy. There is
   no evidence to suggest that any of the holders ever attempted to
   exercise control over the heraldic practice of Ireland. In 1552,
   Bartholomew Butler was created Ulster King of Arms. This can be seen to
   some extent as a revival of the more ancient office of Ireland, but
   between the suspension of Bellinger and the appointment of Butler,
   there lapsed 60 to 70 years. During this time, no king of Arms existed
   for Ireland. Since the creation of Ulster King of Arms, there has been
   effective control exercised over the heraldic affairs of Ireland, but
   this has come from the College of Arms in London. It is interesting
   that heraldic authority in Ireland transferred from a national king of
   arms to a newly created provincial king of arms. Today, the office of
   Ulster King of Arms has been merged with that of Norroy King of Arms to
   form Norroy and Ulster King of Arms.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ireland_King_of_Arms"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
