   #copyright

Ivan IV of Russia

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Historical figures

   Tsar Ivan the Terrible, by Viktor Vasnetsov.
   Enlarge
   Tsar Ivan the Terrible, by Viktor Vasnetsov.

   Ivan IV Vasilyevich (Russian: Иван IV Васильевич) ( August 25, 1530,
   Moscow – March 18, 1584, Moscow) was the Grand Duke of Muscovy from
   1533 to 1547 and was the first ruler of Russia to assume the title of
   tsar. His long reign saw the conquest of Tartary and Siberia and
   subsequent transformation of Russia into a multiethnic and
   multiconfessional state. This tsar retains his place in the Russian
   tradition simply as Ivan Grozny (Russian: Ива́н Гро́зный which
   translates into English as Ivan the Fearsome or 'Thunderous', listen ).
   He is commonly referred to in English as Ivan the Terrible.

Early reign

   Ivan (or Ioann, as his name is rendered in Church Slavonic) was a
   long-awaited son of Vasili III. Upon his father's death, he formally
   came to the throne at the age of three, but his minority was dominated
   by regents. Initially his mother Elena Glinskaya acted as regent, but
   she died when Ivan was only eight. She was replaced as regent by boyars
   from the Shuisky family until Ivan assumed power in 1544. According to
   his own letters, Ivan customarily felt neglected and offended by the
   mighty boyars from the Shuisky and Belsky families. These traumatic
   experiences may have contributed to his hatred of the boyars and to his
   mental instability. He was known to throw cats and dogs out of the
   Kremlin windows, among other cruel acts.
   Ivory throne of Ivan the Terrible.
   Enlarge
   Ivory throne of Ivan the Terrible.

   Ivan was crowned tsar with Monomakh's Cap at the Cathedral of the
   Dormition at age sixteen on January 16, 1547. Despite calamities
   triggered by the Great Fire of 1547, the early part of his reign was
   one of peaceful reforms and modernization. Ivan revised the law code
   (known as the sudebnik), created a standing army (the streltsy),
   established the Zemsky Sobor, the council of the nobles (known as the
   Chosen Council), and confirmed the position of the Church with the
   Council of the Hundred Chapters, which unified the rituals and
   ecclesiastical regulations of the entire country. He introduced the
   local self-management in rural regions, mainly in the Northeast of
   Russia, populated by the state peasantry. During his reign the first
   printing press was introduced to Russia (although the first Russian
   printers Ivan Fedorov and Pyotr Mstislavets had to flee from Moscow to
   the Grand Duchy of Lithuania).

   In 1547 Hans Schlitte, the agent of tsar Ivan, employed handicraftsmen
   in Germany for work in Russia. However all these handicraftsmen were
   arrested in Lübeck at the request of Poland and Livonia. The German
   merchant companies ignored the new port built by tsar Ivan on the river
   Narva in 1550 and delivered the goods still in the Baltic ports owned
   by Livonia. Russia remained isolated from sea trade.

   Ivan formed new trading connections, opening up the White Sea and the
   port of Arkhangelsk to the Muscovy Company of English merchants. In
   1552 he defeated the Kazan Khanate, whose armies had repeatedly
   devastated the Northeast of Russia , and annexed its territory. In
   1556, he annexed the Astrakhan Khanate and destroyed the largest slave
   market on the river Volga. These gains of tsar complicated the
   migration of aggressive nomadic hordes from Asia to Europe through
   Volga and transformed Russia into a multinational and multiconfessional
   state. He had St. Basil's Cathedral constructed in Moscow to
   commemorate the seizure of Kazan. Legend has it that he was so
   impressed with the structure that he had the architects blinded, so
   that they could never design anything as beautiful again.
   Ivan married 7 times, sometimes divorcing his wife a week after the
   marriage.
   Enlarge
   Ivan married 7 times, sometimes divorcing his wife a week after the
   marriage.

   Other less positive aspects of this period include the introduction of
   the first laws restricting the mobility of the peasants, which would
   eventually lead to serfdom. The dramatic change in Ivan's personality
   is traditionally linked to his near-fatal illness in 1553 and the death
   of his first wife, Anastasia Romanovna. Ivan suspected boyars of
   poisoning his wife and of plotting to replace him on the throne with
   his cousin, Vladimir of Staritsa. In addition, during that illness Ivan
   had asked the boyars to swear an oath of allegiance to his eldest son,
   an infant at the time. Many boyars refused, deeming the tsar's health
   too hopeless to survive. This angered Ivan and added to his distrust of
   the boyars. There followed brutal reprisals and murders of innocent
   people, including Metropolitan Philip and Prince Alexander
   Gorbatyi-Shuisky.

   Also problematic was the 1565 formation of the Oprichnina. The
   Oprichnina was the section of Russia (mainly the Northeast) directly
   ruled by Ivan and policed by his personal servicemen, the Oprichniki.
   This whole system of Oprichnina has been viewed by some historians as a
   tool against the omnipotent hereditary nobility of Russia ( boyars) who
   opposed the absolutist drive of the tsar, while others have interpreted
   it as a sign of the paranoia and mental deterioration of the tsar.

Later reign

   The latter half of Ivan's reign was far less successful. Although Khan
   Devlet I Giray of Crimea repeatedly devastated Moscow region and even
   set Moscow on fire in 1571, the tsar supported Yermak's conquest of
   Tatar Siberia, adopting a policy of empire-building, which led him to
   launch a victorious war of seaward expansion to the west, only to find
   himself fighting the Swedes, Lithuanians, Poles, and the Livonian
   Teutonic Knights.

   For twenty-four years the Livonian War dragged on, damaging the Russian
   economy and military but winning Russia no territory. In the 1560s the
   combination of drought and famine, Polish-Lithuanian raids, Tatar
   attacks, and the sea-trading blockade carried out by the Swedes, Poles
   and the Hanseatic League devastated Russia. The price of grain
   increased by a factor of ten. Epidemics of the plague killed 10,000 in
   Novgorod. In 1570 the plague killed 600-1000 in Moscow daily. . Ivan's
   closest advisor, Prince Andrei Kurbsky, defected to the Lithuanians,
   headed the Lithuanian troops and devastated the Russian region of
   Velikie Luki. This treachery deeply hurt Ivan. As the Oprichnina
   continued, Ivan became mentally unstable and physically disabled. In
   one week, he could easily pass from the most depraved orgies to prayers
   and fasting in a remote northern monastery.
   Ivan the Terrible killing his son by Ilya Repin
   Enlarge
   Ivan the Terrible killing his son by Ilya Repin

   Because he gradually grew unbalanced and violent, the Oprichniks under
   Malyuta Skuratov soon got out of hand and became murderous thugs. They
   massacred nobles and peasants, and conscripted men to fight the war in
   Livonia. Depopulation and famine ensued. What had been by far the
   richest area of Russia became the poorest. In a dispute with the
   wealthy city of Novgorod, Ivan ordered the Oprichniks to murder
   inhabitants of this city, which was never to regain its former
   prosperity. Between thirty and forty thousand might have been killed
   during the infamous Massacre of Novgorod in 1570; many others were
   deported elsewhere. Yet the official death toll named 1,500 of Novgorod
   big people (nobility) and only mentioned about the same number of
   smaller people. Many modern researchers estimate number of victims
   between two and three thousand. (After the famine and epidemics of
   1560s the population of Novgorod did not exceed 10,000-20,000.)

   In 1581, Ivan beat his pregnant daughter-in-law for wearing immodest
   clothing, causing a miscarriage. His son, also named Ivan, upon
   learning of this, engaged in a heated argument with his father, which
   resulted in Ivan striking his son in the head with his pointed staff,
   causing his son's (accidental) death. This event is depicted in the
   famous painting by Ilya Repin, Ivan the Terrible and his son Ivan on
   Friday, November 16, 1581 better known as Ivan the Terrible killing his
   son.

Death and legacy

   Ivan's murder of his son brought about the extinction of the Rurik
   Dynasty and the Time of Troubles.
   Enlarge
   Ivan's murder of his son brought about the extinction of the Rurik
   Dynasty and the Time of Troubles.

   Although it is thought by many that Ivan died while setting up a chess
   board, it is more likely that he died while playing with little boys
   along with Bogdan Belsky on March 18, 1584. When Ivan's tomb was opened
   during renovations in the 1960s, his remains were examined and
   discovered to contain very high amounts of mercury, indicating a high
   probability that he was poisoned. Modern suspicion falls on his
   advisors Belsky and Boris Godunov (who became tsar in 1598). Three days
   earlier, Ivan had allegedly attempted to rape Irina, Godunov's sister
   and Fyodor's wife. Her cries attracted Godunov and Belsky to the noise,
   whereupon Ivan let Irina go, but Belski and Godunov considered
   themselves marked for death. The tradition says that they either
   poisoned or strangled Ivan in fear for their own lives. The mercury
   found in Ivan's remains may also be related to treatment for syphilis,
   which it is speculated that Ivan had. Upon Ivan's death, the ravaged
   kingdom was left to his unfit and childless son Feodor.

Epistles

   D.S. Mirsky called Ivan "a pamphleteer of genius". His epistles are the
   masterpieces of old Russian (perhaps all Russian) political journalism.
   They may be too full of texts from the Scriptures and the Fathers, and
   their Church Slavonic is not always correct. But they are full of cruel
   irony, expressed in pointedly forcible terms.
   Ivan's repentance: he asks a father superior of the Pskovo-Pechorsky
   Monastery to let him take the tonsure at his monastery.
   Enlarge
   Ivan's repentance: he asks a father superior of the Pskovo-Pechorsky
   Monastery to let him take the tonsure at his monastery.

   The shameless bully and the great polemicist are seen together in a
   flash when he taunts runaway Kurbsky with the question: "If you are so
   sure of your righteousness, why did you run away and not prefer
   martyrdom at my hands?" Such strokes were well calculated to drive his
   correspondent into a rage. "The part of the cruel tyrant elaborately
   upbraiding an escaped victim while he continues torturing those in his
   reach may be detestable, but Ivan plays it with truly Shakespearian
   breadth of imagination"..

   Besides his letters to Kurbsky he wrote other satirical invectives to
   men in his power. The best is his letter to the abbot of the
   Kirillo-Belozersky Monastery, where he pours out all the poison of his
   grim irony on the unascetic life of the boyars, shorn monks, and those
   exiled by his order. His picture of their luxurious life in the citadel
   of ascetism is a masterpiece of trenchant sarcasm.

Sobriquet

   The English word terrible is usually used to translate the Russian word
   grozny in Ivan's nickname, but the modern English usage of terrible,
   with a pejorative connotation of bad or evil, does not precisely
   represent the intended meaning. Grozny's meaning is closer to the
   original usage of terrible—inspiring fear or terror, dangerous (as in
   Old English in one's danger), formidable, threatening, or awesome.
   Perhaps a translation closer to the intended sense would be Ivan the
   Fearsome. (Compare the city name Grozny.) The Russian people gave Ivan
   this nickname after he seized Kazan.
   Preceded by:
   Vasili III  Grand Prince of Muscovy
               1533–1547              Succeeded by:
                                      became Tsar
   Preceded by:
   None        Tsar of Russia
               1547–1584              Succeeded by:
                                      Feodor I

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ivan_IV_of_Russia"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
