   #copyright

J. M. W. Turner

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Artists

   J. M. W. Turner
   Self portrait, oil on canvas, circa 1799
   Born April 23, 1775
   Flag of United Kingdom Covent Garden, London, England, United Kingdom
   Died December 19, 1851
   River Thames, London, England, United Kingdom
   Unspecified (burial location: Saint Paul's Cathedral, London, England,
   United Kingdom)
   Other names Joseph Turner

   Joseph Mallord William Turner ( April 23, 1775 (exact date disputed) –
   December 19, 1851) was an English Romantic landscape painter,
   watercolourist and printmaker, whose style can be said to have laid the
   foundation for Impressionism.

Life and career

   Turner was born in Covent Garden, London. His father, William Gay
   Turner ( 27 January 1738 – 7 August 1829), was a barber and wig maker .
   His mother, Mary Marshall, became increasingly mentally unstable,
   perhaps, in part, due to the early death of Turner's younger sister in
   1783. She died in 1804, after having been committed in 1799 to a mental
   asylum.

   Possibly due to the load placed on the family by these problems, the
   young Turner was sent in 1785 to stay with his uncle on his mother's
   side in Brentford, which was then a small town west of London on the
   banks of the River Thames. It was here that he first expressed an
   interest in painting. A year later he went to school in Margate in Kent
   to the east of London in the area of the Thames estuary. By this time
   he had created many drawings, which his father exhibited in his shop
   window.
   The fighting Temeraire tugged to her last berth to be broken up,
   painted 1839.
   The fighting Temeraire tugged to her last berth to be broken up,
   painted 1839.

   He entered the Royal Academy of Art schools in 1789, when he was only
   14 years old, and was accepted into the academy a year later. Sir
   Joshua Reynolds, president of the Royal Academy at the time, chaired
   the panel that admitted him. At first Turner showed a keen interest in
   architecture but was advised to keep to painting by the architect
   Thomas Hardwick (junior). A watercolour of Turner's was accepted for
   the Summer Exhibition of 1790 after only one year's study. He exhibited
   his first oil painting in 1796, Fishermen at Sea, and thereafter
   exhibited at the academy nearly every year for the rest of his life.

   Although renowned for his oils, Turner is also one of the greatest
   masters of British watercolour landscape painting. He is commonly known
   as "the painter of light".

   One of his most famous oil paintings is The fighting Temeraire tugged
   to her last berth to be broken up, painted in 1838, which hangs in the
   National Gallery, London. See also The Golden Bough.

   Turner travelled widely in Europe, starting with France and Switzerland
   in 1802 and studying in the Louvre in Paris in the same year. He also
   made many visits to Venice during his lifetime. On a visit to Lyme
   Regis, in Dorset, England, he painted a stormy scene (now in the
   Cincinnati Art Museum). Turner was also a frequent guest of Lord
   Egremont at Petworth House in West Sussex and painted scenes from the
   grounds of the house and of the Sussex countryside, including a view of
   the Chichester Canal that Egremont funded. Petworth House still
   displays a number of paintings.
   The shipwreck of the Minotaur, oil on canvas.
   The shipwreck of the Minotaur, oil on canvas.

   As he grew older, Turner became more eccentric. He had few close
   friends except for his father, who lived with him for thirty years,
   eventually working as his studio assistant. His father's death in 1829
   had a profound effect on him, and thereafter he was subject to bouts of
   depression. He never married, although he had two daughters by Sarah
   Danby, one born in 1801, the other in 1811.

   He died in the house of his mistress Mrs Sophia Caroline Booth in
   Cheyne Walk, Chelsea on 19 December 1851. At his request he was buried
   in St Paul's Cathedral, where he lies next to Sir Joshua Reynolds. His
   last exhibition at the Royal Academy was in 1850.

Style

   Turner's talent was recognized early in his life. He became a full art
   academician at the age of 29. Financial independence allowed Turner to
   innovate freely; his mature work is characterized by a chromatic
   palette and broadly applied atmospheric washes of paint. According to
   David Piper's The Illustrated History of Art, his later pictures were
   called "fantastic puzzles." However, Turner was still recognized as an
   artistic genius: the influential English art critic John Ruskin
   described Turner as the artist who could most "stirringly and
   truthfully measure the moods of Nature." (Piper 321)

   Suitable vehicles for Turner's imagination were to be found in the
   subjects of shipwrecks, fires (such as the burning of Parliament in
   1834, an event which Turner rushed to witness first-hand, and which he
   transcribed in a series of watercolor sketches), natural catastrophes,
   and natural phenomena such as sunlight, storm, rain, and fog.He was
   fascinated by the violent power of the sea, as seen in Dawn after the
   Wreck (1840) and The Slave Ship (1840).

   Turner placed human beings in many of his paintings to indicate his
   affection for humanity on the one hand (note the frequent scenes of
   people drinking and merry-making or working in the foreground), but its
   vulnerability and vulgarity amidst the 'sublime' nature of the world on
   the other hand. 'Sublime' here means awe-inspiring, savage grandeur, a
   natural world unmastered by man, evidence of the power of God - a theme
   that artists and poets were exploring in the late 18c. and early 19c.
   The significance of light was to Turner the emanation of God's spirit
   and this was why he refined the subject matter of his later paintings
   by leaving out solid objects and detail, concentrating on the play of
   light on water, the radiance of skies and fires. Although these late
   paintings appear to be 'impressionistic' and therefore a forerunner of
   the French school, Turner was striving for expression of spirituality
   in the world, rather than responding primarily to optical phenomena.
   ("The Sun is God," he stated shortly before his death.)
   Rain, Steam and Speed - The Great Western Railway painted (1844).
   Rain, Steam and Speed - The Great Western Railway painted (1844).

   His first works, such as Tintern Abbey (1795) and Venice: S. Giorgio
   Maggiore (1819), stayed true to the traditions of English landscape.
   However, in Hannibal Crossing the Alps (1812), an emphasis on the
   destructive power of nature had already come into play. His distinctive
   style of painting, in which he used watercolor technique with oil
   paints, created lightness, fluency, and ephemeral atmospheric effects.
   (Piper 321)

   One popular story about Turner, though it likely has little basis in
   reality, states that he even had himself "tied to the mast of a ship in
   order to experience the drama" of the elements during a storm at sea.

   In his later years he used oils ever more transparently, and turned to
   an evocation of almost pure light by use of shimmering colour. A prime
   example of his mature style can be seen in Rain, Steam and Speed - The
   Great Western Railway, where the objects are barely recognizable. The
   intensity of hue and interest in evanescent light not only placed
   Turner's work in the vanguard of English painting, but later exerted an
   influence upon art in France, as well; the Impressionists, particularly
   Claude Monet, carefully studied his techniques. In the modern art era,
   advocates of abstract art were also inspired by Turner.

   It has been suggested that the high levels of ash in the atmosphere
   during the 1816 " Year Without a Summer," which led to unusually
   spectacular sunsets during this period, were an inspiration for some of
   Turner's work.

   John Ruskin says in his "Notes" on Turner in March 1878, that an early
   patron, Dr Thomas Monro, the Principal Physician of Bedlam, was a
   significant influence on Turner's style:

                His true master was Dr Monro; to the practical teaching of
                that first patron and the wise simplicity of method of
                watercolour study, in which he was disciplined by him and
                companioned by Giston, the healthy and constant
                development of the greater power is primarily to be
                attributed; the greatness of the power itself, it is
                impossible to over-estimate.

Legacy

   Turner left a small fortune which he hoped would be used to support
   what he called "decayed artists". Part of the money went to the Royal
   Academy of Arts, which now does not use it for this purpose though
   occasionally it awards students the Turner Medal. His collection of
   finished paintings was bequeathed to the British nation, and he
   intended that a special gallery would be built to house them. This did
   not come to pass owing to a failure to agree on a site, and then to the
   parsimony of British governments. Twenty-two years after his death, the
   British Parliament passed an Act allowing his paintings to be lent to
   museums outside London, and so began the process of scattering the
   pictures which Turner had wanted to be kept together. In 1910 the main
   part of the Turner Bequest, which includes unfinished paintings and
   drawings, was rehoused in the Duveen Turner Wing at the Tate Gallery.
   In 1987 a new wing of the Tate, the Clore Gallery, was opened
   specifically to house the Turner bequest, though some of the most
   important paintings in it remain in the National Gallery in
   contravention of Turner's condition that the finished pictures be kept
   and shown together.

   In 1974, the Turner Museum was founded in the USA by Douglass
   Montrose-Graem to house his collection of Turner prints.

   A prestigious annual art award, the Turner Prize, created in 1984, was
   named in Turner's honour, but has become increasingly controversial,
   having promoted art which has no apparent connection with Turner's.
   Twenty years later the more modest Winsor & Newton Turner Watercolour
   Award was founded.

   A major exhibition, "Turner's Britain", with material, (including The
   Fighting Temeraire) on loan from around the globe, was held at
   Birmingham Museum & Art Gallery from 7 November 2003 to 8 February
   2004.

   In 2005, Turner's The Fighting Temeraire was voted Britain's "greatest
   painting" in a public poll organized by the BBC.

   In October 2005 Professor Harold Livermore, its owner for 60 years,
   gave Sandycombe Lodge, the villa at Twickenham which Turner designed
   and built for himself, to the Sandycombe Lodge Trust to be preserved as
   a monument to the artist. In 2006 he additionally gave some land to the
   Trust which had been part of Turner's domaine. The Friends of Turner's
   House were formed in 2004 to support it.

   In April 2006, Christie's New York auctioned Giudecca, La Donna Della
   Salute and San Giorgio, a view of Venice exhibited at the Royal Academy
   in 1841, for US$35.8 million, setting a new record for a Turner. The
   New York Times stated that according to two sources who had requested
   anonymity the buyer was casino magnate Stephen Wynn.

   In 2006, Turner's Glaucus and Scylla (1840) was returned by Kimbell Art
   Museum to the heirs of John and Anna Jaffe after a Holocaust Claim was
   made. The painting is scheduled to be sold by Christie's in April of
   2007.

Selected works

     * 1799 - Warkworth Castle, Northumberland - Thunder Storm Approaching
       at Sun-Set, oil on canvas - Victoria and Albert Museum, London
     * 1806 - The Battle of Trafalgar, as Seen from the Mizen Starboard
       Shrouds of the Victory, oil on canvas - Tate Gallery, London
     * 1812 - Snow Storm:Hannibal and His Army Crossing the Alps, oil on
       canvas, Tate Gallery, London
     * 1817 - Erruption of Vesuvius, oil on canvas, Yale Centre for
       British Art, New Haven, CT
     * 1822 - The Battle of Trafalgar, oil on canvas, National Maritime
       Museum, Greenwich, London
     * 1829 - Ulysses Deriding Polyphemus, oil on canvas, National
       Gallery, London
     * 1835 - The Burning of the Houses of Lords and Commons, oil on
       canvas, Philadelphia Museum of Art, Philadelphia
     * 1835 - The Grand Canal, Venice, oil on canvas, Metropolitan Museum
       of Art, New York
     * 1838 - The Fighting Temeraire Tugged to Her Last Berth to Be Broken
       up, oil on canvas, National Gallery, London
     * 1840 - Slave Ship (Slavers Throwing Overboard the Dead and Dying,
       Typhoon Coming On), oil on canvas, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston
     * 1840 - Glaucus and Scylla, oil on canvas. Formerly at Kimbell Art
       Museum, TX; recently returned to heirs
     * 1842 - Fishing Boats with Hucksters Bargaining for Fish, oil on
       canvas, The Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago
     * 1844 - Rain, Steam and Speed - The Great Western Railway, oil on
       canvas, National Gallery, London

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/J._M._W._Turner"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
