   #copyright

Jackie Robinson

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Sports and games people

   CAPTION: Jackie Robinson

                      Jackie Robinson
                       Personal Info
   Birth          January 31, 1919, Cairo, Georgia
   Death:         October 24, 1972, Stamford, Connecticut
                    Professional Career
   Debut          April 15, 1947, Brooklyn Dodgers vs. ,
   Team(s)        As Player

                  Brooklyn Dodgers ( 1947 - 1956)
   HOF induction: 1962
                     Career Highlights
     * 1947 National League R.O.Y. Award
     * 1949 National League MVP Award
     * Six-time All-Star

   Member of the National Baseball Hall of Fame

   Jackie Robinson
   "n/a"
   Inducted as a member of the Brooklyn Dodgers (42)
   Year Inducted: 1962
   First Year Elligible: 1962

   Jack Roosevelt "Jackie" Robinson ( January 31, 1919 - October 24, 1972)
   became the first African American Major League Baseball player of the
   modern era in 1947. The Baseball Hall of Fame inducted Robinson in 1962
   and he was a member of six World Series teams. Jackie earned six
   consecutive All-Star Game nominations and won several awards during his
   career. In 1947, Robinson won The Sporting News Rookie of the Year
   Award and the National League Rookie of the Year Award. Two years
   later, Jackie won the 1949 National League MVP Award.

   In recognition of his accomplishments both on the field and off of it,
   every Major League Baseball team retired the number 42. This was the
   number Jackie wore during his career. He was the subject of a 1950 film
   biography, The Jackie Robinson Story, in which he played himself, and
   became a political activist in his post-playing days.

Early life

   Jackie Robinson in the Negro Leagues, 1945
   Enlarge
   Jackie Robinson in the Negro Leagues, 1945

   In 1919, Jackie Robinson, the youngest of five children, was born near
   Cairo, Georgia during a Spanish Flu epidemic. In 1920 his family moved
   to Pasadena, California after his father abandoned them.

   Growing up, he lived in relative poverty and even joined a local
   neighbourhood gang. Eventually, friend Carl Anderson persuaded Robinson
   to abandon the gang.

   In 1935 Jackie Robinson graduated from Washington Junior High School
   and enrolled in John Muir High School ("Muir Tech"). There he played on
   various Muir Tech sport teams. He was a shortstop and catcher on the
   baseball team, a quarterback on the football team, a guard on the
   basketball team, and a member of the tennis team and the track and
   field squad. He won awards in the broad jump.

   In 1936 he captured the junior boys singles championship in the annual
   Pacific Coast Negro Tennis Tournament, starred as quarterback and
   earned a place on the annual Pomona baseball tournament all-star team,
   one which included future Major League Baseball Hall of Famers Ted
   Williams and Bob Lemon. The next year, Jackie played for the high
   school's basketball team. That year, the Pasadena Star-News newspaper
   ran a piece on Jackie.

   After leaving Muir, Jackie attended Pasadena Junior College and played
   both football and baseball. He played quarterback and safety for the
   football team, shortstop and leadoff batter for the baseball team and
   participated in the broad jump.

   While at PJC, he was elected to the "Lancers", a student run police
   organization responsible for patrolling various school activities. He
   dated and made friends. However, on January 25, 1938, he was arrested,
   the reason speculative, and sentenced to two years probation.

   In 1938 he was elected to the All-Southland Junior College (baseball)
   Team and selected as the region's Most Valuable Player.

   On February 4, 1939, he played his last basketball game at Pasadena
   Junior College. Jackie then received a gold pin and was named to the
   school's "Order of the Mast and Dagger".

UCLA

   On February 15, 1939, Jackie enrolled at the University of California,
   Los Angeles. While at UCLA, Jackie played basketball, ran track, played
   varsity baseball, and started for the Bruins football team.

   He excelled at each of these four sports and consequently became the
   first athlete in UCLA history to letter in four different sports in one
   year. He was also a 24- letterman. Until 1947 he was presumed to be the
   only person ever selected to play in the college all-star games in both
   basketball and football. He left college in 1941 because of financial
   problems, not many credits from a bachelor's degree.. Before he left,
   he met the woman he would eventually marry, Rachel Robinson. He and
   Rachel married in 1946 and had three children, Jackie Jr., Sharon and
   David.

Robinson in the Army

   After leaving UCLA his senior year, Robinson enlisted in the U.S. Army
   during World War II. He was assigned to the U.S. 761st Tank Battalion,
   an all black battalion. While initially refused admission to Officer
   Candidate School, he fought for it and eventually was accepted and,
   upon graduation, was commissioned as a second lieutenant and branched
   Armor. While training in the Army at Fort Hood, Texas, Robinson refused
   to go to the back of a public bus. He was court-martialed for
   insubordination and, therefore, never made it to Europe with his unit.
   He later received an honorable discharge in 1944, after being acquitted
   of all charges at the court-martial.

   Jackie played baseball in 1944 for the Kansas City Monarchs in the
   Negro American League, where he was noticed by Clyde Sukeforth, a scout
   working for Branch Rickey, although David Halberstam, in October 1964,
   asserts that legendary super-scout Tom Greenwade discovered and
   secretly followed Robinson for a month on the road.

The Dodgers

   Statue at Montreal's Olympic Stadium
   Enlarge
   Statue at Montreal's Olympic Stadium

   In the late 1940's, Branch Rickey was club president and general
   manager of the Brooklyn Dodgers. The Dodgers began to scout Robinson
   and Rickey eventually selected Jackie from a list of promising
   African-American players. Robinson became the first player in
   fifty-seven years to break the Baseball colour line.

   In 1946, the Dodgers assigned to Jackie to Montreal Royals. Because of
   Jackie's play in 1946, the Dodgers called him up to play for the major
   league club in 1947. Robinson debuted on April 15, 1947. Jackie went
   0-3 and played first base.

   Although Jackie played every game that season at first base, Robinson
   spent most of his career as a second baseman. Later in his career, he
   played games at third base and in the outfield.

   Throughout the season, Robinson experienced harassment at the hands of
   both players and fans. He was verbally assaulted by both his own
   teammates and by members of opposing teams. Several Dodger players
   insinuated they would strike if forced to play alongside Robinson. The
   mutiny ended when Dodger management informed those players that they
   were welcome to find employment elsewhere.

   On April 22, 1947, players on the Philadelphia Phillies called Jackie a
   "nigger" from their dugout. They yelled that he should "go back to the
   cotton fields." Rickey would later recall that the Phillies' Ben
   Chapman "did more than anybody to unite the Dodgers. When he poured out
   that string of unconscionable abuse, he solidified and united thirty
   men." Baseball Commissioner Happy Chandler admonished the Phillies and
   asked Chapman to pose for photographs with Robinson as a conciliatory
   gesture and the two players obliged.

   For his services, Jackie earned the major-league minimum salary of
   $5000--which was standard for many rookies at the time. That year, he
   played in 151 games, hit .297, lead the National League in stolen bases
   and won the Rookie of the Year award.

   Two years later, Jackie won the Most Valuable Player award for the
   National League. Jackie won his only championship ring when the Dodgers
   beat the New York Yankees in the 1955 World Series.

   After the 1956 season, Robinson was sold by the Dodgers to the New York
   Giants. Rather than report to the Giants, Robinson chose to retire at
   age 37.

   Robinson was a disciplined hitter and a versatile fielder. He had a
   .311 career batting average and substantially more walks than
   strikeouts. He played several defensive positions and was a noted base
   stealer; no other player since World War II has stolen home more than
   Robinson. During his career, the Dodgers played in six World Series and
   Jackie played in six All-Star games. He is a member of the Baseball
   Hall of Fame and a member of the All-Century Team. In one of his most
   famous quotes, he said "I'm not concerned with your liking or disliking
   me... all I ask is that you respect me as a human being."

Post-baseball life

   Jackie Robinson and his son David being interviewed at the "March on
   Washington"August 28, 1963From the National Archives
   Enlarge
   Jackie Robinson and his son David being interviewed at the "March on
   Washington"
   August 28, 1963
   From the National Archives

   Robinson retired on January 5, 1957. He had wanted to manage or coach
   in the major leagues, but received no offers. He became a
   vice-president for the Chock Full O' Nuts corporation instead, and
   served on the board of the NAACP until 1967, when he resigned. During
   the early to late 50's, Jackie and Louis Ostrer owned Jackie
   Robinson's, a men's clothing store located on 125th St. in New York
   City.

   He was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1962, his first year
   of eligibility, becoming the first African-American so honored. On June
   4, 1972 the Dodgers retired his uniform number 42 alongside Roy
   Campanella (39) and Sandy Koufax (32).

   Robinson made his final public appearance on October 14, 1972, before
   Game 2 of the World Series. He used this chance to express his wish for
   a black manager to be hired by a Major League Baseball team.

   This wish was granted two years later, following the 1974 season, when
   the Cleveland Indians gave their managerial post to Frank Robinson, a
   Hall of Fame bound slugger who was then still an active player, and no
   relation to Jackie Robinson. At the press conference announcing his
   hiring, Frank expressed his wish that Jackie had lived to see the
   moment.

   Robinson's final few years were marked by tragedy. In 1971, his eldest
   son, Jackie, Jr., who had beaten back drug problems and was working as
   a Daytop Village counselor, was killed in an automobile accident. Also,
   Jackie suffered from diabetes, virtually went blind, and suffered heart
   problems.

   Jackie Robinson was pronounced dead in Stamford, Connecticut on October
   24, 1972 and was interred in the Cypress Hills Cemetery in Brooklyn,
   New York. The highway that goes through the cemetery ( Interborough
   Parkway) has been renamed the Jackie Robinson Parkway.

Trivia & interesting facts

     * In 1997 (the 50th anniversary of his major league debut), his
       number 42 was retired by all major league teams, though players who
       wore the number at the time were allowed to retain it until the end
       of their careers. In 2004, Major League Baseball designated that
       April 15 each year would be marked as "Jackie Robinson Day" in all
       their ballparks.

     * In 2000, he ranked number 44 on The Sporting News' list of the 100
       Greatest Baseball Players, and was elected to the Major League
       Baseball All-Century Team.

     * The book Carl Erskine's Tales from the Dodgers Dugout: Extra
       Innings (2004) includes short stories from former Dodger pitcher
       Carl Erskine. Robinson is prominent in many of these stories.

     * On October 29, 2003, the United States Congress posthumously
       awarded Robinson the Congressional Gold Medal, the highest award
       the Congress can bestow. Robinson's widow accepted the award in a
       ceremony in the Capitol Rotunda on March 2, 2005.

     * At the November, 2006 groundbreaking for a new New York Mets
       ballpark, Citi Field, scheduled to open in 2009, it was announced
       that the main entrance, modeled on the one in Brooklyn's old Ebbets
       Field, will be called the Jackie Robinson Rotunda. Additionally,
       Mets owner Fred Wilpon said that the Mets and Citigroup would work
       with the the Jackie Robinson Foundation to create a Jackie Robinson
       Museum and Learning Centre in lower Manhattan, as well as fund
       scholarships for "young people who live by and embody Jackie's
       ideals."

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jackie_Robinson"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
