   #copyright

James Joyce

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Writers and critics

   James Augustine Aloysius Joyce ( Irish Seamus Seoighe; 2 February 1882
   – 13 January 1941) was an Irish writer and poet, widely considered to
   be one of the most influential writers of the 20th century. Along with
   Marcel Proust and Virginia Woolf, he is a key figure in the development
   of the modernist novel. He is best known for his landmark novel Ulysses
   (1922). His other major works are the short story collection Dubliners
   (1914) and the novels A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (1916)
   and Finnegans Wake (1939).

   Although most of his adult life was spent outside the country, Joyce's
   Irish experiences are essential to his writings and provide all of the
   settings for his fiction and much of their subject matter. In
   particular, his rocky early relationship with the Irish Catholic Church
   is reflected by a similar conflict in his character Stephen Dedalus,
   who appears in several of his works. His fictional universe is firmly
   rooted in Dublin and reflects his family life and the events and
   friends (and enemies) from his school and college days; Ulysses is set
   with precision in the real streets and alleyways of the city. As the
   result of the combination of this attention to one place and his
   lengthy travels throughout Europe, he became both one of the most
   cosmopolitan and one of the most local of all the great English
   language modernists.

Life and writing

Dublin, 1882-1904

   In 1882, James Augustine Joyce was born into a Catholic family in the
   Dublin suburbs of Rathgar. He was the eldest of ten surviving children;
   two of his siblings died of typhoid. His father's family, originally
   from Cork, had once owned a small salt and lime works. Joyce's father
   and paternal grandfather both married into wealthy families. In 1887,
   his father, John Stanislaus Joyce, was appointed rate collector by
   Dublin Corporation; the family subsequently moved to the fashionable
   new suburb of Bray. Around this time Joyce was attacked by a dog, this
   resulted in a lifelong canine phobia. He also suffered from a fear of
   thunderstorms, which his deeply religious aunt had described to him as
   being a sign of God's wrath.

   In 1891, Joyce wrote a poem, "Et Tu Healy," on the death of Charles
   Stewart Parnell. His father had it printed and even sent a copy to the
   Vatican Library. In November of that same year, John Joyce was entered
   in Stubbs Gazette (an official register of bankruptcies) and suspended
   from work. In 1893 John Joyce was dismissed with a pension. This was
   the beginning of a slide into poverty for the family, mainly due to
   John's drinking and general financial mismanagement.

   James Joyce was initially educated at Clongowes Wood College, a
   boarding school in County Kildare, which he entered in 1888 but had to
   leave in 1892 when his father could no longer pay the fees. Joyce then
   studied at home and briefly at the Christian Brothers school on North
   Richmond Street, Dublin, before he was offered a place in the Jesuits'
   Dublin school, Belvedere College, in 1893. The offer was made at least
   partly in the hope that he would prove to have a vocation and join the
   Order. Joyce, however, was to reject Catholicism by the age of 16,
   although the philosophy of St. Thomas Aquinas would remain a strong
   influence on him throughout his life.

   He enrolled at the recently established University College Dublin in
   1898. He studied modern languages, specifically English, French and
   Italian. He also became active in theatrical and literary circles in
   the city. His review of Ibsen's New Drama, his first published work,
   was published in 1900 and resulted in a letter of thanks from the
   Norwegian dramatist himself. Joyce wrote a number of other articles and
   at least two plays (since lost) during this period. Many of the friends
   he made at University College Dublin would appear as characters in
   Joyce's written works.

   After graduating from UCD in 1903, Joyce left for Paris; ostensibly to
   study medicine, but in reality he squandered money his family could ill
   afford. He returned to Ireland after a few months, when his mother was
   diagnosed with cancer. Fearing for her son's "impiety", his mother
   tried unsuccesfully to get Joyce to make his confession and to take
   communion. She finally passed into a coma and died on August 13th,
   Joyce having refused to kneel with other members of the family praying
   at her bedside. After her death he continued to drink heavily, and
   conditions at home grew quite appalling. He scraped a living reviewing
   books, teaching and singing — he was an accomplished tenor, and won the
   bronze medal in the 1904 Feis Ceoil.

   On 7 January 1904, he attempted to publish A Portrait of the Artist, an
   essay-story dealing with aesthetics, in a day, only to have it rejected
   from the free-thinking magazine Dana. He decided, on his twenty-second
   birthday, to revise the story and turn it into a novel he planned to
   call Stephen Hero. The same year he met Nora Barnacle, a young woman
   from Connemara, County Galway who was working as a chambermaid. On 16
   June 1904, they went on their first date, an event which would be
   commemorated by providing the date for the action of Ulysses.

   Joyce remained in Dublin for some time longer, drinking heavily. After
   one of these drinking binges, he got into a fight over a
   misunderstanding with a man in Phoenix Park; he was picked up and
   dusted off by a minor acquaintance of his father's, Alfred H. Hunter,
   who brought him into his home to tend to his injuries. Hunter was
   rumored to be a Jew and to have an unfaithful wife, and would serve as
   one of the models for Leopold Bloom, the main protagonist of Ulysses.
   He took up with medical student Oliver St John Gogarty, who formed the
   basis for the character Buck Mulligan in Ulysses. After staying in
   Gogarty's Martello Tower for six nights he left in the middle of the
   night following an altercation which involved Gogarty shooting a pistol
   in his direction. He walked all the way back to Dublin to stay with
   relatives for the night, and sent a friend to the tower the next day to
   pack his trunk. Shortly thereafter he eloped to the continent with
   Nora.

1904-1920: Trieste and Zürich

   Joyce and Nora went into self-imposed exile, moving first to Zürich,
   where he had supposedly acquired a post teaching English at the Berlitz
   Language School through an agent in England. It turned out that the
   English agent had been swindled, but the director of the school sent
   him on to Trieste, which was part of Austria-Hungary until World War I
   (today part of Italy). Once again, he found there was no position for
   him, but with the help of Almidano Artifoni, director of the Trieste
   Berlitz school, he finally secured a teaching position in Pola, then
   part of Austria-Hungary (today part of Croatia). He stayed there,
   teaching English mainly to Austro-Hungarian naval officers stationed at
   the Pola base, from October 1904 until March 1905, when the Austrians —
   having discovered an espionage ring in the city — expelled all aliens.
   With Artifoni's help, he moved back to Trieste and began teaching
   English there. He would remain in Trieste for most of the next ten
   years.

   Later that year Nora gave birth to their first child, George. Joyce
   then managed to talk his brother, Stanislaus, into joining him in
   Trieste, and secured him a position teaching at the school. Ostensibly
   his reasons were for his company and offering his brother a much more
   interesting life than the simple clerking job he had back in Dublin,
   but in truth, he hoped to augment his family's meagre income with his
   brother's earnings. Stanislaus and Joyce had strained relations the
   entire time they lived together in Trieste, most arguments centering
   around Joyce's frivolity with money and drinking habits.

   With chronic wanderlust much of his early life, Joyce became frustrated
   with life in Trieste and moved to Rome in late 1906, having secured a
   position working in a bank in the city. He intensely disliked Rome,
   however, and ended up moving back to Trieste in early 1907. His
   daughter Lucia was born in the summer of the same year.

   Joyce returned to Dublin in the summer of 1909 with George, in order to
   visit his father and work on getting Dubliners published. He visited
   Nora's family in Galway, meeting them for the first time (a successful
   visit, to his relief). When preparing to return to Trieste he decided
   to bring one of his sisters, Eva, back to Trieste with him in order to
   help Nora look after the home. He would spend only a month back in
   Trieste before again heading back to Dublin, this time as a
   representative of some cinema owners in order to set up a regular
   cinema in Dublin. The venture was successful (but would quickly fall
   apart in his absence), and he returned to Trieste in January 1910 with
   another sister in tow, Eileen. While Eva became very homesick for
   Dublin and returned a few years later, Eileen spent the rest of her
   life on the continent, eventually marrying Czech bank cashier Frantisek
   Schaurek.

   Joyce returned to Dublin briefly in the summer of 1912 during his
   years-long fight with his Dublin publisher, George Roberts, over the
   publication of Dubliners. His trip was once again fruitless, and on his
   return he wrote the poem "Gas from a Burner" as a thinly veiled
   invective of Roberts. It was his last trip to Ireland, and he never
   came closer to Dublin than London again, despite the many pleas of his
   father and invitations from fellow Irish writer William Butler Yeats.

   Joyce came up with many money-making schemes during this period of his
   life, such as his attempt to become a cinema magnate back in Dublin, as
   well as an always-discussed but never-accomplished plan to import Irish
   tweeds into Trieste. His expert borrowing skills kept him from ever
   becoming completely destitute. His income was made up partially from
   his position at the Berlitz school, and partially from taking on
   private students. Many of his acquaintances through meeting these
   private students proved invaluable allies during his problems getting
   out of Austria-Hungary and into Switzerland in 1915.

   One of his students in Trieste was Ettore Schmitz, better known by the
   pseudonym Italo Svevo; they met in 1907 and became lasting friends and
   mutual critics. Schmitz was a Jew, and became the primary model for
   Leopold Bloom; most of the details about the Jewish faith included in
   Ulysses came from Schmitz in response to Joyce's queries. Joyce would
   spend most of the rest of his life on the Continent. It was in Trieste
   that he first began to be plagued by major eye problems, which would
   result in over a dozen surgeries before his death.

   In 1915 he moved to Zürich in order to avoid the complexities of living
   in Austria-Hungary during World War I, where he met one of his most
   enduring and important friends, Frank Budgen, whose opinion Joyce
   constantly sought through the writing of Ulysses and Finnegans Wake. It
   was also here where Ezra Pound brought him to the attention of English
   feminist and publisher Harriet Shaw Weaver, who would become Joyce's
   patron, providing him thousands of pounds over the next 25 years and
   relieving him of the burden of teaching in order to focus on his
   writing. After the war he returned to Trieste briefly, but found the
   city had changed, and his relations with his brother (who had been
   interned in an Austrian prison camp for most of the war due to his
   pro-Italian politics) were more strained than ever. Joyce headed to
   Paris in 1920 at an invitation from Ezra Pound, supposedly for a week,
   but he ended up living there for the next twenty years.

1920-1941: Paris and Zürich

   He travelled frequently to Switzerland for eye surgeries and treatments
   for Lucia, who suffered from schizophrenia. In Paris, Maria and Eugene
   Jolas nursed Joyce during his long years of writing Finnegans Wake.
   Were it not for their unwavering support (along with Harriet Shaw
   Weaver's constant financial support), there is a good possibility that
   his books might never have been finished or published. In their now
   legendary literary magazine "transition," the Jolases published
   serially various sections of Joyce's novel under the title Work in
   Progress. He returned to Zürich in late 1940, fleeing the Nazi
   occupation of France. On 11 January 1941, he underwent surgery for a
   perforated ulcer. While at first improved, he relapsed the following
   day, and despite several transfusions, fell into a coma. He awoke at 2
   a.m. on 13 January 1941, and asked for a nurse to call his wife and son
   before losing consciousness again. They were still en route when he
   expired fifteen minutes later. He is buried in the Fluntern Cemetery
   within earshot of the lions in the Zürich zoo. His wife Nora, whom he
   finally married in London in 1931, survived him by 10 years. She is
   buried now by his side, as is their son George, who died in 1976.

Major works

Dubliners

   Joyce's Irish experiences constitute an essential element of his
   writings, and provide all of the settings for his fiction and much of
   their subject matter. His early volume of short stories, Dubliners, is
   a penetrating analysis of the stagnation and paralysis of Dublin
   society. The stories incorporate epiphanies, a word used particularly
   by Joyce, by which he meant a sudden consciousness of the "soul" of a
   thing. The final and most famous story in the collection, " The Dead",
   was directed by John Huston as his last feature film in 1987.

A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man

   A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man is a nearly complete rewrite of
   the abandoned Stephen Hero novel, the original manuscript of which
   Joyce partially destroyed in a fit of rage during an argument with
   Nora. A künstlerroman, or story of the personal development of an
   artist, it is an biographical coming-of-age novel in which Joyce
   depicts a gifted young man's gradual attainment of maturity and
   self-consciousness; the main character, Stephen Dedalus, is in some
   manners based upon Joyce himself. Some hints of the techniques Joyce
   was to frequently employ in later works - such as the use of interior
   monologue and references to a character's psychic reality rather than
   his external surroundings - are evident in this novel. Joseph Strick
   directed a film of the book in 1977 starring Luke Johnston, Bosco
   Hogan, T.P. McKenna and John Gielgud.

Exiles and poetry

   Despite early interest in the theatre, Joyce published only one play,
   Exiles, begun shortly after the outbreak of World War I in 1914 and
   published in 1918. A study of a husband and wife relationship, the play
   looks back to The Dead (the final story in Dubliners) and forward to
   Ulysses, which was begun around the time of the play's composition.

   Joyce also published a number of books of poetry. His first mature
   published work was the satirical broadside "The Holy Office" (1904), in
   which he proclaimed himself to be the superior of many prominent
   members of the Celtic revival. His first full-length poetry collection
   Chamber Music (referring, Joyce explained, to the sound of urine
   hitting the side of a chamber pot) consisted of 36 short lyrics. This
   publication led to his inclusion in the Imagist Anthology, edited by
   Ezra Pound, who was a champion of Joyce's work. Other poetry Joyce
   published in his lifetime includes "Gas From A Burner" (1912), Pomes
   Penyeach (1927) and "Ecce Puer" (written in 1932 to mark the birth of
   his grandson and the recent death of his father). It was published in
   Collected Poems (1936).

Ulysses

   As he was completing work on Dubliners in 1906, Joyce considered adding
   another story featuring a Jewish advertising canvasser called Leopold
   Bloom under the title Ulysses. Although he did not pursue the idea
   further at the time, he eventually commenced work on a novel using both
   the title and basic premise in 1914. The writing was completed in
   October, 1921. Three more months were devoted to working on the proofs
   of the book before Joyce halted work shortly before his self-imposed
   deadline, his 40th birthday ( 2 February 1922).

   Thanks to Ezra Pound, serial publication of the novel in the magazine
   The Little Review began in 1918. This magazine was edited by Margaret
   Anderson and Jane Heap, with the backing of John Quinn, a New York
   attorney with an interest in contemporary experimental art and
   literature. Unfortunately, this publication encountered censorship
   problems in the United States; serialization was halted in 1920 when
   the editors were convicted of publishing obscenity. The novel remained
   banned in the United States until 1933.

   At least partly because of this controversy, Joyce found it difficult
   to get a publisher to accept the book, but it was published in 1922 by
   Sylvia Beach from her well-known Rive Gauche bookshop, Shakespeare and
   Company. An English edition published the same year by Joyce's patron,
   Harriet Shaw Weaver, ran into further difficulties with the United
   States authorities, and 500 copies that were shipped to the States were
   seized and possibly destroyed. The following year, John Rodker produced
   a print run of 500 more intended to replace the missing copies, but
   these were burned by English customs at Folkestone. A further
   consequence of the novel's ambiguous legal status as a banned book was
   that a number of 'bootleg' versions appeared, most notably a number of
   pirate versions from the publisher Samuel Roth. In 1928, a court
   injunction against Roth was obtained and he ceased publication.

   1922 was a key year in the history of English-language literary
   modernism, with the appearance of both Ulysses and T. S. Eliot's poem,
   The Waste Land. In Ulysses, Joyce employs stream of consciousness,
   parody, jokes, and virtually every other literary technique to present
   his characters. The action of the novel, which takes place in a single
   day, 16 June 1904, sets the characters and incidents of the Odyssey of
   Homer in modern Dublin and represents Odysseus (Ulysses), Penelope and
   Telemachus in the characters of Leopold Bloom, his wife Molly Bloom and
   Stephen Dedalus, parodically contrasted with their lofty models. The
   book explores various areas of Dublin life, dwelling on its squalor and
   monotony. Nevertheless, the book is also an affectionately detailed
   study of the city, and Joyce claimed that if Dublin were to be
   destroyed in some catastrophe it could be rebuilt, brick by brick,
   using his work as a model. In order to achieve this level of accuracy,
   Joyce used the 1904 edition of Thom's Directory — a work that listed
   the owners and/or tenants of every residential and commercial property
   in the city. He also bombarded friends still living there with requests
   for information and clarification.

   The book consists of 18 chapters, each covering roughly one hour of the
   day, beginning around about 8 a.m. and ending sometime after 2 a.m. the
   following morning. Each of the 18 chapters of the novel employs its own
   literary style. Each chapter also refers to a specific episode in
   Homer's Odyssey and has a specific colour, art or science and bodily
   organ associated with it. This combination of kaleidoscopic writing
   with an extreme formal, schematic structure represents one of the
   book's major contributions to the development of 20th century modernist
   literature. The use of classical mythology as a framework for his book
   and the near-obsessive focus on external detail in a book in which much
   of the significant action is happening inside the minds of the
   characters are others. Nevertheless, Joyce complained that, "I may have
   oversystematised Ulysses," and played down the mythic correspondences
   by eliminating the chapter titles that had been taken from Homer.

   Joseph Strick directed a film of the book in 1967 starring Milo O'Shea,
   Barbara Jefford and Maurice Roëves. Sean Walsh directed another version
   released in 2004 starring Stephen Rea, Angeline Ball and Hugh O'Conor.
   Neither film really manages to convey the full scope of Joyce's
   masterpiece, however, and each only covers the text selectively. It is
   debatable whether such an ambitious and complex work could ever be
   satisfactorily filmed.

Finnegans Wake

   Having completed work on Ulysses, Joyce was so exhausted that he did
   not write a line of prose for a year. On 10 March 1923 he informed a
   patron, Harriet Weaver: "Yesterday I wrote two pages — the first I have
   since the final Yes of Ulysses. Having found a pen, with some
   difficulty I copied them out in a large handwriting on a double sheet
   of foolscap so that I could read them. Il lupo perde il pelo ma non il
   vizio, the Italians say. The wolf may lose his skin but not his vice or
   the leopard cannot change his spots". Thus was born a text that became
   known, first, as Work in Progress and later Finnegans Wake.

   By 1926 Joyce had completed the first two parts of the book. In that
   year, he met Eugene and Maria Jolas who offered to serialise the book
   in their magazine transition. For the next few years, Joyce worked
   rapidly on the new book, but in the 1930s, progress slowed
   considerably. This was due to a number of factors, including the death
   of his father in 1931, concern over the mental health of his daughter
   Lucia and his own health problems, including failing eyesight. Much of
   the work was done with the assistance of younger admirers, including
   Samuel Beckett. For some years, Joyce nursed the eccentric plan of
   turning over the book to his friend James Stephens to complete, on the
   grounds that Stephens was born in the same hospital as Joyce exactly
   one week later, and shared the first name of both Joyce and of Joyce's
   fictional alter-ego (this is one example of Joyce's numerous
   superstitions).

   Reaction to the work was mixed, including negative comment from early
   supporters of Joyce's work, such as Pound and the author's brother
   Stanislaus Joyce. In order to counteract this hostile reception, a book
   of essays by supporters of the new work, including Beckett, William
   Carlos Williams and others was organised and published in 1929 under
   the title Our Exagmination Round His Factification for Incamination of
   Work in Progress. At his 47th birthday party at the Jolases' home,
   Joyce revealed the final title of the work and Finnegans Wake was
   published in book form on 4 May 1939.

   Joyce's method of stream of consciousness, literary allusions and free
   dream associations was pushed to the limit in Finnegans Wake, which
   abandoned all conventions of plot and character construction and is
   written in a peculiar and obscure language, based mainly on complex
   multi-level puns. This approach is similar to, but far more extensive
   than that used by Lewis Carroll in Jabberwocky. If Ulysses is a day in
   the life of a city, the Wake is a night and partakes of the logic of
   dreams. This has led many readers and critics to apply Joyce's
   oft-quoted description in the Wake of Ulysses as his "usylessly
   unreadable Blue Book of Eccles" to the Wake itself. However, readers
   have been able to reach a consensus about the central cast of
   characters and general plot.

   Much of the wordplay in the book stems from the use of multilingual
   puns which draw on a wide range of languages. The role played by
   Beckett and other assistants included collating words from these
   languages on cards for Joyce to use and, as Joyce's eyesight worsened,
   of writing the text from the author's dictation.

   The view of history propounded in this text is very strongly influenced
   by Giambattista Vico, and the metaphysics of Giordano Bruno of Nola are
   important to the interplay of the "characters". Vico propounded a
   cyclical view of history, in which civilisation rose from chaos, passed
   through theocratic, aristocratic, and democratic phases, and then
   lapsed back into chaos. The most obvious example of the influence of
   Vico's cyclical theory of history is to be found in the opening and
   closing words of the book. Finnegans Wake opens with the words
   'riverrun, past Eve and Adam's, from swerve of shore to bend of bay,
   brings us by a commodius vicus of recirculation back to Howth Castle
   and Environs.' ('vicus' is a pun on Vico) and ends 'A way a lone a last
   a loved a long the'. In other words, the book ends with the beginning
   of a sentence and begins with the end of the same sentence, turning the
   book into one great cycle. Indeed, Joyce said that the ideal reader of
   the Wake would suffer from "ideal insomnia" and, on completing the
   book, would turn to page one and start again, and so on in an endless
   cycle of reading.

Legacy

   Statue of James Joyce on North Earl Street, Dublin.
   Enlarge
   Statue of James Joyce on North Earl Street, Dublin.

   Joyce's work has been subject to intense scrutiny by scholars of all
   types. He has also been an important influence on writers and scholars
   as diverse as Samuel Beckett, Jorge Luis Borges, Flann O'Brien, Máirtín
   Ó Cadhain, Salman Rushdie, Robert Anton Wilson, and Joseph Campbell.

   Countless critics over the past century have argued that Joyce's work
   has had a harmful effect on modern and post-modern fiction, creating
   generations of writers who have eschewed storytelling, proper grammar,
   and coherence in favour of self-indulgent rambling. Some scholars, most
   notably Vladimir Nabokov, have mixed feelings on his work, often
   championing some of his fiction while condemning others (in Nabokov's
   case, Ulysses was brilliant, Finnegans Wake horrible).

   Joyce's influence is also evident in fields other than literature. The
   phrase "Three Quarks for Muster Mark" in Joyce's Finnegans Wake is
   often called the source of the physicists' word "quark", the name of
   one of the main kinds of elementary particles, proposed by the
   physicist Murray Gell-Mann. ( James Gleick's book Genius suggests that
   Gell-Mann found the Joycean antecedent after the fact, as physicists
   have pronounced quark to rhyme with cork and not with Mark.) The French
   philosopher Jacques Derrida has written a book on the use of language
   in Ulysses, and the American philosopher Donald Davidson has written
   similarly on Finnegans Wake in comparison with Lewis Carroll. Vladimir
   Nabokov esteemed Ulysses greatly, listing it with Franz Kafka's " The
   Metamorphosis" as one of the 20th century's greatest prose works.
   However, Nabokov was less than thrilled with Finnegans Wake (see Strong
   Opinions, The Annotated Lolita or Pale Fire), an attitude Jorge Luis
   Borges shared.

   Finnegans Wake is a recurring theme in Tom Robbins's novel Fierce
   Invalids Home from Hot Climates. In that novel, it is the favourite
   discussion topic of the Bangkok-based "C.R.A.F.T. Club" (Can't Remember
   A Fucking Thing). The protagonist, a CIA agent named Switters,
   contemplates writing a thesis about it. The life of Joyce is celebrated
   annually on June 16, Bloomsday, in Dublin and in an increasing number
   of cities worldwide.

   Each year in Dedham, Massachusetts, USA literary-minded runners hold
   the James Joyce Ramble, a 10K Road Race with each mile dedicated to a
   different work by Joyce. With professional actors in period garb lining
   the streets and reading from his books as the athletes run by, it is
   billed as the only theatrical performance where the performers stand
   still and the audience does the moving. The James Joyce Ramble hosts
   three thousand runners, is held on the last Sunday in April each year
   and is dedicated to literary freedom.

   Not everyone is eager to expand upon academic study of Joyce, however;
   Stephen Joyce, James' grandson and sole beneficiary owner of the
   estate, has been alleged to have destroyed some of the writer's
   correspondence, threatened to sue if public readings were held during
   Bloomsday , and blocked adaptations he felt were 'inappropriate'. On
   June 12, 2006, Carol Shloss, a Stanford University professor, sued the
   estate for refusing to give permission to use material about Joyce and
   his daughter on the professor's website.

Works

   Bust of James Joyce in St. Stephen's Green, Dublin.
   Enlarge
   Bust of James Joyce in St. Stephen's Green, Dublin.
     * Stephen Hero (written 1904-6: precursor to the Portrait, published
       1944)
     * Chamber Music ( 1907 poems)
     * Dubliners ( 1914)
     * A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man ( 1916)
     * Exiles ( 1918 play)
     * Ulysses ( 1922)
     * Pomes Penyeach ( 1927 poems)
     * Finnegans Wake ( 1939)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Joyce"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
