   #copyright

James Cook

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geographers and explorers

   James Cook, portrait by Nathaniel Dance, c. 1775, National Maritime
   Museum, Greenwich
   Enlarge
   James Cook, portrait by Nathaniel Dance, c. 1775, National Maritime
   Museum, Greenwich
   Blue plaque for Captain James Cook
   Enlarge
   Blue plaque for Captain James Cook

   James Cook FRS RN ( October 27, 1728 ( O.S.) – February 14, 1779) was
   an English explorer, navigator and cartographer. Ultimately rising to
   the rank of Captain in the Royal Navy, Cook made three voyages to the
   Pacific Ocean, achieving the first European contact with the eastern
   coastline of Australia, the European discovery of the Hawaiian Islands,
   and the first recorded circumnavigation and mapping of Newfoundland and
   New Zealand.

   After service in the British merchant navy as a teenager, he joined the
   Royal Navy in 1755, seeing action in the Seven Years' War, and
   subsequently surveying and mapping much of the entrance to the Saint
   Lawrence River during the siege of Quebec. This allowed General Wolfe
   to make his famous stealth attack on the Plains of Abraham, and helped
   to bring Cook to the attention of the Admiralty and Royal Society at a
   crucial moment both in his personal career and in the direction of
   British overseas discovery, and led to his commission as commander of
   the HM Bark Endeavour and the first of his three Pacific voyages in
   1766.

   Cook accurately charted many areas and recorded several islands and
   coastlines on European maps for the first time. His huge achievements
   can be attributed to a combination of excellent seamanship, his
   superior surveying and cartographic skills, courage in exploring
   dangerous locations to confirm the facts (for example dipping into the
   Antarctic circle repeatedly and exploring around the Great Barrier
   Reef), ability to lead men in adverse conditions, and boldness both
   with regard to the extent of his explorations and his willingness to
   exceed the instructions given to him by the Admiralty.

   Cook died in Hawaii in a fracas with Hawaiians during his third
   exploratory voyage in the Pacific in 1779.

Early life

   Cook was born in relatively humble circumstances at Marton in North
   Yorkshire, which today is within the town of Middlesbrough. Cook was
   one of five children of James Cook, a Scottish farm labourer, and his
   locally-born wife Grace. As a child, Cook moved with his family to
   Airey Holme farm at Great Ayton, where he was educated at the local
   school (now a museum), his studies financed by his father's employer.
   At 13 he began work with his father, who managed the farm.

   In 1745, when he was 16, Cook left home to be apprenticed in a grocery/
   haberdashery in the fishing village of Staithes. According to legend,
   Cook first felt the lure of the sea while gazing out of the shop
   window.

   After a year and a half in Staithes, William Sanderson, the shop's
   owner, found Cook unsuited to the trade. Sanderson took Cook to the
   nearby port town of Whitby and introduced him to John and Henry Walker.
   The Walkers were prominent local ship-owners and Quakers, and were in
   the coal trade. Cook was taken on as a merchant navy apprentice in
   their small fleet of vessels plying coal along the English coast. His
   first assignment was aboard the collier Freelove, and he spent several
   years on this and various other coasters sailing between the Tyne and
   London.

   For this new apprenticeship, Cook applied himself to the study of
   algebra, trigonometry, navigation, and astronomy, skills he would need
   one day to command his own ship.

   His three-year apprenticeship completed, Cook began working on trading
   ships in the Baltic Sea. He soon progressed through the merchant navy
   ranks, starting with his 1752 promotion to Mate (officer in charge of
   navigation) aboard the collier brig Friendship. In 1755 he was offered
   command of this vessel, but within the month he volunteered for service
   in the British Royal Navy.

   In 1755, the Kingdom of Great Britain was re-arming for what was to
   become the Seven Years' War. Cook saw that his career could advance
   more quickly in military service. However, this required starting again
   in the naval hierarchy, and on June 17 he began as able seaman aboard
   HMS Eagle under the command of Captain Hugh Palliser. He was very
   quickly promoted to Master's Mate.

Family life

   Cook married Elizabeth Batts, the daughter of one of his mentors, on
   December 21, 1762. The couple had six children: James (1763-1794),
   Nathaniel (1764-1781), Elizabeth (1767-1771), Joseph (1768-1768),
   George (1772-1772) and Hugh (1776-1793). When not at sea, Cook lived in
   the East End of London. He attended St. Paul's Church, Shadwell, where
   his son James was baptised.

Start of Royal Navy career

   James Cook's 1775 Chart of Newfoundland
   Enlarge
   James Cook's 1775 Chart of Newfoundland

   During the Seven Years' War, he participated in the siege of Quebec
   City before the Battle of the Plains of Abraham in 1759. He showed a
   talent for surveying and cartography and was responsible for mapping
   much of the entrance to the Saint Lawrence River during the siege,
   allowing General Wolfe to make his famous stealth attack on the Plains
   of Abraham.

   Cook's surveying skills were put to good use in the 1760s, mapping the
   jagged coast of Newfoundland. Cook surveyed the northwest stretch in
   1763 and 1764, the south coast between the Burin Peninsula and Cape Ray
   in 1765 and 1766, and the west coast in 1767. Cook’s five seasons in
   Newfoundland produced the first large-scale and accurate maps of the
   island’s coasts; they also gave Cook his mastery of practical
   surveying, achieved under often adverse conditions, and brought him to
   the attention of the Admiralty and Royal Society at a crucial moment
   both in his personal career and in the direction of British overseas
   discovery.

First voyage ( 1768- 1771)

   In 1766, the Royal Society hired Cook to travel to the Pacific Ocean to
   observe and record the transit of Venus across the Sun. Cook was
   commissioned as a Lieutenant and given command of HM Bark Endeavour. He
   sailed from England in 1768, rounded Cape Horn and continued westward
   across the Pacific to arrive at Tahiti on April 13, 1769, where the
   observations were to be made. The transit was scheduled to occur on
   June 3, and in the meantime he commissioned the building of a small
   fort and observatory.

   The astronomer appointed to the task was Charles Green, assistant to
   the recently-appointed Astronomer Royal, Nevil Maskelyne. The primary
   purpose of the observation was to obtain measurements that could be
   used to calculate more accurately the distance of Venus from the Sun.
   If this could be achieved, then the distances of the other planets
   could be worked out, based on their orbits. On the day of the transit
   observation, Cook recorded:

     "Saturday 3^ rd This day prov'd as favourable to our purpose as we
     could wish, not a Clowd was to be seen the Whole day and the Air was
     perfectly clear, so that we had every advantage we could desire in
     Observing the whole of the passage of the Planet Venus over the Suns
     disk: we very distinctly saw an Atmosphere or dusky shade round the
     body of the Planet which very much disturbed the times of the
     contacts particularly the two internal ones. D^ r Solander observed
     as well as M^ r Green and my self, and we differ'd from one another
     in observeing the times of the Contacts much more than could be
     expected..."

   Disappointingly, the separate measurements of Green, Cook and Solander
   varied more than the anticipated margin of error. Their instrumentation
   was adequate by the standards of the time, but the resolution still
   could not eliminate the errors. When their results were later compared
   to those of the other observations of the same event made elsewhere for
   the exercise, the net result was not as conclusive or accurate as had
   been hoped.
   Cook's map of New Zealand
   Enlarge
   Cook's map of New Zealand

   Once the observations were completed, Cook departed in order to execute
   the second purpose of his voyage: to search the south Pacific for signs
   of the postulated southern continent of Terra Australis, acting on
   additional instructions from the Admiralty. The Royal Society, and
   especially Alexander Dalrymple, believed that it must exist, but Cook
   had his own personal doubts on the subject. With the help of a Tahitian
   named Tupaia, who had extensive knowledge of Pacific geography, Cook
   managed to reach New Zealand on 6 October 1769, leading only the second
   group of Europeans to do so (after Abel Tasman over a century earlier,
   in 1642). Cook mapped the complete New Zealand coastline, making only
   some minor errors (such as calling Banks Peninsula an island, and
   thinking Stewart Island/Rakiura was part of the South Island). He also
   identified Cook Strait, which separates the North Island from the South
   Island, and which Tasman had not seen.

   He then set course westwards, intending to strike for Van Diemen's Land
   (present-day Tasmania, sighted by Tasman) in order to establish whether
   or not it formed part of the fabled southern continent. However, they
   were forced to maintain a more northerly course owing to prevailing
   gales, and sailed onwards until one afternoon when land was sighted,
   which Cook named Point Hicks. Cook calculated that Van Diemen's Land
   ought to lie due south of their position, but having found the
   coastline trending to the southwest, recorded his doubt that this
   landmass was connected to it. This point was on the southeastern coast
   of the Australian continent, and in doing so his expedition became the
   first recorded Europeans to have encountered its eastern coastline. In
   his journal, Cook recorded the event thus:

     "the Southermost Point of land we had in sight which bore from us
     W1/4S I judged to lay in the Latitude of 38°..0' S° and in the
     Longitude of 211°..07' W^ t from the Meridion of Greenwich. I have
     named it Point Hicks, because Leuit^ t Hicks was the first who
     discover'd this land".

   The ship's log recorded that land was sighted at 6 a.m. on Thursday
   April 19, 1770. Cook's log used the nautical date, which, during the
   18th century, assigned the same date to all ship's events from noon to
   noon, first p.m. and then a.m. That nautical date began twelve hours
   before the midnight beginning of the like-named civil date.
   Furthermore, Cook did not adjust his nautical date to account for
   circumnavigation of the globe until he had traveled a full 360°
   relative to the longitude of his home British port, either toward the
   east or west. Because he traveled west on his first voyage, this a.m.
   nautical date was the morning of a civil date 14 hours slow relative to
   his home port (port−14h). Because the southeast coast of Australia is
   now regarded as being 10 hours fast relative to Britain, that date is
   now called Friday, April 20.

   The landmark of this sighting is generally reckoned to be a point lying
   about half-way between the present-day towns of Orbost and Mallacoota
   on the southeastern coast of the state of Victoria. A survey done in
   1843 ignored or overlooked Cook's earlier naming of the point, giving
   it the name Cape Everard. On the 200th anniversary of the sighting, the
   name was officially changed back to Point Hicks.
   Captain Cook monument, Corner Brook, Newfoundland
   Enlarge
   Captain Cook monument, Corner Brook, Newfoundland

   Endeavour continued northwards along the coastline, keeping the land in
   sight with Cook charting and naming landmarks as he went. A little over
   a week later, they came across an extensive but shallow inlet, and upon
   entering it moored off a low headland fronted by sand dunes. It was
   here, on April 29, that Cook and crew made their first landfall on the
   continent, at a place now known as Kurnell. This date does not need
   adjustment because it occurred during the afternoon (p.m.) on April 29
   in the ship's log, but was the afternoon of the civil date of April 28
   14 hours west of port, which is now a civil date 10 hours east of port,
   24 hours later, hence a modern civil date of April 29. At first Cook
   bestowed the name Stingaree (Stingray) Bay to the inlet after the many
   such creatures found there; this was later changed to Botanist Bay and
   finally Botany Bay after the unique specimens retrieved by the
   botanists Joseph Banks, Daniel Solander and Herman Spöring.

   This first landing site was later to be promoted (particularly by
   Joseph Banks) as a suitable candidate for situating a settlement and
   British colonial outpost. However, almost 18 years later, when Captain
   Arthur Phillip and the First Fleet arrived in early 1788 to establish
   an outpost and penal colony, they found that the bay and surrounds did
   not live up to the promising picture that had been painted. Instead,
   Phillip gave orders to relocate to a harbour a few kilometres to the
   north, which Cook had named Port Jackson but had not further explored.
   It was in this harbour, at a place Phillip named Sydney Cove, that the
   settlement of Sydney was established. The settlement was for some time
   afterwards still referred to generally as Botany Bay. The expedition's
   scientific members commenced the first European scientific
   documentation of Australian fauna and flora.

   At Cook's original landing contact was made with the local Australian
   Aboriginal inhabitants. As the ships sailed into the harbour, they
   noticed Aborigines on both of the headlands. At about 2 pm they put the
   anchor down near a group of six to eight huts. Two Aborigines, a
   younger and an older man, came down to the boat. They ignored gifts
   from Cook. A musket was fired over their heads, which wounded the older
   man slightly, and he ran towards the huts. He came back with other men
   and threw spears at Cook's men, although they did no harm. They were
   chased off after two more rounds were fired. The adults had left, but
   Cook found several Aboriginal children in the huts, and left some beads
   with them as a gesture of friendship.

   Cook continued northwards, charting along the coastline. A mishap
   occurred when Endeavour ran aground on a shoal of the Great Barrier
   Reef, on June 11, 1770. The ship was seriously damaged and his voyage
   was delayed almost seven weeks while repairs were carried out on the
   beach (near the docks of modern Cooktown, at the mouth of the Endeavour
   River). While there, Joseph Banks, Herman Spöring and Daniel Solander
   made their first major collections of Australian flora. The crew's
   encounters with the local Aboriginal people were mainly peaceable; from
   the group encountered here the name "kangaroo" entered the English
   language, coming from the local Guugu Yimidhirr word for a kind of Grey
   Kangaroo, gangurru ( IPA: /ɡaŋuru/).

   Once repairs were complete the voyage continued, eventually passing by
   the northern-most point of Cape York Peninsula and then sailing through
   Torres Strait between Australia and New Guinea, earlier navigated by
   Luis Vaez de Torres in 1604. Having rounded the Cape, Cook landed on
   Possession Island on 22 August, where he claimed the entire coastline
   he had just explored (later naming the region New South Wales) for the
   British Crown.

   At that point in the voyage, Cook had lost not a single man to scurvy,
   a remarkable and practically unheard-of achievement in 18th century
   long-distance sea-faring. Adhering to Royal Navy policy introduced in
   1747, Cook persuaded his men to eat foods such as citrus fruits and
   sauerkraut. At that time it was known that poor diet caused scurvy but
   not specifically that a vitamin C deficiency was the culprit.

   The means by which he persuaded his crew, described here, are
   illustrative of Cook's leadership qualities.

   Cook then visited the island of Savu, staying for three days before
   continuing on to Batavia, the capital of the Dutch East Indies, to put
   in for repairs. Batavia was known for its outbreaks of malaria, and
   before they returned home in 1771, many in Cook's crew succumbed to the
   disease and other ailments such as dysentery, including the Tahitian
   Tupaia, Banks's Finnish secretary and fellow scientist Herman Spöring,
   astronomer Charles Green, and the illustrator Sydney Parkinson. Cook
   named Spöring Island off the coast of New Zealand to honour Herman
   Spöring and his work on the voyage.

   The Endeavour, his ship on this first voyage, later lent its name to
   the Space Shuttle Endeavour, as well as the Endeavour River.

   Cook's journals were published upon his return, and he became something
   of a hero among the scientific community. Among the general public,
   however, the aristocratic botanist Joseph Banks was a bigger hero.
   Banks even attempted to take command of Cook's second voyage, but
   removed himself from the voyage before it began.
   The south-Pacific routes of Captain James Cook's voyages. The first
   voyage is shown in red, second voyage in green, third voyage in blue.
   The south-Pacific routes of Captain James Cook's voyages. The first
   voyage is shown in red, second voyage in green, third voyage in blue.

Second voyage ( 1772- 1775)

   Shortly after his return, Cook was promoted from Lieutenant to
   Commander (correctly "Master and Commander"). Then once again he was
   commissioned by the Royal Society to search for the mythical Terra
   Australis. On his first voyage, Cook had demonstrated by
   circumnavigating New Zealand that it was not attached to a larger
   landmass to the south; and although by charting almost the entire
   eastern coastline of Australia he had shown it to be continental in
   size, the Terra Australis being sought was supposed to lie further to
   the south. Despite this evidence to the contrary Dalrymple and others
   of the Royal Society still believed that this massive southern
   continent should exist.

   Cook commanded HMS Resolution on this voyage, while Tobias Furneaux
   commanded its companion ship, HMS Adventure. Cook's expedition
   circumnavigated the globe at a very high southern latitude, becoming
   one of the first to cross the Antarctic Circle on January 17, 1773,
   reaching 71°10' south. He also discovered South Georgia and the South
   Sandwich Islands. In the Antarctic fog, the Resolution and Adventure
   became separated. Furneaux made his way to New Zealand, where he lost
   some of his men following a fight with Māori, and eventually sailed
   back to Britain, while Cook continued to explore the Antarctic.

   Cook almost discovered the mainland of Antarctica, but turned back
   north towards Tahiti to resupply his ship. He then resumed his
   southward course in a second fruitless attempt to find the supposed
   continent. On this leg of the voyage he brought with him a young
   Tahitian named Omai, who proved to be somewhat less knowledgeable about
   the Pacific than Tupaia had been on the first voyage. On his return
   voyage, in 1774 he landed at the Friendly Islands, Easter Island,
   Norfolk Island, New Caledonia and Vanuatu. His reports upon his return
   home put to rest the popular myth of Terra Australis.

   Another accomplishment of the second voyage was the successful
   employment of the K1 chronometer, which facilitated accurate
   measurement of longitude.

   Upon his return, Cook was promoted to the rank of Captain and given an
   honorary retirement from the Royal Navy, as an officer in the Greenwich
   Hospital. But he could not be kept away from the sea. A third voyage
   was planned to find the Northwest Passage. Cook travelled to the
   Pacific and hoped to travel east to the Atlantic, while a simultaneous
   voyage travelled the opposite way.

Third voyage (1776-1779)

   A statue of James Cook stands in Waimea, Kauai commemorating his first
   contact with the Hawaiian islands at the town's harbour on January 1778
   Enlarge
   A statue of James Cook stands in Waimea, Kauai commemorating his first
   contact with the Hawaiian islands at the town's harbour on January 1778

   On his last voyage, Cook once again commanded HMS Resolution, while
   Captain Charles Clerke commanded HMS Discovery. Ostensibly the voyage
   was planned to return Omai to Tahiti; this is what the general public
   believed, as he had become a favourite curiosity in London. After
   returning Omai, Cook travelled north and in 1778 became the first
   European to visit the Hawaiian Islands, which, in passing and after
   initial landfall in January 1778 at Waimea harbour, Kauai, he named the
   "Sandwich Islands" after the fourth Earl of Sandwich, the acting First
   Lord of the Admiralty.

   From there, he travelled east to explore the west coast of North
   America, landing near the First Nations village at Yuquot in Nootka
   Sound on Vancouver Island, although he unknowingly sailed past the
   Strait of Juan de Fuca. He explored and mapped the coast from
   California all the way to the Bering Strait, on the way identifying
   what came to be known as Cook Inlet in Alaska.

   The Bering Strait proved to be impassable, although he made several
   attempts to sail through it. He became increasingly frustrated on this
   voyage, and perhaps began to suffer from a stomach ailment; it is
   speculated that this led to irrational behaviour towards his crew, such
   as forcing them to eat walrus meat, which they found inedible. (It has
   also been suggested that Cook had been exhibiting irrational behaviour
   since early in the voyage).

   Cook returned to Hawaii in 1779. After sailing around the archipelago
   for some eight weeks, he made landfall at Kealakekua Bay, on what is
   now the 'Big Island' of Hawaii. There is some discussion by recent
   historians that Cook's arrival coincided by quirk of fate with a season
   of worship for the Polynesian god Lono, ( Makahiki). Indeed the form of
   Cook's ship HMS Resolution (more particularly the mast formation, sails
   and rigging) resembled certain significant artifacts that formed part
   of the season of worship. Similarly, Cook's clockwise route around the
   islands before making landfall resembled the processions that took
   place in a clockwise direction around the island during the Lono
   festivals. For these reasons the arrival, it is thought, led to Cook's
   (and to a limited extent, his crew's) initial deification by the
   natives, who treated him with great reverence as possibly an
   incarnation of Lono himself. This interpretation of the natives'
   reaction, though, has been called into question.

   After a month's stay, Cook got under sail again to resume his
   exploration of the Northern Pacific. However, shortly after leaving the
   Big Island, the foremast on the Resolution broke requiring the ships'
   return to Kealakekua Bay for repairs. The return to the islands by
   Cook's expedition was unexpected on the part of the Hawaiians and as
   the season of Lono had recently ended, tensions rose and a number of
   quarrels broke out between the two camps. On February 14 at Kealakekua
   Bay, some Hawaiians stole one of Cook's small boats. Normally, as
   thefts were quite common in Tahiti and the other islands, Cook would
   have taken hostages until the stolen articles were returned. Indeed, he
   planned to take hostage the Chief of Hawaii, Kalaniopu'u. However, his
   stomach ailment and increasingly irrational behaviour led to an
   altercation with a large crowd of Hawaiians gathered on the beach when
   he went ashore to retrieve the goods. The villagers, angered by his
   strict insistence on getting back a pair of tongs, and hearing that
   another British search party had killed one of their chiefs, began to
   attack with spears and stones. In the ensuing skirmish, shots were
   fired at the Hawaiians but their woven war shields protected them, and
   Cook's men had to retreat to the beach. As Cook turned his back to help
   launch the boats, he was struck on the head by the villagers and then
   stabbed to death as he fell on his face in the surf. The Hawaiians
   dragged his body away.

   It is thought that Cook's return to Hawaii outside the season of
   worship for Lono, which was synonymous with 'peace', and thus in the
   season of 'war' (being dedicated to Kū, god of war) may have upset the
   equilibrium and fostered an atmosphere of resentment and aggression
   from the local population. Coupled with a jaded grasp of native
   diplomacy and a burgeoning but limited understanding of local politics,
   Cook may have inadvertently contributed to the tensions that ultimately
   conspired in his demise.

   The esteem in which he was nevertheless held by the natives resulted in
   his body being retained by their chiefs and elders (possibly, as some
   claim, for partial human consumption, though this remains contentious)
   and the flesh cut and roasted from his bones. Some of Cook's remains,
   disclosing some corroborating evidence to this effect, were eventually
   returned to the British for a formal burial at sea following an appeal
   by the crew.

   Clerke took over the expedition and made a final attempt to pass
   through the Bering Strait. Resolution and Discovery returned home in
   1780. Cook's account of his voyage was completed by Captain James King.

Cook's protégés

   A number of the junior officers who served under Cook went on to
   distinctive accomplishments of their own.
     * William Bligh, Cook's sailing master, was given command of HMS
       Bounty in 1787 to sail to Tahiti and return with breadfruit. Bligh
       is most known for the mutiny of his crew which resulted in his
       being set adrift in 1789. (See: Mutiny on the Bounty). He later
       became governor of New South Wales, where he was also the subject
       of another mutiny — the only successful armed takeover of an
       Australian colonial government.
     * George Vancouver, one of Cook's midshipmen, later led a voyage of
       exploration to the Pacific Coast of North America from 1791 to
       1794.
     * George Dixon sailed under Cook on his third expedition, and later
       commanded an expedition of his own.

Legacy

   A statue of James Cook in Greenwich, London, England.
   Enlarge
   A statue of James Cook in Greenwich, London, England.
   Captain Cook memorial statue at the Catani Gardens St Kilda, Victoria,
   Australia
   Enlarge
   Captain Cook memorial statue at the Catani Gardens St Kilda, Victoria,
   Australia

   Cook's 12 years sailing around the Pacific Ocean contributed much to
   European knowledge of the area. Several islands such as Sandwich
   Islands ( Hawaii) were encountered for the first time by Europeans, and
   his more accurate navigational charting of large areas of the Pacific
   was a major achievement.

   To create accurate maps, latitude and longitude need to be known.
   Navigators had been able to work out latitude accurately for centuries
   by measuring the angle of the sun or a star above the horizon with a
   sextant. But longitude was more difficult to measure accurately because
   it requires precise knowledge of the time difference between points on
   the surface of the earth. Earth turns a full 360 degrees relative to
   the sun each day. Thus longitude corresponds to time: 15 degrees every
   hour, or 1 degree every 4 minutes.

   Cook obtained accurate longitude measurements during his first voyage
   due to his navigational skills, the help of astronomer Charles Green
   and by using the newly published Nautical Almanac tables, via the lunar
   distance method — measuring the angular distance from the moon to
   either the sun during daytime or one of eight bright stars during
   nighttime to determine the time at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich,
   and comparing that to his local time determined via the altitude of the
   sun, moon, or stars. On his second voyage Cook used the K1 chronometer
   made by Larcum Kendal, which was the shape of a large pocket watch, 13
   cm (5 inches) in diameter. It was a copy of the H4 clock made by John
   Harrison, which proved to be the first to keep accurate time at sea
   when used on the ship Deptford's journey to Jamaica, 1761-1762.

   There were several artists on the first voyage. Sydney Parkinson was
   involved in many of the drawings, completing 264 drawings before his
   death near the end of the voyage. They were of immense scientific value
   to British botanists. Cook's second expedition included the artist
   William Hodges, who produced notable landscape paintings of Tahiti,
   Easter Island, and other locations.

   Cook was accompanied by many scientists, whose observations and
   discoveries added to the importance of the voyages. Joseph Banks, a
   botanist, went on the first voyage along with fellow botanist Daniel
   Solander from Sweden. Between them they collected over 3,000 plant
   species. Banks became one of the strongest promoters of the settlement
   of Australia by the British, based on his own personal observations.

   Ever the observer, Cook was the first European to have extensive
   contact with various people of the Pacific. He sailed to many islands
   near the Philippines and even to smaller, more remote islands in the
   South Pacific. He correctly concluded there was a relationship among
   all the people in the Pacific, despite their being separated by
   thousands of miles of ocean (see Malayo-Polynesian languages).

   The first tertiary education institution in North Queensland, Australia
   was named after him, with James Cook University opening in Townsville
   in 1970. Numerous other institutions, landmarks and place names reflect
   the importance of Cook's contribution to knowledge of geography.

   Tributes abound, too, back at 'home' in post-industrial Middlesbrough,
   England, include a primary school, shopping square and Claes Oldenburg
   public artwork, the Bottle 'O Notes, while the James Cook University
   Hospital, a teaching hospital in Marton, was also named after him.
   Marton is also the location of the Captain Cook Birthplace Museum. The
   Royal Research Ship RRS James Cook was built in 2006 to replace the RRS
   Charles Darwin in the UK's Royal Research Fleet.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Cook"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
