   #copyright

James Stewart (actor)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Actors, models and
celebrities

   James Stewart
   Jimmy Stewart, photo by Carl Van Vechten, 1934
   Birth name James Maitland Stewart
   Born       May 20, 1908
              Indiana, Pennsylvania, USA
   Died       July 2 , 1997
              Los Angeles, California
   Academy
    Awards    Best Actor, 1940
              The Philadelphia Story

   James Maitland "Jimmy" Stewart ( May 20, 1908 – July 2, 1997) was an
   iconic, Academy Award-winning American film and stage actor, best known
   for his homebred screen persona. Over the course of his career, he
   starred in many films widely considered classics and was nominated for
   five Oscars, winning one in competition and one life achievement.

   Born in Indiana, Pennsylvania near Pittsburgh, he first pursued a
   career as an architect before being drawn to the theatre in college.
   His first success came as an actor on Broadway, before making his
   Hollywood debut in 1935. Stewart's career gained momentum after his
   well-received Frank Capra films, including his Academy Award nominated
   role in Mr. Smith Goes to Washington. Throughout his seven decades in
   Hollywood, Stewart cultivated a versatile career and recognized screen
   image in such classics as The Philadelphia Story, Harvey, and Vertigo.

   Along with fellow screen icon James Cagney, Stewart became so familiar
   to American audiences that he was most often referred to by them as
   "Jimmy" Stewart — a billing never found on the credits of any of his
   films.

   Stewart left his mark on a wide range of film genres, including
   screwball comedies, westerns, and suspense thrillers. He worked for a
   number of renowned directors later in his career, most notably Alfred
   Hitchcock, John Ford, and Anthony Mann. He won many of the industry's
   highest honours and earned Lifetime Achievement awards from every major
   film organization. He died in 1997, leaving behind a legacy of classic
   performance, and is considered one of the finest actors of the " Golden
   Age of Hollywood." He was named the third Greatest Male Star of All
   Time by the American Film Institute.

Biography

Early life and career

   James Maitland Stewart was born on May 20, 1908, to devoutly
   Presbyterian parents, Alexander M. Stewart and Elizabeth Ruth Jackson,
   in Indiana, Pennsylvania. The son of a prosperous hardware store owner,
   he was expected to continue the business, which had been in the family
   for three generations. The young Stewart was first attracted to
   aviation, but abandoned dreams of being a pilot to attend Princeton
   University in 1928 after graduating from Mercersburg Academy. Stewart
   took quickly to architecture, and was to continue pursuing the field as
   a graduate student, but he gradually became attracted to the school's
   drama and music clubs, including the famous Princeton Triangle Club.

   His talents led him to be invited to the University Players, a
   performing arts club comprised of Ivy League musicians and thespians.
   Taking bit parts in the Players' productions during the summer of 1932,
   he moved to New York City in the fall, where he shared an apartment
   with rising actor Henry Fonda and director/playwright Joshua Logan. In
   November he was cast in his first major stage production, as a
   chauffeur in the Broadway comedy Goodbye Again, in which he had two
   lines. The play was a moderate success and brought more substantial
   stage roles for Stewart, including the 1934 hit, Page Miss Glory, and
   his first dramatic stage role in Sidney Howard's Yellow Jack.

   With several favorably reviewed performances on Broadway, he attracted
   the interest of MGM, and signed a contract with the company in April
   1935. At first, he had trouble breaking into Hollywood due to his
   gangly looks and shy, humble screen presence. His first film was the
   poorly received Spencer Tracy vehicle, The Murder Man, but Rose-Marie,
   an adaptation of a popular operetta, was more successful. After mixed
   success in film, he received his first substantial part in 1936's After
   the Thin Man, playing a psychotic killer. Stewart found his footing in
   Hollywood thanks largely to ex-University Player Margaret Sullavan, who
   campaigned for Stewart to be her leading man in the 1936 romantic
   comedy Next Time We Love and rehearsed extensively with him.

   Stewart was a lifelong supporter of Scouting. He was a Second Class
   Scout when he was a youth, an adult Scout leader, and a recipient of
   the prestigious Silver Buffalo Award from the Boy Scouts of America
   (BSA). He made advertisements for BSA, which led to him sometimes
   incorrectly being identified as an Eagle Scout.

Prewar success

   The 6-foot, 3-inch tall Stewart began a successful partnership with
   director Frank Capra in 1938, when he was loaned out to Columbia
   Pictures to star in You Can't Take It With You. The heartwarming
   Depression-era film, starring matinee idol Jean Arthur, went on to win
   the 1938 Best Picture Academy Award. 1939 saw Stewart team with Capra
   and Arthur again for the political comedy-drama, Mr. Smith Goes to
   Washington. Stewart replaced intended star Gary Cooper in the film
   about an idealistic man thrown into the political arena. Upon the
   film's October release, it garnered critical praise and became a box
   office success. For his performance, Stewart was nominated for the
   first of five Academy Awards for Best Actor. Destry Rides Again, also
   released that year, became Stewart's first western film, a genre for
   which he would become famous later in his career.

   1940 saw Stewart and Margaret Sullavan teaming again for two films. The
   first, the Ernst Lubitsch romantic comedy, The Shop Around the Corner,
   starred Stewart and Sullavan as co-workers unknowingly involved in a
   pen-pal romance who cannot stand each other in real life (This was
   later remade into the romantic comedy You've Got Mail with Tom Hanks
   and Meg Ryan). The Mortal Storm, directed by Frank Borzage, was one of
   the first blatantly anti-Nazi films to be produced in Hollywood, and
   featured the pair as a husband and wife caught in turmoil upon Hitler's
   rise to power. He also starred opposite Katharine Hepburn and Cary
   Grant in George Cukor's classic The Philadelphia Story. His performance
   as an intrusive, fast-talking reporter earned him his only Academy
   Award in a competitive category (Best Actor, 1941). Stewart gave the
   Oscar statuette to his father, who displayed it in the window of his
   hardware store for many years.

   He went on to appear in a series of screwball comedies with varying
   levels of success. Stewart followed the mediocre No Time for Comedy
   (1940) and Come Live with Me (1941) with the Judy Garland musical
   Ziegfeld Girl and the George Marshall romantic comedy Pot o' Gold.
   Foreseeing war on the horizon, Stewart enlisted in the United States
   Army Air Corps in March 1941. Stewart's enlistment coincided with the
   lapse in his MGM contract and marked a turning point in Stewart's
   career.

Wartime activity

   Stewart as a colonel
   Enlarge
   Stewart as a colonel

   The Stewart family had deep military roots: both grandfathers had
   fought in the Civil War, and his father had served during both the
   Spanish-American War and World War I. Jimmy considered his father to be
   the biggest influence on his life, so it is not surprising that when
   another war came, another Stewart would be in uniform. With his private
   pilot's licence in hand and a smattering of flying time, it was also
   inevitable that Jimmy Stewart would seek to become a military flyer.

   Nearly a year before the December 1941 attack on Pearl Harbour, Stewart
   attempted to join the United States Army Air Corps, though his
   enlistment was initially denied due to a weight problem. Stewart came
   in under the weight requirement and was consequently rejected for being
   under-weight. The USAAF had strict height and weight requirements for
   new recruits and Stewart was five pounds under the standard. To get up
   to 148 pounds, he enlisted the help of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer's muscle
   man, Don Loomis, who was legendary for his ability to add or subtract
   pounds in his studio gymnasium. Refusing to accept the inevitable, he
   persuaded the AAF enlistment officer to run new tests, this time
   skipping the weigh-in, with the result that Stewart successfully
   enlisted in the Army in March 1941. He became the first major movie
   star to wear a uniform.

   Since the United States had yet to declare war on Germany and because
   of the Army's unwillingness to put celebrities on the front, Stewart
   was held back from combat duty, though he did earn a commission as a
   Second Lieutenant and completed pilot training. He later became an
   instructor pilot for the B-17 Flying Fortress stationed in Albuquerque,
   NM.

   While petitioning his superiors for combat assignment, Stewart aligned
   himself with the First Motion Picture Unit and starred and produced a
   number of training and educational films. Between 1942 and the end of
   the war, he appeared in nearly a dozen productions, some of which were
   screened theatrically in civilian theaters.
   Col. Stewart being awarded the Croix de guerre with palm by Lt. Gen.
   Henri Valin, Chief of Staff of the French Air Force, for his role in
   the liberation of France. USAF photo.
   Enlarge
   Col. Stewart being awarded the Croix de guerre with palm by Lt. Gen.
   Henri Valin, Chief of Staff of the French Air Force, for his role in
   the liberation of France. USAF photo.

   In August 1943 he was finally assigned to the 445th Bombardment Group
   in Sioux City, Iowa, first as Operations Officer of the 703rd
   Bombardment Squadron, and then its commander. In December, the 445th
   Bombardment Group flew its B-24 Liberator bombers to Tibenham, England,
   and immediately began combat operations. While flying missions over
   Germany, Stewart was promoted to Major. In March 1944, he was
   transferred to the 453rd Bombardment Group, a new B-24 outfit that had
   been experiencing difficulties, as Group Operations Officer. In 1944 he
   twice received the Distinguished Flying Cross for actions in combat,
   and was awarded the Croix de Guerre. He also received the Air Medal
   with three oak leaf clusters. In July 1944, after flying 20 combat
   missions, Stewart was made Chief of Staff of the 2nd Combat Bombardment
   Wing of the Eighth Air Force. Before the war ended he was promoted to
   Colonel, one of only a few Americans to rise from private to colonel in
   four years.

   Stewart continued to play an active role in the United States Air Force
   Reserves after the war, achieving the rank of Brigadier General on July
   23, 1959. Stewart did not often talk of his wartime service, perhaps
   due to his desire to be seen as a regular soldier doing his duty
   instead of as a celebrity. He did appear on the TV series, The World At
   War, and discussed his participation as a squadron commander in the
   October 17, 1943, bombing mission to Schweinfurt — the mission known in
   USAF history as Black Thursday due to the incredibly high casualties it
   sustained. Fittingly, he was identified only as "James Stewart,
   Squadron Commander" in the documentary.

   Iin 1966, Brigadier General James Stewart rode along as an observer on
   a B-52 Stratofortress bombing run during the Vietnam War, though he did
   not fly any duty missions during that conflict. Stewart finally retired
   from the Air Force on May 31, 1968, after 27 years of service. At the
   time of his B-52 mission, he refused the release of any publicity
   regarding his participation as he did not want it treated as a stunt
   for glory, but as his job as an officer in the reserves.

Postwar success

   Stewart, Karolyn Grimes and Donna Reed in It's a Wonderful Life.
   Enlarge
   Stewart, Karolyn Grimes and Donna Reed in It's a Wonderful Life.

   Upon James Stewart's return to Hollywood in the fall 1945, he decided
   not to renew his MGM contract. Instead, Stewart signed with an MCA
   talent agency. The move made Stewart one of the first independently
   contracted actors and gave him more freedom to choose the roles he
   wished to play. For the remainder of his career, Stewart was able to
   work without limits to director and studio availability.

   For his first film in five years, Stewart appeared in his third and
   final Frank Capra production, It's a Wonderful Life. Stewart appeared
   as George Bailey, a small-town man and upstanding citizen, who becomes
   increasingly frustrated by his ordinary existence and financial
   troubles. Driven to suicide on Christmas Eve, he is led to reassess his
   life by an "angel-in-training," played by Henry Travers. Though the
   film was nominated for five Academy Awards, including Stewart's third
   Best Actor nomination, it received only moderate success at the box
   office, possibly due to its dark nature. However, in the decades since
   the film's release, it grew to define Stewart's film persona and is
   widely considered as a sentimental Christmas film classic and,
   according to the American Film Institute, one of the best movies ever
   made.

   Stewart also returned to the stage for the Mary Chase-penned comedy
   Harvey, which opened to nearly universal praise in November 1944.
   Elwood P. Dowd, the protagonist and Stewart's character, is a wealthy
   eccentric, whose best friend is an invisible rabbit, living with his
   sister and niece. His eccentricity, especially the friendship with the
   rabbit, is ruining the niece's hopes of finding a husband. While trying
   to have Dowd committed to a sanitorium, his sister is committed herself
   while the play follows Dowd on an ordinary day in his not-so-ordinary
   life. James Stewart took over the role from Frank Fay in 1947 and
   gained an increased Broadway following in the unconventional play. The
   play, which ran for nearly three years with Stewart as its star, was
   successfully adapted into a 1950 film, directed by Henry Koster, with
   Stewart playing Dowd and Josephine Hull as his sister, Veta. For his
   performance in the film, Stewart received his fourth Best Actor
   nomination.

   After Harvey, the comedic adventure film Malaya and the conventional
   biographical film The Stratton Story in 1949, Stewart entered what many
   critics cite as his "golden era" as an actor. During the 1950s, he took
   on more challenging roles and expanded into the western and suspense
   genres, thanks largely to collaborations with directors Alfred
   Hitchcock and Anthony Mann. Other notable performances by Stewart
   during this time include the critically acclaimed 1950 Delmer Daves
   western Broken Arrow, which featured Stewart as an ex-soldier making
   peace with the Apache; a troubled clown in the 1952 Best Picture The
   Greatest Show on Earth; and Stewart's role as Charles Lindbergh in
   Billy Wilder's 1957 film The Spirit of St. Louis.

Collaborations with Hitchcock and Mann

   James Stewart's collaborations with director Anthony Mann expanded
   Stewart's popularity and expanded his career into the realm of the
   western. Stewart's first appearance in a film helmed by Mann came with
   the 1950 western classic, Winchester '73. The film, which became a
   massive box office hit upon its release, set the pattern for their
   future collaborations. Other Stewart-Mann westerns, such as Bend of the
   River ( 1952), The Naked Spur ( 1953), The Far Country ( 1954), and The
   Man from Laramie ( 1955) were perennial favorites among young audiences
   entranced by the American West. Frequently, the films featured Stewart
   as a troubled cowboy seeking redemption, while facing corrupt
   cattlemen, ranchers and outlaws. Their collaborations laid the
   foundation for many of the westerns of the 1950s and remain popular
   today.

   Stewart and Mann also collaborated on other films outside the western
   genre. 1953's The Glenn Miller Story was critically acclaimed,
   garnering Stewart a BAFTA Award nomination, and (together with The
   Spirit of St. Louis) cemented the popularity of Stewart's portrayals of
   "American heroes." Thunder Bay, released the same year, transplanted
   the plot arch of their western collaborations in the present day, with
   Stewart as a Louisiana oil-driller facing corruption. Strategic Air
   Command, released in 1955, allowed Stewart to use his experiences in
   the United States Air Force on film.

   Stewart's starring role in Winchester '73 was also a turning point in
   Hollywood. Universal Studios, who wanted Stewart to appear in both that
   film and Harvey, balked at his $200,000 asking price. Stewart's agent,
   Lew Wasserman, brokered an alternate deal, in which Stewart would
   appear in both films for no pay, in exchange for a percentage of the
   profits and cast approval. It wasn't the first such deal at Universal;
   Abbott and Costello also had a profit participation contract, but they
   were no longer top-flight moneymakers by 1950. Stewart ended up earning
   about $600,000 for Winchester '73 alone. Hollywood's other stars
   quickly capitalized on this new way of doing business, which further
   undermined the decaying " studio system."

   The second collaboration to define Stewart's career in the 1950s was
   with acclaimed mystery and suspense director Alfred Hitchcock. Stewart
   had previously appeared in Hitchcock's technologically innovative 1948
   film Rope, and the two collaborated for the second of four times on the
   1954 hit Rear Window. Photographer L.B. "Jeff" Jeffries, the central
   character of the film, portrayed by Stewart, projects his fantasies and
   fears onto the people he observes out his apartment window while on
   hiatus due to a broken leg. Jeffries gets into more than he can handle,
   however, when he believes he has witnessed a salesman murder his wife.

   After starring in Hitchcock's remake of the director's own production,
   The Man Who Knew Too Much, Stewart starred in what many consider
   Hitchcock's most personal film, Vertigo. The film starred Stewart as
   Scottie, a former police investigator suffering from acrophobia, who
   develops an obsession with a woman he is shadowing. Scottie's obsession
   inevitably leads to the destruction of everything he once had and
   believed in. Though the film is widely considered a classic today, it
   met with negative reviews and poor box office receipts upon its
   release, and marked the last collaboration between Stewart and
   Hitchcock. The director blamed the film's failure on Stewart looking
   too old to still attract audiences, and replaced him with Cary Grant
   for North by Northwest (1959). In reality, Grant was actually four
   years older than Stewart. (Stewart's character's fear of heights in
   Vertigo is ironic considering Stewart's actual flying experiences.)

Career in the 1960s and 1970s

   In 1960, James Stewart was awarded the New York Film Critics Circle
   Award for Best Actor and nominated for his fifth and final Academy
   Award for Best Actor for his role in the 1959 Otto Preminger film
   Anatomy of a Murder. The early courtroom drama starred Stewart as Paul
   Biegler, the lawyer of a man who claims temporary insanity after
   murdering the man who raped his wife. Stewart's nomination was one of
   seven for the film, and saw his transition into the final decades of
   his career.

   The early 1960s saw Stewart taking lead roles in three John Ford films.
   The first, 1962's twist-ending The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance (with
   John Wayne), is a classic "psychological" western, with Stewart
   featured as an Eastern attorney who goes against his nonviolent
   principles when he is forced to confront a psychopathic outlaw (played
   by Lee Marvin) in a small frontier town. At story's end, Stewart's
   character — now a rising political figure — faces a difficult ethical
   choice as he attempts to reconcile his actions with his personal
   integrity on the day Liberty Valance was shot. The film's billing is
   unusual in that Stewart was given top billing over Wayne in the
   trailers and on the posters but Wayne had top billing in the film
   itself, a system later repeated by Robert Redford and Dustin Hoffman in
   All the President's Men. How the West Was Won and Cheyenne Autumn were
   western epics released in 1962 and 1964 respectively. While the
   Cinerama production How the West Was Won went on to win three Oscars
   and reaped massive box office figures, Cheyenne Autumn, in which a
   white-suited Stewart played Wyatt Earp in a long sequence in the middle
   of the movie, failed domestically and was quickly forgotten.

   Having played his last romantic lead in 1958's Bell Book and Candle,
   Stewart transitioned into more family-related films in the 1960s. These
   included the successful Henry Koster outing Mr. Hobbs Takes a Vacation
   ( 1962), and the less memorable films Take Her, She's Mine ( 1963) and
   Dear Brigitte ( 1965), which featured French model Brigitte Bardot. The
   Civil War period film Shenandoah (1965) and the western family film The
   Rare Breed fared better at the box office; the Civil War movie was a
   smash hit in the South.

   After a progression of lesser western films in the late '60s and early
   '70s, James Stewart transitioned from cinema to television. He first
   starred in the NBC comedy The Jimmy Stewart Show, which featured
   Stewart as a college professor. He followed it with the CBS mystery
   Hawkins, in which he played a small town lawyer investigating his
   cases. The series garnered Stewart a Golden Globe for Best Actor in a
   Dramatic TV Series, but failed to gain a wide audience and was
   cancelled after one season. During this time, Stewart periodically
   appeared on Johnny Carson's The Tonight Show, sharing poems he had
   written at different times in his life. His poems were later compiled
   into a short collection titled Jimmy Stewart and His Poems (1989).

   Stewart finished the decade with supporting roles in John Wayne's final
   film, The Shootist (1976), Airport '77, the 1978 remake of The Big
   Sleep with Robert Mitchum, and The Magic of Lassie (1978). In The
   Shootist, Stewart played a doctor giving Wayne's gunfighter a terminal
   cancer diagnosis. At one point, both Wayne and Stewart were flubbing
   their lines repeatedly and Stewart turned to director Don Siegel and
   said, "You'd better get two better actors."

Later career and death

   After filming several television movies in the 1980s, including the
   popular Mr. Krueger's Christmas, James Stewart retired from acting to
   spend time with his family. Following his retirement he suffered from
   many health problems including heart disease, skin cancer, deafness and
   senility. He returned only to voice Sheriff Wylie Burp in the
   successful 1991 animated film An American Tail: Fievel Goes West.

   In 1989, Stewart joined Hollywood entrepreneur Peter F. Paul in
   founding the American Spirit Foundation to apply entertainment industry
   resources to developing innovative approaches to public education and
   to assist the emerging democracy movements in the former Iron Curtain
   countries and Russia. Paul arranged for Stewart, through the offices of
   President Boris Yeltsin, to send a special print of It's A Wonderful
   Life, translated by Moscow University, to Russia as the first American
   program ever to be broadcast on Russian television. On January 5, 1992,
   coinciding with the first day of the existence of the democratic
   Commonwealth of Independent States and Russia, and the first free
   Russian Orthodox Christmas Day, Russian TV Channel 2 broadcast It's A
   Wonderful Life to 200 million Russians who celebrated an American
   holiday tradition with the American people for the first time in
   Russian history.

   In association with politicians and celebrities that included President
   Ronald Reagan, Supreme Court Chief Justice Warren Burger, California
   Governor George Deukmejian, Bob Hope and Charlton Heston, Stewart
   worked from 1987 to 1993 on projects that enhanced the public
   appreciation and understanding of the U.S. Constitution and Bill of
   Rights.

   Stewart died at the age of 89 on July 2, 1997, of cardiac arrest and a
   pulmonary embolism following a long illness from respiratory problems.
   His death came just one day after fellow screen legend and The Big
   Sleep co-star Robert Mitchum had died of lung cancer and emphysema.
   Stewart is interred in Forest Lawn Memorial Park Cemetery in Glendale,
   California.

   Jimmy Stewart has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 1708 Vine
   Street. In 1972, he was inducted into the Western Performers Hall of
   Fame at the National Cowboy & Western Heritage Museum in Oklahoma City,
   Oklahoma. He was awarded various lifetime achievement awards from the
   Academy Awards (1985), American Film Institute (1980), Lincoln Centre
   (1990), Golden Globe Awards (1965), National Board of Review (1990) and
   the Screen Actors Guild (1969).

   In his hometown, Indiana, Pennsylvania, a statue of Stewart was erected
   on the lawn of the Indiana County Courthouse on May 20, 1983 to
   celebrate Stewart's 75th birthday. In 1995, The Jimmy Stewart Museum, a
   museum dedicated to his life and career, opened as well in Indiana,
   Pennsylvania.

   In honour of his years of service with the U.S. Air Force, Gen. Jimmy
   Stewart's original WWII A-2 jacket (a Rough Wear 1401 contract) has
   been displayed for many years at the National Museum of the United
   States Air Force in Dayton, Ohio. A patch for the 703rd Bomb Squadron
   is still sewn on the front of the jacket.

   In November 1997, Los Angeles County Supervisor Mike Antonovich led an
   unsuccessful attempt to have Los Angeles International Airport renamed
   in Stewart's honour .

Personal life

   After World War II, Stewart settled down at age 41, marrying former
   model Gloria Hatrick McLean on August 9, 1949. They remained devotedly
   married until her death on February 16, 1994, due to lung cancer.
   Stewart adopted her two sons, Michael and Ronald, and together they had
   twin daughters, Judy and Kelly, on May 7, 1951. Ronald McLean was
   killed in action on June 8, 1969, at the age of 24, while serving in
   Vietnam.

   Stewart was rumored to have had an affair with his Destry Rides Again
   costar Marlene Dietrich, who reportedly had an abortion after becoming
   pregnant by Stewart. According to Gary Fishgall, author of Pieces of
   Time: The Life of James Stewart, writer Erich Maria Remarque had
   written diary entries in which he discloses conversations he had with
   Dietrich in which she tells him that she had sex with Stewart. Fishgall
   states that Remarque's diary also reveals that Stewart insisted on the
   abortion and that Dietrich did so with regrets because she "blamed
   herself for getting pregnant." In Steven Bach's biography of Dietrich,
   Marlene Dietrich: Life and Legend, he claims that Dietrich's daughter,
   Maria, "fifty years (after the affair) later ... told people who would
   listen that Stewart had made Marlene pregnant during the making of
   Destry, that Marlene confronted him with the fact on a dance floor in
   Hollywood, that Stewart (unmarried) walked away without a word, and
   that Marlene (married) did what women do who don't want unexpected
   souvenirs of romance." (page 253, Bach, Marlene Dietrich: Life and
   Legend).

   While visiting India in 1959, he reportedly smuggled the remains of a
   supposed yeti, the so-called Pangboche Hand, by hiding them in his
   luggage (specifically, in Gloria's underwear) when he flew from India
   to London, as a favour to Tom Slick.

Politics

   Politically, Stewart was a conservative, and a strong supporter of the
   Republican party. He also supported blacklisting in Hollywood in the
   1950s. Ironically, one of his best friends was Henry Fonda, despite the
   two having vastly different political ideologies (Stewart a
   conservative Republican, Fonda a liberal Democrat).

Filmography

   From the beginning of James Stewart's career in 1935 through his final
   theatrical project in 1991, Stewart appeared in ninety-two films,
   television programs, and shorts. Through the course of his career, he
   appeared in many landmark and critically acclaimed films, including
   such classics as Mr. Smith Goes to Washington and Vertigo. His roles in
   ...Washington, The Philadelphia Story, It's a Wonderful Life, Harvey,
   and Anatomy of a Murder earned him Academy Award nominations (he won
   for Philadelphia). Stewart's career defied the boundaries of genre and
   trend, and he made his mark in screwball comedies, suspense thrillers,
   westerns, and family films.

Broadway stage performances

     * Carry Nation (Oct. 1932–Nov. 1932)
     * Goodbye Again (Dec. 1932–Jul 1933)
     * Spring in Autumn (Oct. 1933–Nov. 1933)
     * All Good Americans (Dec. 1933–Jan. 1934)
     * Yellow Jack (May 1934)
     * Divided By Three (Oct. 1934)
     * Page Miss Glory (Nov. 1934–Mar. 1935)
     * A Journey By Night (Apr. 1935)
     * Harvey (Nov. 1944–Jan. 1949)
     * Harvey (revival, Feb. 1970–May 1970)

Awards

   Year Award                             Work
   Academy Awards
   Won:
   1985 Honorary Award                    Lifetime Achievement
   1941 Best Actor                        The Philadelphia Story
   Nominated:
   1960 Best Actor                        Anatomy of a Murder
   1951 Best Actor                        Harvey
   1946 Best Actor                        It's a Wonderful Life
   1940 Best Actor                        Mr. Smith Goes to Washington
   BAFTA Awards
   Nominated:
   1960 Best Foreign Actor                Anatomy of a Murder
   1955 Best Foreign Actor                The Glenn Miller Story
   Golden Globes
   Won:
   1974 Best TV Actor - Drama             Hawkins
   1965 Cecil B. DeMille Award            Lifetime Achievement
   Nominated:
   1951 Best Motion Picture Actor - Drama Harvey
        Preceded by:
   Robert Donat
   for Goodbye, Mr. Chips Academy Award for Best Actor
                          1940
                          for The Philadelphia Story    Succeeded by:
                                                      Gary Cooper
                                                      for Sergeant York

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Stewart_%28actor%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
