   #copyright

Jane Fonda

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Actors, models and
celebrities

   Jane Fonda
   Jane Fonda at a book signing in 2005, photo by Paul Schultz
   Birth name Lady Jayne Seymour Fonda
   Born       December 21, 1937 (age 68)
              New York City, New York

   Jane Fonda (born December 21, 1937) is an American actress, writer,
   political activist, former fashion model, and fitness guru.

   Since the 1960s Fonda has appeared in movies, many of which have
   contained political messages. She has won two Academy Awards and
   received several other awards and nominations. She initially announced
   her retirement from acting in 1991, and said for many years that she
   would never act again, but she returned to film in 2005 with Monster in
   Law. She also produced and starred in several exercise videos released
   between 1982 and 1995.

   Fonda has served as an activist for various political causes, one of
   the most notable of which was her opposition to the Vietnam War. She
   has also protested the Iraq War and violence against women. She
   describes herself as a liberal and a feminist.

   Since 2001, Fonda has considered herself a Christian. She published an
   autobiography in 2005 and currently lives in Atlanta, Georgia.

Ancestry and family

   Jane Fonda was born in New York City to actor Henry Fonda and socialite
   Frances Ford Seymour, and named Lady Jayne Seymour Fonda. When Jane was
   twelve years old, her mother committed suicide after voluntarily
   seeking treatment at a psychiatric hospital.

   Henry Fonda had distant Dutch ancestry, and the surname Fonda
   originates from Holland. The "Lady" part of Jane Fonda's name was
   apparently inspired by Lady Jane Seymour, the third wife of King Henry
   VIII of England, who she is distantly related to on her mother's side.
   The "Jayne" comes from her father's middle name Jaynes.

   Her brother, Peter Fonda (born 1939), and his daughter Bridget Fonda
   (born 1964), are also actors. She has an older half-sister, Frances
   Brokaw, as well as an adopted sister, Amy, who was born in 1953.

   After Seymour's suicide, Henry Fonda married Susan Blanchard, who was
   only 10 years older than Jane. Although all of Henry's children seemed
   to like Blanchard, Blanchard and Henry Fonda divorced before Jane
   turned 20.

Acting career

   Before starting her acting career, Fonda was a fashion model, gracing
   the cover of Vogue magazine twice. Fonda became interested in acting in
   1954, while appearing with her father in a charity performance of The
   Country Girl, at the Omaha Community Theatre. After attending Vassar
   College in New York, she was introduced by her father to renowned drama
   teacher Lee Strasberg in 1958, and subsequently joined his Actors
   Studio.

1960s

   Her stage work in the late 1950s laid the foundation for her film
   career in the 1960s. She averaged almost two movies a year throughout
   the decade, starting in 1960 with Tall Story, in which she recreated
   one of her Broadway roles as a college cheerleader pursuing a
   basketball star, played by Anthony Perkins. Period of Adjustment and
   Walk on the Wild Side followed in 1962. In Walk on the Wild Side, Fonda
   played a prostitute, and earned a Golden Globe for Most Promising
   Newcomer.

   In 1963, she appeared in Sunday in New York. Newsday called her "the
   loveliest and most gifted of all our new young actresses". However, she
   also had her detractors—in the same year, the Harvard Lampoon named her
   the "Year's Worst Actress". Fonda's career breakthrough came with Cat
   Ballou ( 1965), in which she played a schoolmarm turned outlaw. This
   comedy Western received five Oscar nominations and was one of the
   year's top ten films at the box office. It was considered by many to
   have been the film that brought Fonda to stardom at the age of
   twenty-eight. After this came the comedies Any Wednesday ( 1966) and
   Barefoot in the Park ( 1967), the latter co-starring Robert Redford.

   In 1968, she played the lead role in the science fiction spoof
   Barbarella, which established her status as a sex symbol. In contrast,
   the tragedy They Shoot Horses, Don't They? ( 1969) won her critical
   acclaim, and she earned her first Oscar nomination for the role. Fonda
   was very selective by the end of the 1960s, turning down lead roles in
   Rosemary's Baby and Bonnie and Clyde, films widely praised by critics
   and considered box-office successes.

1970s

   Fonda won her first Academy Award for Best Actress in 1971, again
   playing a prostitute, the gamine Bree Daniel, in the detective murder
   mystery Klute. It is generally acknowledged that her finest moment
   onscreen is the extraordinary scene towards the end of Klute where she
   is confronted by her potential killer. Her second Award was in 1978 for
   Coming Home, the story of a disabled Vietnam War veteran's difficulty
   in re-entering civilian life.

   Between Klute in 1971 and Fun With Dick and Jane in 1977, Fonda spent
   most of the first half of the decade without a major film success, even
   though she appeared in films such as A Doll's House ( 1973) and The
   Blue Bird ( 1976). From comments ascribed to her in interviews, some
   have inferred that she personally blamed the situation on anger at her
   outspoken political views - "I can't say I was blacklisted, but I was
   greylisted." However in her 2005 autobiography, My Life So Far it would
   appear that she categorically rejects such simplification. "The
   suggestion is that because of my actions against the war my career had
   been destroyed ... But the truth is that my career, far from being
   destroyed after the war, flourished with a vigor it had not previously
   enjoyed." From her own point of view it would appear that her absence
   from the silver screen was related more to the fact that her political
   activism provided a new focus in her life. By the same token her return
   to acting with a series of 'issue-driven' films was a reflection of
   this new focus. "When I hear admonitions ... warning outspoken actors
   to remember 'what happened to Jane Fonda back in the seventies', this
   has me scratching my head: And that what would be...?"

   Through her production company, IPC Films, she produced films that
   helped return her to star status. The 1977 comedy film Fun With Dick
   and Jane is generally considered her "comeback" picture. She also
   received very positive reviews and an Oscar nomination for her
   portrayal of playwright Lillian Hellman in the 1977 film, Julia. During
   this period Fonda announced that she would make films only that focused
   on important issues, and she generally stuck to her word. She turned
   down An Unmarried Woman because she felt the part was not relevant. She
   followed with popular and successful films such as The China Syndrome (
   1979), about a coverup of an accident in a nuclear power plant; and The
   Electric Horseman ( 1979) with her previous co-star, Robert Redford.

1980s

   In 1980, Fonda starred in the office-politics comedy Nine to Five with
   Lily Tomlin and Dolly Parton. Her character was re-entering the
   workforce, after a divorce had devastated both her finances and
   self-confidence. The film was one of Fonda's greatest financial
   successes, contributing significantly to her wealth.

   She had long wanted to work with her father, hoping it would help their
   strained relationship. She achieved this goal when she was cast as a
   supporting actress alongside Henry Fonda and Katharine Hepburn in On
   Golden Pond ( 1981). This film brought Henry Fonda his first Academy
   Award for Best Actor, which Jane accepted on his behalf, as he was ill
   and home bound. He died five months later.

   Fonda continued appearing in feature films throughout the 1980s, most
   notably her role of Dr. Martha Livingston in Agnes of God.

Exercise videos

   For many years, Fonda was a ballet enthusiast, but after fracturing her
   foot while filming The China Syndrome, she was no longer able to
   participate. To compensate, she began actively participating in
   aerobics and strengthening exercises. This became a second career for
   her, which continued for many years.

   In 1982, Fonda released her first exercise video, titled Jane Fonda's
   Workout, which sold 17 million copies, the most of any home video ever.
   The video's release led many people to buy the then-new VCR, in order
   to watch and perform the workout in the privacy and convenience of
   their own homes. Fonda subsequently released 23 more workout videos,
   five workout books, and thirteen audio tapes. Her most recent original
   workout video was released in 1995.

   Exercise videos in chronological order:
     * 1982: Jane Fonda's Workout (aka Workout)
     * 1983: Jane Fonda's Pregnancy, Birth and Recovery Workout
     * 1983: Jane Fonda's Workout Challenge
     * 1984: Jane Fonda's Prime Time Workout (re-released as "Jane Fonda's
       Easy Going Workout")
     * 1985: Jane Fonda's New Workout
     * 1986: Jane Fonda's Low Impact Aerobic Workout
     * 1987: Jane Fonda's Start Up (aka "Start Up with Jane Fonda")
     * 1987: Jane Fonda's Sports Aid
     * 1987: Jane Fonda's Toning and Shaping (aka "Jane Fonda's Workout
       with Weights")
     * 1988: Jane Fonda's Complete Workout
     * 1989: Jane Fonda's Light Aerobics and Stress Reduction Program
     * 1989: Jane Fonda's Stress Reduction Program
     * 1990: Jane Fonda's Lean Routine Workout
     * 1991: Jane Fonda's Lower Body Solution
     * 1992: Jane Fonda's Step Aerobic and Abdominal Workout
     * 1993: Jane Fonda's Yoga Exercise Workout
     * 1993: Jane Fonda's Favorite Fat Burners
     * 1994: Jane Fonda's Step and Stretch Workout
     * 1995: Jane Fonda's Personal Trainer Series: Low Impact Aerobics &
       Stretch
     * 1995: Jane Fonda's Personal Trainer Series: Total Body Sculpting
     * 1995: Jane Fonda's Personal Trainer Series: Abs, Buns & Thighs
     * 2005: DVD-release of the "Personal Trainer Series"
     * 2005: DVD-release of "The Complete Workout" & "Stress Reduction
       Program"

   Fonda has been credited with popularizing the phrase "go for the burn."

Retirement and return

   In April 1991, after three decades in film, Fonda announced her
   retirement from the film industry. In May 2005, however, she returned
   to the screen, after a fourteen-year absence, with the box-office
   success Monster-in-Law, a comedy in which she played the manipulative
   prospective mother-in-law of Jennifer Lopez's character .

   In July 2005, the British tabloid The Sun reported that when Fonda was
   asked if she would appear in a sequel to her 1980 hit Nine to Five, she
   replied "I'd love to."

   Fonda's next project is the Garry Marshall-directed, Georgia Rule,
   which began shooting in July 2006. Fonda stars along with Felicity
   Huffman, and Lindsay Lohan.

   In the course of her career, Fonda has received seven Oscar
   nominations, winning twice.

Political activism

   During the 1960s, Fonda engaged in political activism in support of the
   Civil Rights Movement and in opposition to the Vietnam War.

   Along with other celebrities, she supported the Alcatraz Island
   occupation in 1969, which was intended to call attention to Native
   American issues. (In the 1990s, she was criticized by Native American
   activists for making the perceived racist, sports-fan celebration
   gesture, "The Tomahawk Chop", at Atlanta Braves baseball games with her
   then-husband Ted Turner.)

   She likewise supported Huey Newton and the Black Panthers in the early
   1970s, stating "Revolution is an act of love; we are the children of
   revolution, born to be rebels. It runs in our blood." She called the
   Black Panthers "our revolutionary vanguard", and said "we must support
   them with love, money, propaganda and risk." In a 1979 appearance at
   the National Press Club in Washington, DC, she was asked about her past
   praise for Huey Newton and won laughter and applause for her response:
   "I've said a lot of off-the-wall things in my life. All I can say about
   that is I was naive and utterly wrong."

   Fonda has also been involved in the feminist movement since the 1970s,
   which dovetails with her activism in support of civil rights.

Opposition to the Vietnam War

   In April 1970, Fred Gardner, Fonda and Donald Sutherland formed the FTA
   tour ("Free The Army", a play on the troop expression "Fuck The Army"),
   an anti-war road show designed as an answer to Bob Hope's USO tour. The
   tour, referred to as "political vaudeville" by Fonda, visited military
   towns along the West Coast, with the goal of establishing a dialogue
   with soldiers about their upcoming deployments to Vietnam. The dialogue
   was made into a movie (F.T.A.) that contained strong, frank criticism
   of the war by service men and women. It was released in 1972.

   In the same year, Fonda spoke out against the war at a rally organized
   by Vietnam Veterans Against the War (VVAW) in Valley Forge,
   Pennsylvania. She offered to help raise funds for VVAW, and, for her
   efforts, was rewarded with the title of Honorary National Coordinator.
   On November 3, 1970, Fonda started a tour of college campuses on which
   she raised funds for the organization. As noted by the New York Times,
   Fonda was a "major patron" of the VVAW.

   In March 1971, Fonda traveled to Paris to meet with National Liberation
   Front (NLF) foreign minister Madam Nguyen Thi Binh. According to a
   transcript that was translated into Vietnamese and back to English,
   Fonda told Binh at one point: "Many of us have seen evidence proving
   the Nixon administration has escalated the war, causing death and
   destruction, perhaps as serious as the bombing of Hiroshima."
   Afterwards, Fonda traveled to London, where she again came under fire
   for making a speech that discussed the use of torture by US troops in
   Vietnam. Her financial support to VVAW at this time was apparently not
   significant, as the organization ran out of money within a month, and
   one of its prominent leaders, John Kerry, was called upon to raise the
   necessary funds.

"Hanoi Jane"

   Fonda visited Hanoi in July 1972. She is credited with publicly
   exposing Richard Nixon's potential strategy of bombing the dikes in
   Vietnam. At the time, she was called a liar by United Nations
   ambassador George H. W. Bush. Bush was intending to provide evidence of
   US innocence, but cancelled the press conference after Fonda released
   filmed evidence, with Bush saying, "I think that the best thing I can
   do on the subject is to shut up." In 2004, her former husband Tom
   Hayden renewed claims that "Fonda was right and Bush was lying".

   In Vietnam, Fonda was photographed seated on an anti-aircraft battery
   used against American aircrews. She also participated in several radio
   broadcasts on behalf of the Communist regime, asking US aircrews to
   consider the consequences of their actions. In her 2005 autobiography,
   she states that she was manipulated into sitting on the battery, and
   claims to have been immediately horrified at the implications of the
   pictures. Fonda says that it was not what was in her heart at all, and
   wasn't the reason why she was even there. She was there to film
   evidence of the Nixon Administration's plan to blow up the dikes, (a
   plan that Fonda says "Johnson, to his credit decided not to do"), and
   the lie the administration had been giving to the public, that troop
   returns were imminent. She expressed regret for her actions many times
   over the years, but some Americans remain hostile to her. "I've learned
   that a picture does not capture what was actually in your heart."

   During this visit she also visited American prisoners of war (POWs);
   and brought back messages from them to their families. When cases of
   torture began to emerge among POWs returning to the United States,
   Fonda called the returning POWs "hypocrites and liars". She added,
   "These were not men who had been tortured. These were not men who had
   been starved. These were not men who had been brainwashed." On the
   subject of torture in general, Fonda told the New York Times in 1973,
   "I'm quite sure that there were incidents of torture... but the pilots
   who were saying it was the policy of the Vietnamese and that it was
   systematic, I believe that's a lie." Several American POWs and other
   eyewitnesses, including former POW and current US Senator John McCain,
   disagree with this sentiment.

   The POW camp visits also lead to persistent stories - widely circulated
   on the Internet and via email - that the POWs she met had reviled her
   or attempted to sneak notes to her, which she had reported to the North
   Vietnamese, leading to further abuse. These false accounts have been
   discredited by the former prisoners who are directly mentioned in the
   accounts.

   Although Fonda's actions in July 1972 did not receive widespread
   coverage at the time (The New York Times, for example, ran only a brief
   UPI story and no photograph), her trip was perceived by many as an
   unpatriotic display of aid and comfort to the enemy, with some
   characterizing it as treason; the Nixon Administration, however,
   dismissed calls for legal action against her. Years later, she was
   labeled as Hanoi Jane by her critics and compared to war propagandists
   Tokyo Rose and Hanoi Hannah. (The first recorded use of the phrase is
   in a 1979 Washington Post article, citing picket signs by KKK and
   American Nazi demonstrators, not Vietnam veterans, at a Fonda speech.)
   She has often been accused of contributing to a perceived anti-soldier
   sentiment (despite the fact that she got involved in the anti-war
   movement by working with active-duty anti-war soldiers and veterans).
   Because of her actions, actor John Wayne cut off all contact with her,
   despite his close ties to her father.

   In 1972, Fonda funded and organized the Indochina Peace Campaign. It
   continued to mobilize antiwar activists across the nation after the
   1973 Paris Peace Agreement, when most other antiwar organizations
   closed down.

Fonda's regrets

   In 1988, Fonda admitted to former American POWs and their families that
   she had some regrets, stating:

          "I would like to say something, not just to Vietnam veterans in
          New England, but to men who were in Vietnam, who I hurt, or
          whose pain I caused to deepen because of things that I said or
          did. I was trying to help end the killing and the war, but there
          were times when I was thoughtless and careless about it and I'm
          very sorry that I hurt them. And I want to apologize to them and
          their families. [...] I will go to my grave regretting the
          photograph of me in an anti-aircraft gun, which looks like I was
          trying to shoot at American planes. It hurt so many soldiers. It
          galvanized such hostility. It was the most horrible thing I
          could possibly have done. It was just thoughtless."

   On the Charlie Rose program, Fonda noted that her regrets were limited
   to the photo appearance with the anti-aircraft gun, and that she was
   "proud" of her activism against "the bombing of the dikes".

   In a 60 Minutes interview on March 31, 2005, Fonda reiterated that she
   had no regrets about her trip to North Vietnam in 1972, with the
   exception of the anti-aircraft gun photo. She stated that the incident
   was a "betrayal" of American forces and of the "country that gave me
   privilege". Fonda said, "The image of Jane Fonda, Barbarella, Henry
   Fonda's daughter ... sitting on an enemy aircraft gun was a betrayal
   ... the largest lapse of judgment that I can even imagine." She later
   distinguished between regret over the use of her image as propaganda
   and pride for her anti-war activism: "There are hundreds of American
   delegations that had met with the POWs. Both sides were using the POWs
   for propaganda... It's not something that I will apologize for." Fonda
   said she had no regrets about the broadcasts she made on Radio Hanoi,
   something she asked the North Vietnamese to do: "Our government was
   lying to us and men were dying because of it, and I felt I had to do
   anything that I could to expose the lies and help end the war."

Feminist causes

   Jane Fonda in the lobby of the theater immediately after the conclusion
   of the telecast of the 62nd Academy Awards (Jane is holding Ted
   Turner's arm), March 26, 1990, photo by Alan Light
   Enlarge
   Jane Fonda in the lobby of the theatre immediately after the conclusion
   of the telecast of the 62nd Academy Awards (Jane is holding Ted
   Turner's arm), March 26, 1990, photo by Alan Light

   Fonda has been a longtime supporter of feminist causes, including
   V-Day, a movement to stop violence against women, inspired by the
   off-Broadway hit The Vagina Monologues, of which she is an honorary
   chairperson. She was present at their first summit in 2002, bringing
   together founder Eve Ensler, Afghan women oppressed by the Taliban, and
   a Kenyan activist campaigning to save girls from genital mutilation.

   In 2002, Fonda established the Jane Fonda Centre for Adolescent
   Reproductive Health at Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia; the goal
   of the centre is to prevent adolescent pregnancy, and to promote
   women's reproductive rights.

   On February 16 2004, Fonda led a march through Ciudad Juárez, with
   Sally Field, Eve Ensler, and other women, urging Mexico to provide
   sufficient resources to newly appointed officials helping investigate
   the murders of hundreds of women in the rough border city.

   Fonda strongly feels that many gender stereotypes are damaging to
   individuals of both genders. In 2004, she served as a mentor to the
   first ever all- transsexual cast of The Vagina Monologues.

   In the days before the Swedish election on September 17, 2006, Fonda
   came to Sweden to support the new political party Feministiskt
   initiativ in their election campaign.

   In My Life So Far, Fonda says that she considers patriarchy to be
   harmful to men as well as women. She also states that for many years,
   she feared to call herself a feminist, because she believed that all
   feminists were "anti-male". But now, with her increased understanding
   of patriarchy, she feels that feminism is beneficial to both men and
   women, and states that she "still loves men". She states that when she
   divorced Ted Turner, she felt like she had also divorced the world of
   patriarchy, and was very happy to have done so. On October 5, 2006,
   Fonda was invited to speak at the University of Notre Dame on
   "Feminization of Poverty", however the lecture dealt more with the
   subject of patriarchy. Nonetheless she was granted a standing ovation
   by both students and faculty, following her 50 minute address.

Israeli-Palestinian conflict

   Fonda continues to participate in political activism, particularly in
   connection with the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. During a trip to
   Jerusalem in 2002 (billed as a promotion of "world peace"), Fonda was
   criticized by right wing Israelis, and heckled as she arrived for a
   meeting with leading Israeli feminists. Three hecklers, members of
   Women in Green, criticized her controversial stance during the Vietnam
   War, her stance toward Israel, and said that she "came to Israel as a
   guest of Peace Now, Israeli traitors".

Opposition to the Iraq War

   Fonda has argued that the military campaign in Iraq will turn people
   all over the world against America, and has asserted that a global
   hatred of America will result in more terrorist attacks in the
   aftermath of the war. In July 2005, Fonda said that some of the war
   veterans she had met while on her book tour had urged her to speak out
   against the Iraq War.

   In September 2005, Fonda and George Galloway postponed their anti-war
   bus tour due to the slow start to the relief operation now underway in
   the Gulf Coast, which had been devastated by Hurricane Katrina. Fonda
   then planned to take a bus tour in March 2006 with her daughter and
   several families of military veterans but later scrapped her plans,
   mostly because she felt like she would distract attention from Cindy
   Sheehan's activism. She remains opposed to the Iraq War and to
   President George W. Bush in general.

Anti-Fonda protests

   Protestors in Waterbury, Connecticut, lead by a Republican politcal
   activist who was a WW2 veteran, threatened to disrupt filming of
   Fonda's 1990 picture Stanley and Iris, but when filming began she was
   well recieved by the community and the city's Board of Aldermen
   decisively defeated a resolution saying she was not welcome in the
   city.

   In the U.S. presidential election, 2004, her name was used as a
   disparaging epithet against John Kerry, the former VVAW leader, who was
   then the Democratic Party presidential candidate. Republican National
   Committee Chairman Ed Gillespie called Kerry a "Jane Fonda Democrat".
   In addition, Kerry's opponents circulated a photograph showing Fonda
   and Kerry in the same large crowd at a 1970 anti-war rally, although
   they were sitting several rows apart. A faked composite photograph,
   which gave the false impression that the two had shared a speaker's
   platform, was also circulated. Fonda appeared on CNN to defend Kerry
   against these attacks.

   In April 2005, a man named Michael A. Smith from Kansas City, Missouri
   took advantage of one of Jane Fonda's book signings to spit tobacco
   juice in her face. Minutes later, Smith was caught by police and
   charged with disorderly conduct. He went to court on May 27, 2005, and
   stated that he spat in Fonda's face because he believed her to be a
   "traitor", adding that his actions were "absolutely worth it". After he
   was led away, Fonda carried on signing books. It was the only incident
   during her national book tour.

Christianity

   In 2001, Fonda publicly announced that she had become a Christian. She
   considers herself a Biblical Christian and strongly opposes bigotry,
   discrimination, and dogma, which she believes are promoted by a small
   minority of Christians. Her announcement came shortly after her divorce
   from Ted Turner. Some believe that Fonda's Christianity led to the
   divorce as Turner had allegedly criticized religion.

Autobiography

   In 2005, Fonda released her autobiography, My Life So Far. The book
   describes her life as a series of three acts, each thirty years long,
   and declares that her third "act" will be her most significant, largely
   due to her commitment to Christ, and that it will determine the things
   she will be remembered for. Fonda also claims that her autobiography
   shows that "she is so much more than what we as America knows her as".

   Fonda's autobiography was praised by the Los Angeles Times, New York
   Times, and several other newspapers. Fonda has held book-signing events
   all over the United States since publishing her book.

Romantic relationships

   Roger Vadim and Jane Fonda (then married) near their home in Malibu,
   from LOOK Magazine, May 13, 1969, photo by Douglas Kirkland
   Enlarge
   Roger Vadim and Jane Fonda (then married) near their home in Malibu,
   from LOOK Magazine, May 13, 1969, photo by Douglas Kirkland
   Ted Turner and Jane Fonda on the red carpet at the 1992 Emmy Awards,
   photo by Alan Light
   Enlarge
   Ted Turner and Jane Fonda on the red carpet at the 1992 Emmy Awards,
   photo by Alan Light

   Fonda's first husband, from 1965-1973, was French film director Roger
   Vadim, with whom she had a daughter, Vanessa born in 1968 and named for
   actress and activist Vanessa Redgrave. According to her 2005
   autobiography, Fonda participated in sexual threesomes at Vadim's
   suggestion.

   In 1973, shortly after her divorce from Vadim, Fonda married author and
   politician Tom Hayden. Their son, Troy Garity (born 1973) was given his
   paternal grandmother's surname. With Hayden, she also raised a foster
   daughter, Mary Luana Williams, who is an activist born to members of
   the Black Panthers. Fonda and Hayden divorced in 1990.

   Fonda's third husband (1991-2001) was cable-television tycoon and CNN
   founder Ted Turner. In My Life So Far, Fonda states that she "left the
   father's house" when she divorced Turner. In addition to having become
   a Christian, Fonda's desire to disassociate herself from patriarchy may
   have contributed to the divorce.

   Fonda has also had romantic relationships with Alexander "Sandy"
   Whitelaw, a film director, with whom she was involved in 1960; Donald
   Sutherland, with whom she co-starred in Klute and dated in the 1970s;
   and Barry Matalon, a hairdresser whom she dated in the 1990s.

Film awards and nominations

Academy Awards

     * 1969 - Nominated - Best Actress in a Leading Role - They Shoot
       Horses, Don't They?
     * 1971 - Won - Best Actress in a Leading Role - Klute
     * 1977 - Nominated - Best Actress in a Leading Role - Julia
     * 1978 - Won - Best Actress in a Leading Role - Coming Home
     * 1979 - Nominated - Best Actress in a Leading Role - The China
       Syndrome
     * 1981 - Nominated - Best Actress in a Supporting Role - On Golden
       Pond
     * 1986 - Nominated - Best Actress in a Leading Role - The Morning
       After

   Preceded by:
   Glenda Jackson
   for Women in Love Academy Award for Best Actress
   1971
   for Klute Succeeded by:
   Liza Minnelli
   for Cabaret
   Preceded by:
   Goldie Hawn, Gene Kelly, Walter Matthau, George Segal, and Robert Shaw
   48th Academy Awards " Oscars" host
   49th Academy Awards (with Warren Beatty, Ellen Burstyn, and Richard
   Pryor) Succeeded by:
   Bob Hope
   50th Academy Awards
   Preceded by:
   Diane Keaton
   for Annie Hall Academy Award for Best Actress
   1978
   for Coming Home Succeeded by:
   Sally Field
   for Norma Rae
   Preceded by:
   Jack Lemmon
   57th Academy Awards " Oscars" host
   58th Academy Awards (with Alan Alda and Robin Williams) Succeeded by:
   Chevy Chase, Goldie Hawn, and Paul Hogan
   59th Academy Awards

Golden Globes

     * 1961: Golden Globe; Most Promising Newcomer — Female
     * 1971: Golden Globe; Best Actress in a Motion Picture (Drama), Klute
     * 1972: Golden Globe; World Film Favorite — Female
     * 1977: Golden Globe; Best Actress in a Motion Picture (Drama), Julia
     * 1978: Golden Globe; World Film Favorite — Female
     * 1978: Golden Globe; Best Actress in a Motion Picture (Drama),
       Coming Home

Others

     * 1984: Emmy; Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited Series or a
       Special, The Dollmaker

Selected Filmography


   Main Filmography
   Walk on the Wild Side (1962) | Sunday in New York (1963) | La
   Ronde(1964) | Cat Ballou(1965) | The Chase(1966) | Any Wednesday (1966)
    | Barefoot in the Park (1967)  | Barbarella (1968) | They Shoot
   Horses, Don't They? (1969) | Klute (1971) | Julia (1977) | Coming Home
   (1978) | Comes a Horseman (1978) | California Suite (1978) | The China
   Syndrome (1979) | The Electric Horseman (1979) | 9 to 5 (1980) | On
   Golden Pond (1981) | Rollover (1981) | Agnes of God (1985) | The
   Morning After (1986) | Stanley and Iris (1990) | Monster-in-Law
   (2005) | Georgia Rule (scheduled 2007)
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jane_Fonda"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
