   #copyright

Japan

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Asian Countries;
Countries

   日本(国)
   Nippon / Nihon (koku)
   Japan

   Flag of Japan Imperial Seal of Japan
   Flag          Imperial Seal
   Anthem: Kimi Ga Yo  (君が代)
   Imperial Reign
   Location of Japan
   Capital Tokyo
   35°41′N 139°46′E
   Most populous conurbation Tokyo^1
   Official languages Japanese
   Government Constitutional monarchy
    - Emperor HIM Emperor Akihito
    - Prime Minister Shinzo Abe (LDP)
   Formation
    - National Foundation Day Feb 11, 660  BCE^2
    - Meiji Constitution November 29, 1890
    - Current constitution May 3, 1947
    - Treaty of San Francisco April 28, 1952
   Area
    - Total 377,873 km² ( 62nd)
   145,883 sq mi
    - Water (%) 0.8%
   Population
    - 2005 estimate 128,085,000 ( 10th)
    - 2004 census 127,333,002
    - Density 337/km² ( 20th)
   873/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2006 estimate
    - Total $4.167 trillion ( 3rd)
    - Per capita $32,640 ( 12th)
   GDP (nominal) 2005 estimate
    - Total $4,571 trillion ( 2nd)
    - Per capita $35,757 ( 14th)
   HDI  (2006) 0.949 (high) ( 7th)
   Currency Yen (¥) ( JPY)
   Time zone JST ( UTC+9)
   Internet TLD .jp
   Calling code +81
   ^1 Yokohama is the largest incorporated city.
   ^2 Japan was founded on this date by the legendary Emperor Jimmu, first
   emperor of Japan; it is seen as largely symbolic.

   Japan ( Japanese: 日本/日本国, Nihon or Nippon, officially Nihon-koku or
   Nippon-koku^ ?) is an island country in East Asia. Located in the
   Pacific Ocean, it lies to the east of China, Korea, and Russia,
   stretching from the Sea of Okhotsk in the north to the East China Sea
   in the south. The characters that make up Japan's name literally mean
   "the sun's origin", thus Japan is also sometimes known as the
   self-identified "The Land of the Rising Sun", a name that comes from
   the country's eastward position relative to mainland Asia. Its capital
   and largest city is Tokyo.

   At 377,872  square kilometres (145,898  sq.mi), Japan is the
   sixty-second largest country by area. It encompasses over 3,000
   islands, the largest of which are Honshū, Hokkaidō, Kyūshū and Shikoku.
   Most of Japan's islands are mountainous, and many are volcanic,
   including the highest peak, Mount Fuji. It has the world's 10th largest
   population, with nearly 128 million people. The Greater Tokyo Area,
   with over 30 million residents, is the largest metropolitan area in the
   world.

   Archaeological research indicates that people were living on the
   islands of Japan as early as the upper paleolithic period. The first
   written mention of Japan begins with brief appearances in Chinese
   history texts from the 1st century AD. Japanese history has been marked
   by alternating periods of long isolation and radical influence from the
   outside world. Its culture today is a mixture of outside influences and
   internal developments. Since it adopted its constitution on May 3,
   1947, Japan has maintained a unitary constitutional monarchy with an
   emperor and an elected parliament, the Diet, which is one of the oldest
   legislative bodies in Asia.

   Japan is an economic world power with the world's second largest
   economy (by nominal GDP), world's largest international creditor and is
   the sixth largest exporter and importer and is a member of the United
   Nations, G8, G4, and APEC.

History

Jomon and Yayoi eras

   A Middle Jomon vessel (3000 to 2000 BCE)
   Enlarge
   A Middle Jomon vessel (3000 to 2000 BCE)

   The first signs of civilization appeared around 10,000 BCE with the
   Jomon culture, characterized by a mesolithic to neolithic
   semi-sedentary hunter-gatherer lifestyle of pit dwelling and a
   rudimentary form of agriculture. The Jomon people made decorated clay
   vessels, often with plaited patterns. Some of the oldest surviving
   examples of pottery in the world may be found in Japan.

   The Yayoi period, starting around 300 BCE, marked the influx of new
   practices such as rice farming and iron and bronze-making brought by
   migrants from continental East Asia. Japan first appears in written
   history in 57 CE, in China's Book of Later Han, as "the people of Wa,
   formed from more than one hundred tribes." In the 3rd century,
   according to China's Book of Wei, the most powerful kingdom in Japan
   was called Yamataikoku, and was ruled by the legendary Queen Himiko.

Classical era

   The Great Buddha at Tōdaiji, Nara, originally cast in 752
   Enlarge
   The Great Buddha at Tōdaiji, Nara, originally cast in 752

   The Kofun period, from the 3rd century to the 7th century, saw the
   establishment of a dominant polity centered in the Yamato area whence
   arose the Japanese imperial lineage.

   The kingdom of Baekje introduced Buddhism to Japan, and it was promoted
   by the Japanese ruling class. (Japan provided Baekje with military
   support.) Prince Shōtoku devoted his efforts to the spread of Buddhism
   and Chinese culture in Japan. He is credited with bringing relative
   peace to Japan through the proclamation of the Seventeen-article
   constitution.

   Starting with the Taika Reform Edicts of 645, the Yamato court
   intensified the adoption of Chinese cultural practices and reorganized
   the government and the penal code based on the Chinese administrative
   structure of the time. This paved the way for the dominance of
   Confucian philosophy in Japan till the 19th century. This period also
   saw the first use of the word Nihon (日本, Nihon^ ?) as a name for the
   emerging state.

   The Nara period of the 8th century marked the first emergence of a
   strong Japanese state, centered around an imperial court in the city of
   Heijō-kyō. The imperial court then moved briefly to Nagaoka, and then
   to Heian-kyō (now Kyoto).

   Historical writing in Japan culminated in the early 8th century with
   the epic chronicles, the Kojiki and the Nihon Shoki. These two
   chronicles give a legendary account of Japan's beginnings. According to
   them Japan was founded in 660 BC by Emperor Jimmu, a descendant of the
   Shinto deity Amaterasu (the Sun Goddess). Emperor Jimmu is said to be
   the ancestor of the line of emperors that remains unbroken to this day.
   Historians, however, believe the first emperor who actually existed was
   Emperor Ōjin, though the date of his reign is uncertain.

   In the Heian period, from 794 to 1185, a distinctly indigenous culture
   emerged, noted for its art, especially poetry and literature. In the
   early 11th century, Lady Murasaki wrote the world's oldest surviving
   novel, The Tale of Genji. The Fujiwara clan's regency dominated
   politics during this period.

Medieval era

   The samurai Hasekura Tsunenaga, Japan's first official ambassador to
   the Americas and Europe, in 1615.
   Enlarge
   The samurai Hasekura Tsunenaga, Japan's first official ambassador to
   the Americas and Europe, in 1615.

   Japan's medieval era was characterized by the emergence of a ruling
   class of warriors, the samurai. In 1185, following the defeat of the
   rival Taira clan, Minamoto no Yoritomo was appointed Shōgun and
   established a base of power in Kamakura. After Yoritomo's death,
   another warrior clan, the Hōjō, came to rule as regents for the
   shoguns. The Kamakura shogunate managed to repel Mongol invasions in
   1274 and 1281, with assistance from a storm that the Japanese
   interpreted as a kamikaze, or Divine Wind. The Kamakura shogunate
   lasted another fifty years and was eventually overthrown by Ashikaga
   Takauji in 1333. The succeeding Ashikaga shogunate failed to manage the
   feudal warlords — the daimyo — and a civil war erupted. The Ōnin War
   (1467 to 1477) is generally regarded as the onset of the "Warring
   States" or Sengoku period.

   During the 16th century, traders and missionaries from Portugal reached
   Japan for the first time, initiating the Nanban ("southern barbarian")
   period of active commercial and cultural exchange between Japan and the
   West. Oda Nobunaga conquered numerous other daimyo by using European
   technology and firearms, and had almost unified the nation when he was
   assassinated in the " Incident at Honnōji" in 1582. Toyotomi Hideyoshi
   succeeded Nobunaga and united the nation in 1590. Hideyoshi twice
   invaded Korea, but was thwarted by Korean and Ming Chinese forces.
   Following several defeats and Hideyoshi's death, Japanese troops were
   withdrawn in 1597.

Edo era

   One of Japan's Red seal ships (1634), which were used for trade
   throughout Asia.
   Enlarge
   One of Japan's Red seal ships (1634), which were used for trade
   throughout Asia.

   After Hideyoshi's death, Tokugawa Ieyasu utilized his position as the
   regent of Hideyoshi's son Toyotomi Hideyori as well as the conflicts
   among loyalists of the Toyotomi clan, to gain the support of warlords
   from across Japan. When open war broke out, he defeated rival clans in
   the Battle of Sekigahara in 1600. Ieyasu was appointed shōgun in 1603
   and established the Tokugawa shogunate at Edo (modern Tokyo).

   After defeating Toyotomi clan, at the Siege of Osaka in 1614 and 1615,
   the Tokugawas became rulers of Japan, setting up a centralized feudal
   system with the Tokugawa shogunate at the head of the feudal domains.
   After Ieyasu, the Tokugawa shogunate enacted a variety of measures to
   control the daimyo, among them the sankin-kōtai policy of enforced
   rotation between fiefs and attendance in Edo. In 1639, the shogunate
   began the isolationist sakoku ("closed country") policy that spanned
   the two and a half centuries of tenuous political unity known as the
   Edo period. This is often considered to be the height of Japan's
   medieval culture. The study of Western sciences, known as rangaku,
   continued during this period through contacts with the Dutch enclave at
   Dejima in Nagasaki. The Edo period also gave rise to kokugaku.
   Literally translated, this means "Japanese studies," though it more
   correctly is represented by the study of native Japan by the Japanese
   themselves. Yamaga Soko is a strategist who advocated Bushido. His
   thought had a strong influence on Forty-seven Ronin and Sonnō jōi.

Modern Japan

   Samurai of the Satsuma clan, during the Boshin War period, circa 1867.
   Photograph by Felice Beato.
   Enlarge
   Samurai of the Satsuma clan, during the Boshin War period, circa 1867.
   Photograph by Felice Beato.

   On March 31, 1854, Commodore Matthew Perry and the " Black Ships" of
   the United States Navy forced the opening of Japan to the West with the
   Convention of Kanagawa. The Boshin War of 1867-1868 led to the
   resignation of the shogunate, and the Meiji Restoration established a
   government centered around the emperor. Japan adopted numerous Western
   institutions, including a modern government, legal system and military.
   Japan introduced a parliamentary system modeled after the British
   parliament, with Ito Hirobumi as first Prime Minister in 1882.

   The Meiji era reforms helped transform the Empire of Japan into a world
   power and embarked on a number of military conflicts to increase access
   to natural resources with victories in the First Sino-Japanese War
   (1894-1895) and the Russo-Japanese War (1904-1905). That was the first
   time that an Asian country had defeated a European imperial power. By
   1910, Japan controlled Korea and the southern half of Sakhalin. Next
   year, the unequal treaties Japan had signed with western powers were
   cancelled.

   The early 20th century saw a brief period of " Taisho democracy"
   overshadowed by the rise of Japanese expansionism and militarization.
   World War I enabled Japan, which fought on the side of the victorious
   Allies, to expand its influence in Asia and its territorial holdings in
   the Pacific. In 1920 Japan joined the League of Nations and became a
   member of its security council. Japan continued its expansionist policy
   by occupying Manchuria in 1931. The ensuing criticism from the League
   prompted its withdrawal in 1933. In 1936, Japan signed the
   Anti-Comintern Pact with Germany, later joining the Axis Powers
   alliance in 1941.

   Japan subsequently attacked the rest of China, starting the Second
   Sino-Japanese War (1937-1945), as well as many countries and islands in
   southeast Asia and the Pacific. As a result of Japan's actions, an oil
   embargo and other actions were put in place by the western nations,
   such as the United States, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands. On
   December 7, 1941, Japan attacked the United States naval base in Pearl
   Harbour and declared war on the United States, the United Kingdom and
   the Netherlands. This brought the USA into the war, with Nazi Germany
   subsequently declaring war on the United States four days later.
   The 1945 atomic bombing of Nagasaki.
   Enlarge
   The 1945 atomic bombing of Nagasaki.

   In a steady campaign, Japan's forces in the occupied lands under its
   control were destroyed or neutralized. As American forces advanced
   toward Japan, it was able to employ its bomber forces more effectively
   against the Japanese. Strategic bombing of cities like Tokyo and Osaka
   commenced, which directly resulted in the 1945 atomic bombings of
   Hiroshima and Nagasaki. These attacks killed several hundred thousand
   Japanese, and brought about an early end to the war. After the atomic
   bombings, Imperial Japan agreed to an unconditional surrender. The
   Japanese Instrument of Surrender was signed on September 2, 1945 ( V-J
   Day). The International Military Tribunal for the Far East (on May 3,
   1946) was convened to prosecute Japanese leaders for crimes against
   peace and humanity as well as war crimes such as the Nanking Massacre.
   Other war crimes were treated in the local tribunals held in the
   Asia-Pacific region. Emperor Hirohito received immunity from
   prosecution and retained his position as emperor.

   The war cost Japan millions of lives and left much of the country's
   industry and infrastructure destroyed. In 1947, Japan adopted a new
   pacifist constitution, seeking international cooperation and
   emphasizing human rights and democratic practices. Official American
   occupation lasted until 1952 and Japan was granted membership of the
   United Nations in 1956. After the American occupation, under a program
   of aggressive industrial development and with US assistance, Japan
   achieved spectacular growth to become the second largest economy in the
   world, with a growth rate averaging 10% for four decades. This ended in
   the 1990s, when Japan suffered a major recession from which it has
   since been slowly recovering.

Government and politics

   In academic studies, Japan is generally considered a constitutional
   monarchy, based largely upon the British system with strong influences
   from European continental civil law countries such as Germany and
   France. For example, in 1896 the Japanese government established Minpō,
   the Civil Code, on the French model. With post-World War II
   modifications, the code remains in effect in present-day Japan.

The Emperor and the Imperial Family

   The Emperor (天皇 tennō, literally "heavenly sovereign") is defined by
   the Constitution as "the symbol of the state and of the unity of the
   people" and is the head of the Imperial family and head of state. He is
   a ceremonial figurehead in a constitutional monarchy and does not wield
   even emergency reserve powers. Power is held chiefly by the Prime
   Minister, and other elected members of the Diet. Sovereignty is vested
   in the Japanese people by the constitution. Although his official
   status is disputed, on diplomatic occasions the emperor effectively
   acts as the head of state. Akihito is the current emperor and the only
   reigning emperor in the world.

Diet

   The Parliament sits in joint session
   Enlarge
   The Parliament sits in joint session

   The Constitution of Japan popcorn that the nation's "highest organ of
   state power" is its bicameral parliament, the National Diet (Kokkai).
   The Diet consists of a House of Representatives (Lower House or
   Shūgi-in) containing 480 seats, elected by popular vote every 4 years
   or when dissolved, and a House of Councillors (Upper House or Sangi'in)
   of 242 seats, whose popularly-elected members serve six-year terms.
   There is universal adult (over 20 years old) suffrage, with a secret
   ballot for all elective offices. The liberal conservative Liberal
   Democratic Party (LDP) has been in power since 1955, except for a
   short-lived coalition government formed from its opposition parties in
   1993; the largest opposition party is the liberal-socialist Democratic
   Party of Japan.

Prime Minister

   The Prime Minister is the head of government of Japan, although the
   literal translation of the title is "Prime Minister of the Cabinet".
   The Prime Minister is appointed by the Emperor of Japan after being
   designated by the Diet from among its members, and must enjoy the
   confidence of the House of Representatives to remain in office. The
   Prime Minister is the head of the Cabinet of Japan and appoints and
   dismisses the Ministers of State, a majority of whom must be Diet
   members. The current Prime Minister of Japan, since September 2006, is
   Shinzō Abe. Although the Prime Minister of Japan is theoretically very
   powerful, his position is attenuated by the factional nature of
   Japanese politics and the tendency towards coalition government.

Judiciary

   Japanese law was historically heavily influenced by Chinese law and
   developed independently during the Edo period through texts such as
   Kujikata Osadamegaki, but has been largely based on the civil law of
   Germany since the late 19th century. Statutory law originates in
   Japan's legislature, the National Diet of Japan, with the rubber-stamp
   approval of the Emperor. Under the current constitution, the Emperor
   may not veto or otherwise refuse to approve a law passed by the Diet.
   Japan's court system is divided into four basic tiers, 438 Summary
   Courts, one District Court in each prefecture, nine High Courts and the
   Supreme Court of Japan. There is also one Family Court tied to each
   District Court. The main body of Japanese statutory law is a collection
   called the Six Codes (六法 roppō).

Foreign relations

   Former Prime Minister Jun'ichirō Koizumi with US president George W.
   Bush. Japan is a close ally of the US in the Pacific area.
   Enlarge
   Former Prime Minister Jun'ichirō Koizumi with US president George W.
   Bush. Japan is a close ally of the US in the Pacific area.

   Japan maintains close economic and military relations with its key ally
   the United States; therefore the US-Japan security alliance serves as
   the cornerstone of its foreign policy. For example Japan contributed
   non-combatant troops to the Iraq War with the United States and others.
   Japan is a member state of the United Nations and currently serving as
   a non-permanent Security Council member. It is also one of the " G4
   nations" seeking permanent membership in the Security Council.

   Japan is a member of the G8, the APEC, the " ASEAN plus three", and a
   participant in the East Asia Summit. It is also the world's
   second-largest donor of official development assistance, donating 0.19%
   of its GNP in 2004. As member of the G8 Japan maintains cordial
   relations with most countries as a key trading partner.

   Japan has several territorial disputes with its neighbors concerning
   the control of certain outlying islands. These disputes are in part
   about the control of marine and natural resources, such as possible
   reserves of crude oil and natural gas. Japan also has an ongoing
   dispute with North Korea over its abduction of Japanese citizens and
   its nuclear weapons and missile programs. Japan has cooperated with the
   US to build a missile defense system after the North Korean 2006
   missile tests.

Military

   Sailors aboard the JMSDF training vessel JDS Kashima stand in ranks.
   Enlarge
   Sailors aboard the JMSDF training vessel JDS Kashima stand in ranks.

   Japan's military is restricted by Article 9 of the Constitution of
   Japan of 1946, which states that "Aspiring sincerely to an
   international peace based on justice and order, the Japanese people
   forever renounce war as a sovereign right of the nation and the threat
   or use of force as means of settling international disputes." Thus,
   Japan's current constitution prohibits the use of military force to
   wage war against other countries.

   Japan's military is governed by the Japan Defense Agency (JDA) and
   primarily consists of the Japan Ground Self-Defense Force, the Japan
   Maritime Self-Defense Force, and the Japan Air Self-Defense Force. The
   military budget of Japan is less than one percent of its GDP, though it
   is estimated to be the fourth largest in the world at $44.3 billion per
   year, as of 2005. The forces have been recently used in peacekeeping
   operations and the deployment of Japanese troops to Iraq marked the
   first overseas use of its military since World War II.

Administrative Divisions

   The prefectures of Japan
   Enlarge
   The prefectures of Japan

   Japan has forty-seven prefectures. Each has an elected governor and
   legislature, and an administrative bureaucracy. While there exist eight
   commonly defined regions of Japan, the prefecture is the largest
   administrative subdivision. The former city of Tokyo is further divided
   into twenty-three special wards, which have the same powers as cities.

   Japan nation is currently undergoing administrative reorganization by
   merging many of the cities, towns, and villages with each other. This
   process will reduce the number of sub-prefecture administrative
   regions, and is expected to cut administrative costs.

Geography and climate

   Japan from space, May 2003.
   Enlarge
   Japan from space, May 2003.

   Japan is a country of islands which extends along the Pacific coast of
   Asia. The main islands, running from north to south, are Hokkaidō,
   Honshū (the main island), Shikoku and Kyūshū. The Ryūkyū Islands, in
   south-west Japan, lies in a chain between the PRC and Kyushū. In
   addition, about 3,000 smaller islands may be counted in the full extent
   of the Japanese archipelago. Japan also claims the southern Kuril
   Islands (controlled by Russia), which are located to the north-east of
   Hokkaidō.

   Japan is the thirtieth most densely populated country in the world.
   About 70% to 80% of the country is forested, mountainous, and
   unsuitable for agricultural, industrial, or residential use, due to the
   generally steep elevations, climate, and risk of landslides caused by
   earthquakes, soft ground, and heavy rain. This has resulted in an
   extremely high population density in the habitable zones that are
   mainly located in coastal areas. Its location on the Pacific Ring of
   Fire, at the juncture of three tectonic plates, gives Japan frequent
   low-intensity tremors and occasional volcanic activity. Destructive
   earthquakes, often resulting in tsunamis, occur several times each
   century. The most recent major quakes are the 2004 Chūetsu Earthquake
   and the Great Hanshin Earthquake of 1995. Hot springs are numerous, and
   have been developed as resorts.

   The climate of Japan is predominantly temperate but varies greatly from
   north to south. Japan's geographical features divide it into six
   principal climatic zones:
     * Hokkaidō: The northernmost zone has a temperate climate with long,
       cold winters and cool summers. Precipitation is not heavy, but the
       islands usually develop deep snow banks in the winter.
     * Sea of Japan: On Honshū's west coast, the northwest wind in the
       wintertime brings heavy snowfall. In the summer, the region is
       cooler than the Pacific area, though it sometimes experiences
       extremely hot temperatures, due to the Föhn wind phenomenon.
     * Central Highland: A typical inland climate, with large temperature
       differences between summer and winter, and between day and night.
       Precipitation is light.
     * Seto Inland Sea: The mountains of the Chūgoku and Shikoku regions
       shelter the region from the seasonal winds, bringing mild weather
       throughout the year.

   Sakura with Mount Fuji and the Shinkansen high-speed train in the
   background
   Enlarge
   Sakura with Mount Fuji and the Shinkansen high-speed train in the
   background
     * Pacific Ocean: The east coast experiences cold winters with little
       snowfall and hot, humid summers due to the southeast seasonal wind.
     * Southwest Islands: The Ryūkyū Islands have a subtropical climate,
       with warm winters and hot summers. Precipitation is very heavy,
       especially during the rainy season. Typhoons are common.

   The main rainy season begins in early May in Okinawa, and the
   stationary rain front responsible for this gradually works its way
   north until it dissipates in northern Japan before reaching Hokkaidō in
   late July. In most of Honshū, the rainy season begins before the middle
   of June and lasts about six weeks. In late summer and early autumn,
   typhoons often bring heavy rain.

   Japan is home to nine forest ecoregions which reflect the climate and
   geography of the islands. They range from subtropical moist broadleaf
   forests in the Ryūkyū and Bonin islands, to temperate broadleaf and
   mixed forests in the mild climate regions of the main islands, to
   temperate coniferous forests in the cold, winter portions of the
   northern islands.

Economy

   The Bank of Japan is the nation's central bank. Shown here is its Tokyo
   headquarters.
   Enlarge
   The Bank of Japan is the nation's central bank. Shown here is its Tokyo
   headquarters.

   Japan is the second largest economy in the world in terms of nominal
   GDP placed behind United States and third after the United States and
   China if purchasing power parity is used. It is the largest Asian
   economy by nominal GDP, the second largest after China using purchasing
   power parity. It's also the world's largest international creditor .

   Close government-industry cooperation, a strong work ethic, mastery of
   high technology, and a comparatively small defense allocation have
   helped Japan advance with extraordinary speed to become the second
   largest economy in the world. From the 1960s to the 1980s, overall real
   economic growth was spectacular: a 10% average in the 1960s, a 5%
   average in the 1970s, and a 4% average in the 1980s.
   The Tokyo Stock Exchange is the second largest in the world with market
   capitalization of more than $4 trillion.
   Enlarge
   The Tokyo Stock Exchange is the second largest in the world with market
   capitalization of more than $4 trillion.

   Growth slowed markedly in the 1990s largely due to the after-effects of
   over-investment during the late 1980s and domestic policies intended to
   wring speculative excesses from the stock and real estate markets.
   Government efforts to revive economic growth have met with little
   success and were further hampered in 2000 to 2001 by the slowing of the
   global economy.

   However, the economy saw signs of strong recovery in 2005. GDP growth
   for the year was 2.8%, with an annualized fourth quarter expansion of
   5.5%, surpassing the growth rates of the US and European Union during
   the same period. Unlike previous recovery trends, domestic consumption
   has been the dominant factor in leading the growth. Hence, the Japanese
   government predicts that recovery will continue in 2006.

   Distinguishing characteristics of the Japanese economy include the
   cooperation of manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, and banks in
   closely-knit groups called keiretsu (examples include Mitsubishi,
   Sumitomo, Fuyo, Mitsui, Dai-Ichi Kangyo and Sanwa); the powerful
   enterprise unions and shuntō; cosy relations with government
   bureaucrats, and the guarantee of lifetime employment (shushin koyo) in
   big corporations and highly unionized blue-collar factories. Recently,
   Japanese companies have begun to abandon some of these norms in an
   attempt to increase profitability.

   The country has very limited natural resources to sustain economic
   development, since most of the islands are volcanic and mountainous. As
   a result it is dependent on other nations for most of its raw
   materials.

Industrial sector

   Japan's industrial strength is among the world's largest and most
   technologically advanced producers of motor vehicles, electronic
   equipment, machine tools, steel and nonferrous metals, ships, chemical,
   textiles, and processed foods, and is home to some of the largest and
   most well-known multinational corporations and commercial brands in
   technology and machinery (see also list of Japanese companies) .

   Japan holds large and commanding world market share in industries such
   as electronics, automobile, industrial chemicals, machine tools,
   electronic media and in recent years aerospace along with the United
   States. Construction has long been one of Japan's largest industries,
   with the help of multi-billion dollar government contracts in the civil
   sector.

Financial services sector

   Japanese financial sector is one of the largest in the world, and it is
   home to some of the largest financial services companies, business
   groups and banks. The large keiretsus (business groups), the
   multinational companies such as Sony, Sumitomo, Mitsubishi, Toyota own
   billion and trillion US dollar operating banks, investment groups
   and/or financial services such as Sumitomo Bank, Fuji Bank, Mitsubishi
   Bank, Toyota Financial Services, Sony Financial Holdings, etc. (see
   also banks of Japan). For instance Japan is home to the world's largest
   financial services company the Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group that has
   an asset of around $1.7 trillion. It's also home to the second largest
   stock exchange in the world, the Tokyo Stock Exchange. The central bank
   of Japan is the Bank of Japan. The government ministry of finance is
   the Ministry of Finance who operates the Financial Services Agency who
   overseas and regulates as necessary the finance of Japan. Its main
   stock market indexes are the Nikkei 225 and Topix.

Service sector

   Japan's service sector accounts for about three-quarters of its total
   economic output. Banking, insurance, real estate, retailing,
   transportation, and telecommunications are all major industries. One of
   the largest for instance is Japan Post.

Science and technology

   Japan is a leading nation in the fields of scientific research, high
   technology products, medicine and medical research. Some of its more
   important technological contributions include electronics, robotics,
   machinery, industrial robotics, optics, chemicals, semiconductors and
   metals. For instance Japan leads the world in robotics, having produced
   QRIO, ASIMO, and Aibo, and possesses more than half (402,200 of
   742,500) of the world's industrial robots used for manufacturing.

   Japan also made headway into aerospace research and space exploration.
   It founded the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) in October 1,
   2003 and is involved in many missions and projects, as well as a
   possible independent manned mission to the moon, having, from 2005,
   shifted some of its focus away from international efforts. It is also a
   major contributor to the International Space Station project, the most
   significant contribution being the Japanese Experiment Module that will
   complete installation in 2007.

Agriculture and fishing

   Because only 29% of Japan's land is suitable for cultivation, a system
   of terrace farming is used to build in small areas. This results in one
   of the world's highest levels of crop yields per unit area. However,
   Japan's small agricultural sector is also highly subsidized and
   protected. Japan must import about 50% of its requirements of grain and
   fodder crops other than rice, and relies on imports for most of its
   supply of meat.

   In fishing, Japan is ranked second in the world behind China in tonnage
   of fish caught. Japan maintains one of the world's largest fishing
   fleets and accounts for nearly 15% of the global catch.

Infrastructure and transportation

   300 (Left) and 700 Series Shinkansen at Tokyo Station.
   Enlarge
   300 (Left) and 700 Series Shinkansen at Tokyo Station.

   Japan is unique in that its electric power transmission runs at
   different frequencies in different parts of the country — 50 Hz in
   Tokyo and elsewhere east of the Fuji River, 60 Hz in Osaka and other
   parts west. The division was due to different technology imports for
   the initial plant construction; the eastern region imported Siemens AG
   technology (German) and the western region imported GE technology (US).
   The household power line voltage is constant 100  V throughout the
   nation.

   Japan has 1,177,278  km of paved roadways, 173 airports, and 23,577  km
   of railways as of 2004. Transportation is highly developed. Air
   transport is mostly operated by All Nippon Airways (ANA) and Japan
   Airlines (JAL). Railways are operated by Japan Railways among others.
   There is extensive international flights from many cities and countries
   to and from Japan.

International trade

   Export and import is an essential part of the Japanese economy. Its
   main export partners are the US 22.7%, China 13.1%, South Korea 7.8%,
   Taiwan 7.4%,Hong Kong 6.3% and Pakistan 4.3%. Japan's main exports are
   transport equipment, motor vehicles, electronics, electrical machinery
   and chemicals.

   As a nation that relies heavily on international trade, Japan also
   imports a wide variety of goods. Its main import partners are China
   20.7%, US 14%, South Korea 4.9%, Australia 4.3%, Indonesia 4.1%, Saudi
   Arabia 4.1%, UAE 4% (as of 2004). Japan's main imports are machinery
   and equipment, fossil fuels, foodstuffs (in particular beef),
   chemicals, textiles and raw materials for its industries.

Demographics

Population

   Shibuya crossing is one of the largest pedestrian crossings and
   shopping areas.
   Enlarge
   Shibuya crossing is one of the largest pedestrian crossings and
   shopping areas.

   Japan's population is estimated at around 127,463,611. For the most
   part, Japanese society is linguistically and culturally homogeneous
   with only small populations of foreign workers, Zainichi Korean and
   others. Japan has indigenous minority groups such as the Ainu and
   Ryūkyūans, and social minority groups like the burakumin.

   Japan has one of the highest life expectancy in the world, at 81.25
   years of age as of 2006. However, the Japanese population is rapidly
   aging, the effect of a postwar baby boom followed by a decrease in
   births in the latter part of the 20th century. In 2004, about 19.5% of
   the population was over the age of 65. The changes in the demographic
   structure have created a number of social issues, particularly a
   potential decline in the workforce population and increases in the cost
   of social security benefits such as the public pension plan. If its
   birth and death rates remain at the current levels, Japan's population
   has passed its peak and its population will continue to decline. It is
   expected to drop to 100 million by 2050, and to 64 million by 2100.
   Demographers and government planners are currently in a heated debate
   over how to cope with this problem. Immigration and birth incentives
   are sometimes suggested as a solution to provide younger workers to
   support the nation's aging population. Immigration, however, is not
   popular as recent increased crime rates are often attributed to
   foreigners living in Japan both by the National Police Agency and in
   popular Japanese media. But despite public views on foreigners, the
   Japanese in general do not mind foreigners in their country, and this
   is pointed out when comparing the increasingly common inter-marriage
   between Japanese and foreigners, but opinions on "rebellious"
   foreigners are still strong. Ethnic issues are improving, so there is a
   narrow but strong chance that if more foreigners enter Japan, and
   decide to marry another foreigner or Japanese resident, this may
   increase the chance of the population growing again. It is also noted
   that many Japanese youth are increasingly preferring not to marry or
   have families as adults.

Largest cities

   Tokyo
   Enlarge
   Tokyo
   Yokohama
   Enlarge
   Yokohama
   Osaka
   Enlarge
   Osaka

   Japan has dozens of major cities, which play an important role in Japan
   culture, heritage, and economy. Those in the list of the ten most
   populous below are all prefecture capitals and Government Ordinance
   Cities except those indicated:
   No.           City            Prefecture Population
   1   Tokyo's special wards^a   Tokyo      8,390,967
   2   Yokohama                  Kanagawa   3,579,133
   3   Osaka                     Osaka      2,640,097
   4   Nagoya                    Aichi      2,214,958
   5   Sapporo                   Hokkaidō   1,882,424
   6   Kobe                      Hyōgo      1,525,389
   7   Kyoto                     Kyoto      1,474,764
   8   Fukuoka                   Fukuoka    1,400,621
   9   Kawasaki^b                Kanagawa   1,317,862
   10  Saitama                   Saitama    1,185,030

   ^a 23 municipalities. Also capital of Japan.
   ^b Government Ordinance City only.

Language

   Japan does not legally recognize an official language; however,
   Japanese is the de facto official language. Japanese courts are the
   sole location that define language use: Judicial Code Article 74 states
   "Japanese will be used in courts".

   About 99% of the population speaks Japanese as their first language.
   The Ryūkyūan languages, also part of the Japonic language family to
   which Japanese belongs, are spoken in Okinawa, but few children learn
   these languages. Ainu, the language of the indigenous minority in
   northern Japan, is moribund, with only a few elderly native speakers
   remaining in Hokkaidō. Most public and private schools require students
   to take courses in both Japanese and English.

   The Japanese language is an agglutinative language distinguished by a
   system of honorifics reflecting the hierarchical nature of Japanese
   society, with verb forms and particular vocabulary which indicate the
   relative status of speaker and listener. There is no consensus on what,
   if any, linguistic relationship Japanese has with other languages, but
   scholars continue to research the issue.

   Japanese incorporates many foreign elements. Japanese has borrowed or
   derived large amounts of vocabulary from Chinese. When non-Chinese
   foreign words are written in Japanese, they are usually done so in a
   separate alphabet called katakana. Since the end of World War II,
   Japanese has also extensively borrowed from English. The writing system
   uses kanji ( Chinese characters) and two sets of kana ( syllabaries
   based on simplified forms of Chinese characters), as well as the Roman
   alphabet and Hindu-Arabic numerals.

Religion

   The "floating" torii at Itsukushima Shrine.
   Enlarge
   The "floating" torii at Itsukushima Shrine.

   84% of Japanese people profess to believe both Shinto (the indigenous
   religion of Japan) and Buddhism. Buddhism, Taoism and Confucianism from
   China have significantly influenced Japanese beliefs and mythology.
   Religion in Japan tends to be syncretic in nature, and this results in
   a variety of practices such as parents and children celebrating Shinto
   rituals, students praying before exams, couples holding a wedding at a
   Christian church and funerals being held at Buddhist temples. A
   minority (0.7%) profess to Christianity and other religions (4.7%) like
   shamanism, Islam, and Hinduism. Since the mid-19th century, numerous
   religious sects ( Shinshūkyō) have emerged.

Education

   Compulsory education was introduced into Japan in 1872 as a result of
   the Meiji Restoration. Since 1947, compulsory education consists of
   elementary school and middle school, which lasts for 9 years (from age
   6 to age 15). Almost all children continue their education at a
   three-year senior high school, and, according to basic statics of MEXT,
   67.5% of high school graduates attend a university, junior college,
   trade school, or other post-secondary institution in 2006. Japan's
   education is very competitive especially at the college level and it
   has prestigious and large universities such as University of Tokyo,
   University of Tohoku, Keio University, Waseda University, Kyoto
   University, Hitotsubashi University, and Doshisha University.

Health

   In Japan, healthcare services are provided by national and local
   governments. Payment for personal medical services is offered through a
   universal health care insurance system that provides relative equality
   of access, with fees set by a government committee. People without
   insurance through employers can participate in a national health
   insurance program administered by local governments. Since 1973, all
   elderly persons have been covered by government-sponsored insurance.
   Patients are free to select physicians or facilities of their choice.

Culture

   A traditional Japanese dancer.
   Enlarge
   A traditional Japanese dancer.

   Japanese culture has evolved greatly over the years, from the country's
   original Jomon culture to its contemporary hybrid culture, which
   combines influences from Asia, Europe, and North America. Traditional
   Japanese arts include crafts ( ikebana, origami, ukiyo-e, dolls,
   lacquerware, pottery), performances ( bunraku, dance, kabuki, noh,
   rakugo), traditions ( games, tea ceremony, budō, architecture, gardens,
   swords), and cuisine.

   Post-war Japan has been heavily influenced by American and European
   culture which has led to the evolution of popular band music (called
   J-Pop). The fusion of traditional woodblock printing and Western art
   led to the creation of manga, a typically Japanese comic book format
   that is now popular in and even outside Japan. Manga-influenced
   animation for television and film is called anime. Video game consoles
   have prospered since the 1980s. The mascot of Nintendo, "Mario", is the
   most popular.

Cuisine

   Image:Traditional Japanese Breakfast.jpg
   Breakfast served by a ryokan (inn).

   A basic, traditional Japanese meal consists of white Japanese rice with
   accompanying tsukemono pickles as appetizers; a bowl of miso
   soup;selected or combined seafood, meat, egg, and vegetable dishes
   known as okazu; and green tea. In a traditional Japanese breakfast, for
   example, the okazu may be a grilled fish. Culturally, people start and
   finish meals with phrases of gratitude as itadakimasu and gochisōsama,
   respectively. Foods, beverages, and condiments from Japan, such as
   sushi, sashimi, ramen, sake, wasabi, sukiyaki and teriyaki are
   recognized worldwide.

Music

   Japanese music is eclectic, having borrowed instruments, scales and
   styles from neighboring cultures. Many instruments, such as the koto,
   were introduced in the ninth and tenth centuries. The accompanied
   recitative of the Noh drama dates from the fourteenth century and the
   popular folk music, with the guitarlike shamisen, from the 16th.

   Western music, introduced in the late nineteenth century, now forms an
   integral part of the culture, as evident from the profusion of J-Pop
   artists. Modern Japanese music uses western instruments, scales and
   style.

Literature

   The earliest works include two history books the Kojiki and the Nihon
   Shoki, and a poetry book Man'yōshū in the eighth century, all written
   in Chinese characters. In the early days of the Heian period, the
   system of transcription known as kana ( Hiragana and Katakana) was
   created as phonograms. The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter is considered the
   oldest Japanese narrative. An account of Heian court life is given by
   The Pillow Book, written by Sei Shōnagon while The Tale of Genji by
   Lady Murasaki is sometimes called the world's first novel.

   During the Edo Period, literature became not so much the field of the
   samurai aristocracy as that of the chōnin, the ordinary people.
   Yomihon, for example, became popular and reveals this profound change
   in the readership and authorship.

   The Meiji era saw the decline of traditional literary forms, during
   which Japanese literature integrated western influences. Natsume Sōseki
   and Mori Ōgai were the first "modern" novelists of Japan, followed by
   Akutagawa Ryūnosuke, Tanizaki Jun'ichirō, Kawabata Yasunari, Mishima
   Yukio, and more recently, Murakami Haruki. Japan has two Nobel prize
   winning authors — Kawabata Yasunari (1968) and Ōe Kenzaburō (1994).

Sports and recreation

   Sumo, a traditional Japanese sport.
   Enlarge
   Sumo, a traditional Japanese sport.

   Beginning in the twelfth century, Japan developed traditional martial
   arts known as budō, which were popular among the warrior class. These
   include judo, karate and kendō. Sumo is sometimes considered Japan's
   national sport and is one of its most popular.

   After the Meiji Restoration, many western sports were introduced and
   began to spread through the education system. These sports were
   initially stressed as a form of mental discipline, but Japanese have
   now come to enjoy them as recreational activities.

   Baseball is the most popular ball game in Japan - the professional
   baseball league in Japan was established in 1937. One of Japan's most
   famous baseball players in major league baseball is Suzuki Ichiro, who
   won a Gold Glove. Concerning football, the professional soccer league
   in Japan was established in 1992. Japan was a venue of the
   Intercontinental Cup from 1981 to 2004, and Japan co-hosted the 2002
   FIFA World Cup with South Korea. Golf is popular in Japan, as is auto
   racing, the Super GT sports car series and Formula Nippon formula
   racing.

   Each year, Japan observes the second Monday in October as Health and
   Sports Day. The date, originally October 10, commemorates the opening
   day of the 1964 Summer Olympics in Tokyo. Other major sporting events
   that Japan has hosted include the 1972 Winter Olympics in Sapporo and
   the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Japan"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
