   #copyright

Jersey

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

   Bailiwick of Jersey
   Bailliage de Jersey

   Flag of Jersey Coat of arms of Jersey
   Flag           Coat of arms
   Anthem: God Save the Queen (official)
   Ma Normandie (My Normandy) (official for occasions when distinguishing
   anthem required)
   Patron saint: St. Helier
   Location of Jersey
   Capital
   (and largest city) Saint Helier
   49°11.401′N 2°06.600′W
   Official languages English, French ( Jèrriais recognised as regional
   language)
   Government
    - Chief of state Elizabeth II, Duke of Normandy
    - Lt. Governor Lt. Gen. Andrew Ridgway
    - Bailiff Sir Philip Bailhache
    - Chief Minister Senator Frank Walker
   Status British crown dependency
    - Separation from
      mainland Normandy
   1204
    - Liberation from
      Nazi Germany
   9 May 1945
   Area
    - Total 116 km² ( 219th)
   45 sq mi
    - Water (%) 0
   Population
    - July 2006 estimate 91,084 ( 198th)
    - 2001 census 87,186
    - Density 783/km² ( 12th^2)
   2,018/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2003 estimate
    - Total $3.6 billion ( 167th)
    - Per capita $40,000 (2003 estimate) ( 6th)
   HDI  (n/a) n/a (n/a) ( n/a)
   Currency Pound sterling^1 ( GBP)
   Time zone GMT ( UTC)
    - Summer ( DST) ( UTC+1)
   Internet TLD .je
   Calling code +44-1534 (landline)
   +44-7797 (Jersey Telecom mobile)
   +44-7700 (Cable & Wireless mobile)
   ^1 The States of Jersey issue their own sterling notes and coins. See
   Jersey pound
   ^2 Rank based on population density of Channel Islands including
   Guernsey.

   The Bailiwick of Jersey ( Jèrriais: Jèrri) is a British Crown
   dependency off the coast of Normandy, France. As well as the island of
   Jersey itself, it also includes the uninhabited islands of the
   Minquiers and Ecréhous, the Pierres de Lecq and other rocks and reefs.
   Along with the Bailiwick of Guernsey it forms the grouping known as the
   Channel Islands. The defence of all these islands is the responsibility
   of the United Kingdom. However, Jersey is not part of the UK, nor the
   European Union, but is rather a separate possession of the Crown,
   comparable to the Isle of Man.

History

   Jersey history is influenced by its strategic location between the
   northern coast of France and the southern coast of England; the
   island's recorded history extends over a thousand years.

   Evidence of bronze-age and early iron-age settlements can be found in
   many locations around the island. While archaeological evidence of
   Roman influence has been found, in particular the coastal headland site
   at Le Pinacle, Les Landes, where remains of a primitive structure are
   attributed to Roman temple worship (fanum), evidence for regular Roman
   occupation has yet to be established. Formerly under the control of
   Brittany and named Angia, also spelled Agna, Jersey became subject to
   Viking influence in the 9th century, one of the "Norman Islands". The
   name for Jersey itself is sourced from a Viking heritage: the Norse
   suffix -ey for island can be found in many places around the northern
   European coasts. However the significance of the first part of the
   island's toponym is unclear. Among theories are that it derives from
   jarth (Norse: earth) or jarl, or perhaps a personal name, Geirr, to
   give "Geirr's Island". Alternatively support for a Celtic origin can be
   made with reference to the Gaulish gar- (oak), ceton (forest). It is
   also said to be a corruption of the Latin Caesarea, the Roman name for
   the island, influenced by Old English suffix -ey for "island"; this is
   plausible if regional pronunciation of Latin implied that Caesarea was
   not pronounced [kaisarea] but [tʃeːsarea], probably under the influence
   of Ecclesiastical pronunciation of Latin.

   The island was eventually annexed to the Duchy of Normandy by William
   Longsword, Duke of Normandy in 933; his descendant, William the
   Conqueror, conquered England in 1066, which led to the Duchy of
   Normandy and the kingdom of England being governed under one monarch.
   The Dukes of Normandy owned considerable estates on the island, and
   Norman families living on their estates founded many of the historical
   Norman-French Jersey family names. King John lost all his territories
   in mainland Normandy in 1204 to King Philip II Augustus, but retained
   possession of Jersey, along with Guernsey and the other Channel
   Islands; the islands have been internally self-governing since.

   Islanders became involved with the Newfoundland fisheries in the late
   16th century. In recognition for all the help given to him during his
   exile in Jersey in the 1640s, Charles II gave George Carteret, Bailiff
   and governor, a large grant of land in the American colonies, which he
   promptly named New Jersey, now part of the United States of America.

   Trade laid the foundations of prosperity, aided by neutrality between
   England and France. The Jersey way of life involved agriculture,
   fishing, shipbuilding, and production of woollen goods until 19th
   century improvements in transport links brought tourism to the Island.

   Jersey was occupied by Nazi Germany from 1 July 1940, and was held
   until 9 May 1945.

Politics

   The States building in St Helier.
   Enlarge
   The States building in St Helier.

   Jersey's legislature is the States of Jersey. It includes 53 elected
   members — 12 senators (elected for 6-year terms), 12 constables (heads
   of parishes elected for three-year terms), 29 deputies (elected for
   three-year terms); the Bailiff and the Deputy Bailiff (appointed to
   preside over the assembly and having a casting vote in favour of the
   status quo when presiding); and three non-voting members — the Dean of
   Jersey, the Attorney General, and the Solicitor General all appointed
   by the Crown. Government departments are run by a cabinet of ministers
   under a Chief Minister. The civil head of the Island is the Bailiff.

   All current States Members have been elected as independents. Formally
   constituted political parties are unfashionable, although groups of
   "like-minded members" act in concert.

   The Jersey Democratic Alliance is the only party currently having
   States Members, although these were elected as independents. The Centre
   Party (Jersey) has committed to only proposing candidates for
   Senatorial elections, though members are free to, and have, stood for
   Deputy as independents. They would remain independent in the Chamber.
   Stuart Syvret is often reported to be of the Jersey Green Party.

   The legal system is based on Norman customary law (including the
   Clameur de Haro), statute and English law; justice is administered by
   the Royal Court.

   Elizabeth II's traditional title as head of state is that of Duke of
   Normandy, but she does not hold that title formally. She reigns by her
   position as Queen over a crown dependency. Her representative in the
   island is the Lieutenant Governor, who has little but a token
   involvement in island politics. Since 2006 the incumbent Lieutenant
   Governor is Lieutenant General Andrew Ridgway.

Parishes

   Map of the parishes of Jersey

   Administratively, Jersey is divided into 12 parishes, all having access
   to the sea and named after the dedications of their ancient parish
   churches:
     * Grouville (historically Saint Martin de Grouville)
     * Saint Brelade
     * Saint Clement
     * Saint Helier
     * Saint John
     * Saint Lawrence
     * Saint Martin (historically Saint Martin le Vieux)
     * Saint Mary
     * Saint Ouen
     * Saint Peter
     * Saint Saviour
     * Trinity

   The parishes of Jersey are further divided into vingtaines (or, in St.
   Ouen, cueillettes), divisions which are historic and nowadays mostly
   used for purposes of local administration and electoral constituency.

   The Constable (or Connétable) is the head of each parish, elected at a
   public election for a three year term to run the parish and to
   represent the municipality in the States. The Procureur du Bien Public
   (two in each parish) is the legal and financial representative of the
   parish, elected at a public election (since 2003 in accordance with the
   Public Elections (Amendment) (Jersey) Law 2003; prior to that an
   Assembly of Electors of each parish elected the Procureurs in
   accordance with the Loi (1804) au sujet des assemblées paroissiales). A
   Procureur du Bien Public is elected for a mandate of three years as a
   public trustee for the funds and property of the parish and to be
   empowered to pass contract on behalf of the parish if so authorised by
   a Parish Assembly.

   Centeniers are elected at a public election within each parish for a
   term of three years to undertake policing within the parish. The
   Centenier is the only officer authorised to charge and bail offenders.
   Formerly, the senior Centenier of each parish (known as the Chef de
   Police) deputised for the Constable in the States of Jersey when the
   Constable was unable to attend a sitting of the States — this function
   has been abolished.

International relations

   Although diplomatic representation is reserved to the Crown, Jersey
   negotiates directly with foreign governments on matters within the
   competence of the States of Jersey. Jersey maintains a permanent
   non-diplomatic representation in Caen, the Maison de Jersey. A similar
   office in St. Helier represents the Conseil général of Manche and the
   Conseil régional of Basse-Normandie and hosts the Consulate of France.

   Jersey is a member of the British-Irish Council, the Commonwealth
   Parliamentary Association and the Assemblée parlementaire de la
   Francophonie. Jersey is aiming to become a full member of the
   Commonwealth in its own right.

   The Federal Court of Justice of Germany ruled on 1 July 2002 (case: II
   ZR 380/00), that under German law, for the purposes of § 110 of the
   German Civil Procedures Act (ZPO), Jersey is to be deemed part of the
   UK and part of the EU as well. The European Union classes Jersey as a
   "special territory". It is part of the Common Customs Territory.

   Jersey is currently considering its stance on the signing of European
   treaties. Should the UK sign up to the single-currency treaty, Jersey
   may decline and choose to maintain the Pound on its own, endowed as it
   is with its own treasury and economic prosperity as a result of its
   status as one of the world's largest offshore financial centres.

   In a survey carried out by Channel Television in the summer of 2000 700
   people were questioned, with 68% supporting independence from the
   United Kingdom. Senator (now Deputy) Paul le Claire lodged a projet
   calling for Jersey's independence shortly thereafter. Subsequently, the
   Jersey Law Review published an editorial and articles touching on the
   possibility of full independence.

Geography

   Satellite view of Jersey
   Enlarge
   Satellite view of Jersey

   Jersey is an island measuring 118.2 square kilometres (65,569 vergee /
   46 sq. mi.), including reclaimed land and intertidal zone. It lies in
   the English Channel, approximately 22.5 kilometres (12  nm) from the
   Cotentin Peninsula in Normandy, France, and approximately 161
   kilometres (100 mi) south of Great Britain. It is the largest and
   southernmost of the Channel Islands.

   The climate is temperate with mild winters and cool summers, it also
   averages the most sunshine per year in the British Isles. The terrain
   consists of a plateau sloping from long sandy bays in the south to
   rugged cliffs in the north. The plateau is cut by valleys running
   generally north-south.

Economy

   Jersey's economy is based on financial services, tourism, electronic
   commerce and agriculture; financial services contribute approximately
   60 per cent of the Island's economy, and the Island is recognised as
   one of the leading offshore financial centres.

   Major agricultural products are potatoes and dairy produce. The source
   of milk is Jersey cattle, a small breed of cow that has also been
   acknowledged (though not widely so) for the quality of its meat.
   Small-scale organic beef production has been reintroduced in an effort
   to diversify the industry.

   Farmers and growers often sell surplus food and flowers in boxes on the
   roadside, relying on the honesty of those who pass to drop the correct
   change into the money box and take what they want.

   On February 18, 2005 Jersey was granted Fairtrade Island status.

   The absence of VAT has led to the recent growth of the 'fulfilment'
   industry, whereby low-value luxury items, such as videos, lingerie and
   contact lenses are exported to the UK, avoiding VAT on arrival and thus
   undercutting UK prices on the same products. The States of Jersey
   announced in 2005 limits on licences granted to non-resident companies
   trading in this way.

   Duty free goods are available for purchase on travel to and from the
   Island.

   Aside from its banking and finance underpinnings Jersey also depends on
   tourism. Notable hotels include:
     * the Pomme d'Or overlooking Liberation Square in St. Helier, which
       during the Occupation served as the German Navy Headquarters and
       from whose balcony the Liberation force raised the Union Flag on
       Liberation Day, 9 May 1945;
     * the Hotel de France, formerly the Imperial and the Jesuit college,
       in St. Saviour overlooking the town of St. Helier;
     * the Hotel L'Horizon in St. Brelade's Bay.
     * La Grande Vere, in St. Helier overlooking St. Aubins Bay, with
       views of Elizabeth Castle and the Waterfront

Taxation

   Until the 20th century, the States relied on indirect taxation to
   finance the administration of Jersey. The levying of impôts (duties)
   was in the hands of the Assembly of Governor, Bailiff and Jurats until
   1921 when that body's tax raising powers were transferred to the
   Assembly of the States, leaving the Assembly of Governor, Bailiff and
   Jurats to serve simply as licensing bench for the sale of alcohol (this
   fiscal reform also stripped the Lieutenant-Governor of most of his
   effective remaining administrative functions). The Income Tax Law of
   1928 introducing income tax was the first law drafted entirely in
   English. Income tax has been levied at a flat rate of 20% for decades.

   As VAT has not been levied in the Island, luxury goods have often been
   cheaper than in the UK or in France providing an incentive for tourism
   from neighbouring countries.

   On 13 May 2005 the States of Jersey approved the introduction of a
   goods and services tax, scheduled for 2008.

Currency

   Twin cash machines at a bank in Jersey dispense a choice of Bank of
   England banknotes or Jersey banknotes
   Enlarge
   Twin cash machines at a bank in Jersey dispense a choice of Bank of
   England banknotes or Jersey banknotes

   Jersey issues its own Jersey banknotes and coins which circulate with
   UK coinage, Bank of England notes, Scottish notes and Guernsey currency
   within the Island.

Coinage

   Designs on the reverse of Jersey coins:
     * 1p Le Hocq Tower (coastal defence)
     * 2p L'Hermitage, site where Saint Helier lived
     * 5p Seymour Tower (offshore defence)
     * 10p La Pouquelaye de Faldouet (dolmen)
     * 20p La Corbière lighthouse
     * 50p Grosnez Castle (ruins)

   Pound coins are issued, but are much less widely used than pound notes.
   Designs on the reverse of Jersey pound coins include series of crests
   of the 12 parishes, and historic Jersey-built ships. The motto round
   the milled edge of Jersey pound coins is: Insula Caesarea ("island of
   Jersey" in Latin). Two pound coins are issued also, but in very small
   quantities.

Demographics

   Mont Orgueil was built in the 13th century to protect Jersey from
   French invasion
   Enlarge
   Mont Orgueil was built in the 13th century to protect Jersey from
   French invasion

   The Island plays host to large amount of people born outside Jersey;
   roughly 50% of the population are not originally from the island.

   30% of the population is concentrated in Saint Helier, site of the only
   town. Of the roughly 87,000 people in Jersey, around two fifths are of
   Jersey/Norman descent and two fifths of British (English, Scottish,
   Welsh and Northern Irish) descent. The largest minority groups in the
   island, after the British, are Portuguese (around 6% — especially
   Madeiran), Irish and Polish. The French community is also always
   present. The people of Jersey are often called Islanders, or in
   individual terms Jerseyman or Jerseywoman. Most Jersey-born people
   consider themselves British and value the special relationship between
   the British Crown and the Island.

   Religion in Jersey has a complex history and much diversity. The
   established church is the Church of England. In the countryside,
   Methodism found its traditional stronghold. A minority of Roman
   Catholic can also be found in Jersey, with two Catholic private schools
   situated in the main town of Saint Helier (De La Salle being an
   all-boys Catholic school, and Beaulieu Convant School down the road
   being an all-girls school where the sisters still have a presence in
   school life).

   Jersey, like most places in the western world, has an ageing
   population. Reasons for this change particular to Jersey are the
   emigration of young people seeking opportunities the Island cannot
   provide.

   For immigration and nationality purposes the United Kingdom generally
   treats Jersey as though it were part of the UK. However, Jersey is
   constitutionally entitled to restrict immigration by non-Jersey
   residents and maintains its own immigration and border controls.
   Population is currently controlled by restrictions on those without
   residential status purchasing or renting property in the Island.
   Although Jersey's citizens are full British citizens, an endorsement
   restricting the right of establishment in European Union states other
   than the UK is placed in the Jersey passport of British citizens
   connected solely with the Channel Islands and Isle of Man. Those who
   have a parent or grandparent born in the United Kingdom, or who have
   lived in the United Kingdom for five years, are not subject to this
   restriction.

   Censuses have been undertaken in Jersey since 1821, the most recent
   being the 2001 Census (taken 11 March on the island).

Culture

   Victor Hugo in exile, 1850s
   Enlarge
   Victor Hugo in exile, 1850s

   In the 19th century, the most spoken language was Jèrriais, the
   island's indigenous language. It is a variety of Norman. However, the
   number of Jèrriais speakers has been decreasing. There have been
   efforts to revive the language in schools. Jèrriais language is still
   spoken mostly by older people, most commonly in the country parishes.
   The highest number of declared Jèrriais speakers is in the capital.

   The dialects of Jèrriais differ in phonology and, to a lesser extent,
   lexis between parishes, with the most marked differences to be heard
   between those of the west and east. Many place names are in Jèrriais,
   and French and English place names are also to be found. Anglicisation
   of the toponymy increased apace with the migration of English people
   into the island.

   Some Neolithic carvings are the earliest works of artistic character to
   be found in Jersey. Only fragmentary wall-paintings remain from the
   rich mediaeval artistic heritage, after the wholesale iconoclasm of the
   Calvinist reformation of the 16th century.

   Printing arrived in Jersey only in the 1780s, but the Island supported
   a multitude of regular publications in French (and Jèrriais) and
   English throughout the 19th century, in which poetry, most usually
   topical and satirical, flourished. See Jèrriais literature.

   John Everett Millais, Elinor Glyn, and Wace are among Jersey's artistic
   figures. Lillie Langtry, the Jersey Lily, is the Island's most widely
   recognised cultural icon. The famous French writer, Victor Hugo, lived
   in exile in Jersey 1852-1855.

   The Island is particularly famous for the Battle of Flowers, a carnival
   held annually since 1902.

   The Island's patron saint is Saint Helier.

Food and drink

   Jersey wonders, or mèrvelles, are a favourite snack consisting of fried
   dough, especially at country fêtes. According to tradition, the success
   of cooking depends on the state of the tide.
   Enlarge
   Jersey wonders, or mèrvelles, are a favourite snack consisting of fried
   dough, especially at country fêtes. According to tradition, the success
   of cooking depends on the state of the tide.

   Seafood has traditionally been important to the cuisine of Jersey:
   mussels (called moules locally), oysters, lobster and crabs —
   especially spider crabs — ormers, and conger.

   Jersey milk being very rich, cream and butter have played a large part
   in insular cooking. (See Channel Island milk) However there is no
   indigenous tradition of cheese making, contrary to the custom of
   mainland Normandy, but some cheese is produced commercially. Jersey
   fudge, mostly imported and made with milk from overseas Jersey cattle
   herds, is a popular food product with tourists.

   Jersey Royal potatoes are the local variety of new potato, and the
   island is famous for its early crop of small potatoes from the
   south-facing côtils (steeply-sloping fields). They are eaten in a
   variety of ways, often simply boiled and served with butter.

   Apples historically were an important crop. Bourdélots are apple
   dumplings, but the most typical speciality is black butter (lé nièr
   beurre), a dark spicy spread prepared from apples, cider and spices.

   Among other traditional dishes are cabbage loaf, Jersey wonders (les
   mèrvelles), fliottes, bean crock (les pais au fou), nettle (ortchie)
   soup, vraic buns.

   Cider used to be an important export. After decline and
   near-disappearance in the late 20th century, apple production is being
   increased and promoted. Apple brandy is also produced. Some wine is
   produced.

Environment

   Three areas of land are protected for their ecological or geological
   interest as Sites of Special Interest (SSI): Les Landes, Les Blanches
   Banques and La Lande du Ouest. A large area of intertidal zone is
   designated as a Ramsar site. Jersey is the home of Durrell Wildlife
   (formerly known as the Jersey Zoological Park) and Jersey Wildlife
   Preservation Trust, founded by the naturalist, zookeeper, and author
   Gerald Durrell.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jersey"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
