   #copyright

John Sentamu

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Religious figures and
leaders

   The pectoral cross Sentamu is seen here wearing is decorated with
   images and words associated with Oscar Romero.
   Enlarge
   The pectoral cross Sentamu is seen here wearing is decorated with
   images and words associated with Oscar Romero.

   John Tucker Mugabi Sentamu, PhD, (born 10 June 1949) is the 97th
   Archbishop of York, Metropolitan of the province of York, and Primate
   of England. He is the second most senior cleric in the Church of
   England, after the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the first member of an
   ethnic minority to serve as an archbishop in the Church of England.

Biography

   John Sentamu was born in 1949 in a village near Kampala, Uganda, the
   sixth of thirteen children. He was educated for the law at Makerere
   University, Kampala, and practised as an advocate of the High Court of
   Uganda. Sentamu was appointed a High Court judge in 1973 at the age of
   24 by the newly-ascendent Idi Amin; his judicial independence earned
   the dictator's ire, however, and he suffered threats and physical
   violence before fleeing to the United Kingdom in 1974.

   He read theology at Selwyn College, Cambridge ( BA 1976, MA MPhil 1979,
   PhD 1984), and trained for the priesthood at Ridley Hall, Cambridge,
   being ordained a priest in 1979. He worked as assistant chaplain at
   Selwyn College, as chaplain at a remand centre, and as curate, priest
   and vicar in a series of parish appointments before his consecration in
   1996 as Bishop of Stepney (a suffragan bishop in the Diocese of
   London). It was during this time that he served as advisor to the
   Stephen Lawrence Judicial Enquiry. In 2002 he chaired the Damilola
   Taylor review. That same year he was appointed Bishop of Birmingham,
   where his ministry, according to the Archbishop of Canterbury, Rowan
   Williams, was praised by "Christians of all backgrounds".

   On 17 June 2005 the Prime Minister's office announced his translation
   to York as the 97th Archbishop . He was formally elected by the Canons
   of York Minster on 21 June, legally installed as Archbishop in London
   on 5 October, and enthroned at York Minster on 30 November 2005 (the
   feast of Saint Andrew), at a ceremony with African singing and dancing
   and contemporary music, with the Archbishop himself playing African
   drums during the service .

Views

   In an interview a week before his enthronement he, among other things,
   called for a rediscovery of English pride and cultural identity,
   warning that zeal for multiculturalism had sometimes "seemed to imply,
   wrongly for me, 'let other cultures be allowed to express themselves
   but do not let the majority culture at all tell us its glories, its
   struggles, its joys, its pains'." (The Times amongst others) Just as at
   Birmingham, Sentamu has expressed a desire to be known informally as
   Archbishop for York (rather than of).

   Early in 2006, Archbishop Sentamu was featured prominently in the
   British press for his comments on what he saw as injustices over the
   treatment of alleged prisoners of war in Guantanamo Bay.

   For a week, starting August 14, 2006, Archbishop Sentamu camped in York
   Minster, foregoing food in solidarity with those impacted by the Middle
   East conflict.

   One of Sentamu's favourite references is to the " Chocolate Trinity" of
   God-fearing Quaker capitalists who were involved in developing the
   chocolate industry:
     * George Cadbury: "More than just a sweet man"

     * Joseph Rowntree: … an adventurer to the end of life, forever
       peering forward, never content with what had been achieved"

     * Joseph Storrs Fry II (J.S.Fry): " … the very model of the pre-1860
       Quaker, with his plain dress a relic of the past and a reflection
       of his narrow conservative approach to both religion and business."

   (See and also his Ebor Lecture in York Minster ( 13 September 2006).
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Sentamu"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
