   #copyright

Jonah Lomu

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Sports and games people

                     Jonah Lomu
      The cover of Jonah Lomu's autobiography
       The cover of Jonah Lomu's autobiography
   Full name           Jonah Tali Lomu
   Date of birth       May 12, 1975 (age 31)
   Place of birth      Auckland, New Zealand
   Height              1.96 m
   Weight              120 kg
   Rugby union career
   Position            Wing
   Provincial/State sides              Caps (points)
   2006-
   2004-05
   2000-03
   1994-99             North Harbour
                       Cardiff Blues
                       Wellington
                       Counties Manukau   3
                                       10
                                       21
                                       28  (0)
                                           (?)
                                           (?)
                                           (?)
       correct as of 9 September 2006.
   Super Rugby
   2000-03
   1999
   1996-98             Hurricanes
                       Chiefs
                       Blues             29
                                       8
                                       22  (?)
                                           (?)
                                           (?)
   Current local club: Massey
       correct as of 9 September 2006.
   National team(s)
   1994-2002           New Zealand       73 (215)
         correct as of 11 Nov 2006.
   Other Information
   School  attended    Wesley College

   Jonah Tali Lomu (born May 12, 1975) is a New Zealand rugby union
   footballer who has played 73 times (63 caps) as an All Black after
   debuting in 1994. Lomu was born in Auckland, New Zealand of Tongan
   descent. He grew up in South Auckland and attended Wesley College,
   Pukekohe. He is generally regarded as the first true global superstar
   of rugby union, and one of the sport's most intimidating players on the
   pitch, and has had a huge impact on the game.

   Lomu burst onto the international rugby scene during the 1995 World Cup
   in South Africa. At one time Lomu was considered 'rugby union's biggest
   drawcard', swelling attendances at any match where he appeared. He has
   played for several provincial teams, in the National Provincial
   Championship (NPC) and Super Rugby competitions. These included the
   Auckland Blues, Waikato Chiefs, and later the Wellington Lions and
   Hurricanes. He is making a comeback after undergoing a kidney
   transplant in 2004. He has been married to Fiona Taylor since 2003.

Physical attributes

   Lomu's physique was particularly suited for rugby as he is large, fast,
   and strong - qualities he augments with aggression, skill, and an
   intimidating presence on the field. At 1.96 metres (6 foot 5
   inches/195.58 centermetres), Lomu is as tall as most locks, and at 119
   kilograms (19.5 stone/273 pounds) is as heavy as most prop forwards.
   Despite his size he was, when healthy, still able to run 100 metres
   (109.4 yards) in 10.8 seconds.

   At school his sprint training included running around the field and
   pulling a lawn-roller with a rope tied around his waist. Lomu played
   rugby league until the age of fourteen. While at Wesley and being
   coached by Chris Grinter, Lomu became a mobile loose forward in the
   college's First XV. He was soon noticed by provincial rugby selectors,
   and joined the Counties Manukau NPC team side. Lomu was also selected
   for national age-grade sides, representing New Zealand under-17 in
   1991-92 and New Zealand Secondary Schools in 1992-93.

Early career

   Lomu represented New Zealand in the national under-19 side in 1993, as
   well as the under-21 side the following year. He first came to
   international attention at the 1994 Hong Kong Sevens tournament, as
   part of a fearsome team including Eric Rush, and Christian Cullen.

   At the age of 19 years and 45 days Jonah Lomu became the youngest All
   Black test player as he debuted on the wing against France in 1994. The
   match was played at Lancaster Park in Christchurch, and the All Blacks
   lost 22 points to three. Lomu's performance was middling - but the best
   was yet to come. He had however performed well enough to ensure his
   selection the following week, in the second of two tests against
   France. The match was played at Eden Park in Auckland, and France won
   again, 23 to 20.

1995 World Cup

   Despite just the two All Black caps, Lomu was included in the squad for
   the World Cup. Jonah stunned international rugby audiences (and
   unsuspecting players) at the 1995 World Cup, when he scored seven tries
   in five matches, including four in the semi-finals against England. In
   his first ever World Cup match, against Ireland in Johannesburg, he
   scored two tries in the 43 to 19 win. The following match against
   Wales, Lomu was replaced during the game, and did not score any tries
   in the 34 to 9 victory. He was rested for the final pool match against
   Japan. In the quarter finals, Jonah scored a try in the 48 to 30 win
   over Scotland at Loftus Versfeld. He shocked the 51,000 that packed
   into Newlands in Cape Town to see the semi-final against England, as he
   notched up four tries in the 45 to 29 defeat of the English.

   His style of play at times defied description; New Zealand commentator,
   Keith Quinn, was famously reduced to gasps as Lomu devastated England's
   backline. Before the 1995 game on being asked how England planned to
   contain him, Will Carling told reporters 'His legs are the same
   thickness as anybody elses, I'm sure he'll go down just the same.'
   After the game, Carling was quoted as saying: 'He is a freak, and the
   sooner he goes away the better'. Lomu's attacking style was one of pure
   power; he had a tendency to run straight into or over any defender with
   the misfortune to get in his way. When at the peak of his playing
   ability, he defeated up to five players on the way to the tryline.

   Following the win over England, the All Blacks entered what would
   become an epic World Cup final match at Ellis Park against the
   Springboks, but despite his efforts, Lomu could not score a try against
   the South African side. The game went to the hosts, who scored a
   drop-goal in extra time to sink the All Blacks 15-12.

1996-1998

   In the first match after the World Cup loss to South Africa, the All
   Blacks took on Australia at home at Eden Park. Lomu scored New
   Zealand's only try in the match; which they won 28 points to 16. In the
   return match, held at the Sydney Football Stadium to decide the
   Bledisloe Cup, the All Blacks won 34 to 23 despite trailing at
   half-time, with Lomu scoring a try. Lomu's scoring for New Zealand
   continued later that year when the All Blacks took on Italy in Bologna,
   with Lomu contributing two tries to the victory. Lomu also played
   against the French Barbarians in November in Toulon, as well as two
   matches against French selections. Lomu played in the first test
   against France in Toulouse, which was won through penalty goals, as
   well as the subsequent match against a French Selection, in which Lomu
   scored a pair of tries. He scored a try in the second and final test
   against France in Paris.

   Jonah Lomu
   During the 1990s Lomu was responsible for changing rugby, he was the
   face of rugby and in the process became the sport’s first true
   superstar...There had been no-one like him before and there has been
   no-one since

   Jonah Lomu

   — Kris Babicci, Chief Executive of Standard Chartered Bank, Qatar

   Prior to the start of the first Tri Nations Series, Lomu played for the
   All Blacks in matches against Samoa and Scotland, scoring in the
   Scottish match. The All Blacks also hosted Australia in Wellington;
   crushing the Wallabies 43 to six, with Lomu getting one of the tries.
   The 1996 Tri Nations was the first of its kind, and launched with the
   advent of professionalism in rugby. A close victory over South Africa
   in Christchurch was followed by a 32 to 25 win over the Wallabies, in
   which Lomu scored. The wins ensured the All Blacks became the first
   ever Tri Nations champions. Post-Tri Nations, Lomu played three other
   matches for the All Blacks that year; against Currie Cup sides in South
   Africa; Eastern Province, Western Transvaal and Griqualand West.

   At the end of 1996 he was diagnosed with a rare and serious kidney
   disorder, which saw him take time off from the sport. As such he did
   not play in the 1997 Tri Nations Series, but was included in the All
   Blacks tour of the northern hemisphere at the end of the year. Lomu
   played in the two warm up matches, scoring tries against Wales 'A' and
   Emerging England. He played the first test against England at Old
   Trafford, as well as the test against Wales at Wembley Stadium, and the
   second match against England, though he did not score in any of the
   three games.

   At the 1998 Commonwealth Games in Kuala Lumpur he won a gold medal
   representing New Zealand in the Sevens Rugby event. Following the test
   series in England, the English rugby team came to New Zealand in June
   the following year for a two test series. Lomu played in both of the
   matches, scoring in the first, which was a 64 to 22 win in Dunedin,
   which was followed by a 40 to 10 win. The 1998 Tri Nations Series did
   not go as planned for the All Blacks, as they lost all four games and
   finished at the bottom of the table.

1999 and the World Cup

   Lomu's 1999 international season kicked off with a warm-up match
   against New Zealand 'A', which was followed by a game against Samoa in
   which Lomu scored one of the All Blacks' nine tries. Lomu came on late
   in the first game of the 1999 Tri Nations Series, which was a huge 28
   to nil win over South Africa, and at one point took eight men to bring
   him down. He again started from the bench in the subsequent game
   against Australia which the All Blacks also won. Lomu started from the
   bench in the following match against the Springboks in Pretoria, though
   he came in early, in the 34 to 18 win. He was introduced at near
   half-time in the final Tri Nations game against Australia in Sydney,
   though the game was characterised by New Zealand errors, and Australia
   won the rainy affair, in front of 107,042 supporters. Despite the loss,
   the All Blacks were crowned Tri Nations champions.

   He scored eight tries at the 1999 World Cup. In New Zealand's first
   pool match of the tournament against Tonga he scored two tries, scoring
   again in the one of his finest matches in pool play against England.
   Lomu scored his second double of the tournament in the third and final
   pool match against Italy. The All Blacks, finishing atop of their pool
   proceeded to the quarter-finals, where they defeated Scotland, with
   Lomu added one of New Zealand's four tries. Lomu scored twice in the
   semi-final match against France, though it was not enough to see them
   through to the final, as France went onto win 43 to 31. Through his
   career, Lomu has scored 8 tries against England — more than any other
   All Black. Lomu also holds an unbeaten record of 15 tries in World Cup
   tournaments. Following the World Cup, there was speculation that Lomu
   would be moving to the NFL, or the English premiership, with both the
   Saracens F.C. and Worcester Rugby publicly saying they would make an
   offer to him. None of the speculation materialised and Lomu stayed in
   New Zealand.

2000-2003

   After playing in the 100+ victory over Tonga, he and Tana Umaga scored
   five tries between them in the subsequent match against Scotland. One
   of his tries was a characteristic bulldozing effort down the wing,
   leaving Scottish defenders in his wake. In the opening match of the
   2000 Tri Nations Series, the All Blacks raced out to a 21 to nil lead,
   which had the potential to be 28, had George Gregan not stopped Lomu
   from scoring one of his own. Australia amazingly fought back, and with
   minutes remaining, both sides had scored five tries each. The world
   record rugby crowd of 109,874 was treated to the highest scoring match
   ever between the two sides. With just minutes remaining, the Wallabies
   led 35 to 34; until Lomu "brushed past a desperate Stephen Larkham to
   tip-toe down the line and score the winning try".

   The match was followed by a victory over South Africa, and then a
   re-match of the thrilling Bledisloe Cup game, which Australia won by
   just a single point, 24 to 23. A barn-storming Lomu was stopped short
   of the line early in the second half in the final match against South
   Africa. The Springboks eventually won, 46 to 40. The All Blacks
   finished second on the table, with Australia winning the Tri Nations.
   He played in one other test that year; against France at Stade de
   France in November, which the All Blacks won 39 to 26.

   Lomu also led the New Zealand Sevens team to victory at the 2001 Sevens
   World Cup, filling in for Rush, who suffered a broken leg during the
   competition. In the lead up to the 2001 Tri Nations Series the All
   Blacks played Argentina and France at home, Lomu scoring a try in the
   French match. Despite causing havoc for the Springboks, no tries were
   scored in the opening match of the Tri Nations, which was won on
   penalty goals by the All Blacks. Lomu played his 50th test for the All
   Blacks at the Carisbrook 'House of Pain', scoring a try in the second
   minute of play. The Wallabies spoiled the party however, winning 23 to
   15. This was followed by a win over South Africa, and loss to the
   Wallabies at Stadium Australia.

   At the end of the year, the All Blacks played Ireland at Lansdowne Road
   in Dublin, with Lomu being a central figure in the 40 to 29 win;
   setting up Aaron Mauger for his debut try, and taking an inside pass to
   blast through for one of his own. The All Blacks end of season tour
   continued at Murrayfield in Edinburgh, where they defeated Scotland 37
   to six, with Lomu contributing one try. In the final match of the tour,
   the All Blacks played Argentina at the River Plate Stadium. Lomu put
   the All Blacks in front after Argentina took an early lead, with Lomu
   brushing off four defenders to score. The match was in the end won by
   New Zealand, 24 to 20.

   In his first test of 2002, he came off the bench in the second half to
   score a try in a match against Italy. He was again injected into play
   from the bench in the first of a two test series against Ireland in New
   Zealand; setting up the All Blacks second try coming on in the last
   fifteen minutes of play. Lomu was back at his usual starting position
   for the second test against the Irish, which New Zealand won 40 points
   to eight. Lomu did not score in the subsequent match against Fiji;
   though he did however make a trademark run down the wing, setting up
   Christian Cullen's third try in the match. Lomu came off the bench in
   the All Blacks first game of the 2002 Tri Nations Series against South
   Africa, though he did not play in the rest of the tournament.

   He was however back in his starting position on the wing for a game
   against England in November; which Lomu ended up scoring a double,
   though it was not enough to see a New Zealand victory, with England
   winning 31 to 28. The subsequent match against France resulted in a
   draw, the first between the two nations in 96 years. The last match of
   the end of season tour was against Wales, which the All Blacks won 43
   to 17.

Health issues

   At the end of 1996 Lomu was diagnosed as having nephrotic syndrome, a
   rare and serious kidney disorder. His rugby union career went on hold
   whilst the disorder was treated. In May 2003, the NZRFU announced that
   Lomu had been put on dialysis three times a week due to deterioration
   in his kidney function. Side effects of Lomu's dialysis treatment led
   to severe nerve damage in his feet and legs; his doctors warned him
   that he faced life in a wheelchair if a kidney transplant was not
   performed soon.

   Late in March 2004, Lomu was quoted by a Hong Kong newspaper to the
   effect that a suitable live kidney donor had been found, and that he
   would have transplant surgery sometime during 2004. However, the former
   All Blacks team physician who was overseeing Lomu's treatment quickly
   denied the report. Nonetheless, at the end of July 2004 it was reported
   that Lomu had indeed undergone a kidney transplant on Tuesday, July 28,
   in Auckland, New Zealand. The kidney was in fact donated by Wellington
   radio presenter Grant Kereama. Lomu soon announced his intention to
   train for his rugby union renaissance in June 2005.

Comeback quest

   In January 2005 he announced his intentions to lead a team against
   Martin Johnson's invitational XV on June 4, 2005, at Twickenham. He
   scored a try in the first half of the Johnson testimonial, but injured
   his shoulder in the process and did not return for the second half,
   dampening an otherwise encouraging first appearance. As it turned out,
   his injury was more serious than originally thought; he underwent
   surgery on the shoulder that caused him to miss the 2005 NPC season.

   Before returning to professional rugby, he needed special clearance
   from the World Anti-Doping Agency, as one of the anti-rejection drugs
   he must take is on the WADA list of banned substances. On April 8,
   2005, he signed a two-year contract to play for the New Zealand first
   division provincial team North Harbour in the NPC.

   On the 9 August 2005 he accepted a coaching position at North Harbour,
   with North Harbour agreed to allow him to play overseas during the NPC
   offseason, so Lomu signed with the Cardiff Blues of the Celtic League
   and began play in Wales in December that year,, though he would then
   return to North Harbour for the 2006 NPC season. Lomu made his first
   appearance in a competitive match since his transplant on December 10,
   in Cardiff's away Heineken Cup fixture against Italian club Calvisano.
   He started the match and played 60 minutes, although he did not score,
   he made a key line break that led to Cardiff's first try in their 25-10
   win.

   One week later he made his home debut for Cardiff at Cardiff Arms Park
   and played for the whole match. Again, he did not get onto the
   scoresheet but his presence was enough to create space for other
   players to score in a 43-16 win over Calvisano. In front of a record
   home crowd, Lomu scored his first try for Cardiff on December 27, 2005,
   with a man-of-the-match performance during a Celtic League 41-23 win
   against the Newport Gwent Dragons. In early 2006 whilst he had been
   sidelined while he concentrated on gaining speed and strength, stating
   that "I have now lost between 10 and 11 kilos". He got his first start
   since January against Border Reivers on Saturday, April 15, but broke
   his ankle as a result of a cover tackle against him four minutes from
   time. He was denied a try, but managed to get the ball away for Mark
   Lewis to score the Blues sixth try in their 46-11 win. He was estimated
   to be out for six weeks, as reported by his manager and wife, Fiona
   Lomu, meaning the end of his Celtic League season.

   After three seasons of absence from rugby in New Zealand, Lomu played
   for Massey against Marist in the North Harbour club competition. Lomu
   was on for 30 minutes, making a blocking run before he twisted his
   right ankle and was subsequently replaced. Lomu said that it was "a
   small step" in part of his comeback. He is aiming to return to the
   National Provincial Championship and reclaim his All Blacks jersey for
   the 2007 World Cup. It was speculated in the media that Lomu may play
   for North Harbour in third round of the 2006 Air New Zealand Cup,
   though officials did not confirm anything. Lomu ended up running out
   for North Harbour in round four, in a match against Wellington, playing
   in the last 26 minutes of the game. Harbour won the match 31-16. Lomu
   said after the match "For me it's a dream come true...I've always said
   this is my goal - to come back and play in New Zealand." However he has
   now ended his hopes of returning to play with the New Zealand All
   Blacks after not being signed with a New Zealand Super 14 Team,
   therefore ruling him out for the 2007 Rugby World Cup In France. Before
   Lomu failed to be signed by any franchise, Lomu was demoted to the
   North Harbour 2nd XV. Lomu stated he was disappointed by his failure in
   not getting a Super 14 contract, but that he had not failed himself. It
   was subsequently speculated that Lomu may play in Australia in 2007 for
   one of the new national competition clubs.

   On October 16th 2006 it was reported that Lomu was close to switching
   codes and signing for the Gold Coast Titans, a side in Australia's
   National Rugby League competition. He was offered a relatively small
   contract of a hundred thousand dollars. However, the deal did not
   materialise as Lomu was unable to reconcile his contracts based on him
   playing rugby union to playing in the NRL.

   On 5th November 2006, the BBC reported that Lomu was considering a
   return to Welsh rugby.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jonah_Lomu"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
