   #copyright

Jordanhill railway station

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Railway transport

                              Jordanhill
                               Location
   Place             Jordanhill
   Local authority   City of Glasgow
                              Operations
   Station code      JOR
   Managed by        First ScotRail
   Platforms in use  2
   Annual entry/exit 0.281 million *
                     Passenger Transport Executive
   PTE               SPT
                                History
   1 August 1887     Opened
                  National Rail - UK railway stations

   A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T
   U V W X Y Z
   * based on sales of tickets in 2004/05 financial year which end or
   originate at Jordanhill. Disclaimer (PDF)

   Jordanhill railway station is a side platformed suburban railway
   station in the Jordanhill area in the West End of Glasgow, Scotland.
   The station, which is governed by Transport Scotland and managed by
   First ScotRail, lies on the Argyle Line and the North Clyde Line. It is
   located near the Jordanhill Campus of the University of Strathclyde and
   sits atop Crow Road, an important western thoroughfare in Glasgow and
   the main route to the Clyde Tunnel. The station is five stops and
   eleven minutes journey time from Glasgow Central on the Argyle Line.
   Trains on the North Clyde Line pass through without stopping at the
   station.

History

   The station opened on 1 August 1887 as part of the Glasgow, Yoker and
   Clydebank Railway. Construction of the station structure was not
   completed until 1895, with modular-design wooden buildings, commonly
   seen on the new suburban railway lines, being built on both platforms.
   The station is located on part of the former site of brick and tile
   works, Jordanhill being an area of artisans and miners until the close
   of the 19th century. The railway station arrived just as much of the
   local industry was declining, giving residents, who previously had to
   walk to Hillhead or Partick to find transport into Glasgow, proper
   access to the city centre.

   The station's opening effectively filled a gap in provision, as lines
   in the area had already been constructed; the Whiteinch and Stobcross
   Railways both opened in 1874, but no station was constructed on these
   lines at Jordanhill. A new link allowed services to Whiteinch Victoria
   Park to begin in 1897, but they ceased in 1951 and the link was closed
   to freight in 1967. The route of the link has been converted into a
   nature walk from Victoria Park to Jordanhill station, running alongside
   the existing line for approximately half its length.

   On 15 January 1898, a man named J. Johnstone, a member of the Whiteinch
   Harriers running club, was killed while attempting to run across the
   line west of the station. A small lead memorial stood on the spot for
   many years. The freight line saw near-disaster on 28 December 1932,
   when seventeen wagons laden with coal ran away on a slight incline on
   the sidings operated by the Great Western Steam Laundry; they ran into
   other wagons, derailing nine and spilling coal over the line, seriously
   disrupting passenger traffic.

   A serious accident occurred on 28 April 1980, when a three-coach train
   carrying 80 passengers from Dalmuir to Motherwell derailed at the
   Hyndland junction, just after leaving Jordanhill. All the bogies on the
   leading coach left the rails, causing fifteen people (nine women and
   six men) to be injured seriously enough for them to be taken to the
   Western Infirmary.

Plans for rebuilding

   In 1998, Strathclyde Passenger Transport (SPT) undertook a study into
   the possible relocation of the station west to Westbrae Drive. A
   December 2002 report from the Scottish Executive included this station
   as part of their High Resource Scenario, estimating the project cost at
   approximately £2 million (USD 3.5 million). By 2004, SPT had identified
   this station as one of their top three priorities, and Glasgow City
   Council had identified it as a "main priority".

   An alternative proposal would keep the existing station open, but with
   many services calling only at a new Westbrae Drive station. This
   proposal was backed in August 2001 by Charlie Gordon, then leader of
   Glasgow City Council, who said that having a second station in
   Jordanhill would assist students at the nearby Jordanhill campus of the
   University of Strathclyde. The proposed new station would have been
   only roughly 500 yards (460 m) away.

   If Glasgow has a successful bid for the 2014 Commonwealth Games,
   Jordanhill Station will be among those rebuilt, through a £300 million
   transport legacy plan.

   The station at Jordanhill is to be rebuilt, one of six new stations in
   the west of Scotland, according to an announcement made on 19 May 2006
   by SPT chief executive Ron Culley.

Services

   The name sign identifying Jordanhill station. The sign highlights the
   primary destinations: Glasgow Central, Helensburgh, and Balloch.
   Enlarge
   The name sign identifying Jordanhill station. The sign highlights the
   primary destinations: Glasgow Central, Helensburgh, and Balloch.

   As part of the Argyle Line, the station is used — along with Glasgow
   Central and Anderston — by those commuting to and from Central Glasgow,
   near the heart of its business and financial district. The typical
   hourly service from the station is four trains per hour to Dalmuir via
   Clydebank, two trains to Motherwell via Glasgow Central and two trains
   to Springburn via Glasgow Queen Street. In SRA's 2002/3 financial year,
   85,861 people boarded trains at Jordanhill station, and 94,613
   disembarked, making it the 1029th busiest station in the United
   Kingdom, and 25th busiest on the Argyle Line in 2003.

   The station no longer has a staffed ticket counter, but it contains a
   ticket machine, one of an initial batch of ten installed by SPT in late
   2003 and early 2004 as part of a drive to curb fare dodging, which was
   estimated to be costing the company £2 million a year. Both platforms
   are elevated and each has a wheelchair ramp. There is a connecting
   footbridge between the two platforms.

In the area

   Jordanhill station is located near the Jordanhill Campus of the
   University of Strathclyde.
   Enlarge
   Jordanhill station is located near the Jordanhill Campus of the
   University of Strathclyde.

   The Jordanhill Campus of the University of Strathclyde, which hosts the
   Faculty of Education, is located nearby. Several schools are also in
   the area, including Jordanhill School, Broomhill Primary, St Thomas
   Aquinas; as well as a Territorial Army centre. For the later part of
   the 1980s and the early part of the 1990s, a huge Jolly Giant toy
   centre lay just across Crow Road, and was a major local attraction. It
   closed in 199X and after housing a discount clothing store for a few
   years it is now an Arnold Clark Volkswagen car dealership.

   Backing onto platform 2 is a Scout hall, home to the 72nd Scout Troop.

   There are two sports facilities accessible from the station:
     * New Anniesland, a rugby and cricket playing field is home to the
       Glasgow Academicals Sports Club, and the Glasgow Academy.
     * Old Anniesland, home to The High School of Glasgow and the GHK
       Sports club.

   Glasgow Hawks rugby union team predominantly play at Old Anniesland,
   but occaisionally play at New Anniesland.

Gallery

   Bridge over Crow Road, showing the old Strathclyde Transport logo.

   Platform one, looking east towards Hyndland.

   The automated Scheidt & Bachmann Ticket XPress machine, one of the
   original batch of ten of this type in the SPT system. As of August
   2006, there are 37 of these at 26 First ScotRail stations.

   Satellite image of the area, with the location of the station marked.
   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jordanhill_railway_station"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
