   #copyright

Jordan

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; Middle Eastern
Countries

   SOS Children works in Jordan. For more information see SOS Children in
   Jordan
                المملكة الأردنية الهاشمية
   Al-Mamlakah al-Urdunniyyah al-Hāšimiyyah
   Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan

   Flag of Jordan Coat of arms of Jordan
   Flag           Coat of arms
   Anthem: عاش المليك
   As-salam al-malaki al-urdoni  ( transliteration)^1
   "Long live the King"
   Location of Jordan
   Capital
   (and largest city)    Amman
                         31°57′N 35°56′E
    Official languages   Arabic
   Government            Constitutional monarchy
    - King               Abdullah II
    - Prime Minister     Marouf al-Bakhit
       Independence      from the League of Nations mandate administered by the
                         United Kingdom
    - Date               25 May 1946
                                      Area
    - Total              89,342 km² ( 112th)
                         34,495 sq mi
    - Water (%)          negligible
                                   Population
    - July 2005 estimate 5,350,000 ( 106th)
    - 2003 census        4,755,000
    - Density            64/km² ( 131st)
                         166/sq mi
        GDP ( PPP)       2005 estimate
    - Total              $27.96 billion ( 97th)
    - Per capita         $4,825 ( 103rd)
        HDI  (2003)      0.753 (medium) ( 90th)
         Currency        Jordanian dinar ( JOD)
         Time zone       UTC+2 ( UTC+2)
    - Summer ( DST)      UTC+3 ( UTC+3)
       Internet TLD      .jo
       Calling code      +962
   ^1 Also serves as the Royal anthem.

   Jordan (Arabic: الأردنّ ‎, transliterated as Al-Urdunn), officially the
   Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (Arabic: المملكة الأردنية الهاشمية ), is an
   Arab country in the Middle East. It is bordered by Syria to the north,
   Iraq to the north-east, Saudi Arabia to the east and south, and Israel
   to the west. It shares with Israel the coastlines of the Dead Sea, and
   the Gulf of Aqaba with Israel, Saudi Arabia, and Egypt.

History

   The ancient city of Petra.
   Enlarge
   The ancient city of Petra.

Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan

   With the break-up of the Ottoman Empire at the end of World War I, the
   League of Nations created French Mandate Syria and British Mandate
   Palestine. 80% of the British Mandate of Palestine was East of the
   Jordan river, or " Transjordan" (as opposed to " Cisjordan"). In 1921,
   the British gave semi-autonomous control of Transjordan to the
   Hashemite family, who had lost their civil war with the House of Saud
   for control of Mecca and Medina.

   The Hashemites continued to rule Transjordan until after World War II.
   In 1946, the British requested that the United Nations approve an end
   to British Mandate rule in Transjordan Palestine. Following this
   approval, the Parliament proclaimed King Abdullah the first ruler of
   the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.

   In 1950, Transjordan annexed the West Bank, which it kept under control
   after the armistice that followed the Arab League's war against Israel
   upon its declaration of independence in 1948. The annexation was
   recognised only by the United Kingdom.

   Following the formation of the United Arab Republic by Egypt and Syria,
   and the Iraqi Revolution in 1958, Jordanian trade routes and Iraqi oil
   supply were cut. Consequently, Jordan had to request aid from the
   United States and the United Kingdom, which prevented escalations
   between Jordan and the UAR (see Conflict between the United Arab
   Republic and Jordan).

   In 1965, there was an exchange of land between Saudi Arabia and Jordan.
   Jordan gave up a relatively large area of inland desert in return for a
   small piece of sea-shore near Aqaba.

   Jordan signed a mutual defense pact in May 1967 with Egypt, and it
   participated in the June 1967 war against Israel along with Syria,
   Egypt, and Iraq. During the war, Jordan lost the West Bank and East
   Jerusalem to Israel (the western sector having been under Israeli
   control). In 1988, Jordan renounced all claims to the West Bank but
   retained an administrative role pending a final settlement, and its
   1994 treaty with Israel allowed for a continuing Jordanian role in
   Muslim and Christian holy places in Jerusalem. The United Nations
   considers the West Bank to be territory occupied by Israel and believes
   that its final status should be determined through direct negotiations
   among the parties concerned on the basis of UN Security Council
   Resolution 242 and UN Security Council Resolution 338.

Refugees and Black September

   The 1967 war led to a dramatic increase in the number of Palestinians,
   especially from the West Bank, living in Jordan. Its Palestinian
   refugee population – 700,000 in 1966 – grew by another 300,000 from the
   West Bank. The period following the 1967 war saw an upsurge in the
   power and importance of Palestinian resistance elements (fedayeen) in
   Jordan. The heavily armed fedayeen constituted a growing threat to the
   sovereignty and security of the Hashemite state, and open fighting
   erupted in June 1970. The battle in which Palestinian fighters from
   various Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) groups were expelled
   from Jordan is commonly known as Black September.
   King Abdullah I.
   Enlarge
   King Abdullah I.

   Other Arab governments attempted to work out a peaceful solution, but
   by September, continuing fedayeen actions in Jordan – including the
   destruction of three international airliners hijacked by the Popular
   Front for the Liberation of Palestine and held in the desert east of
   Amman – prompted the government to take action to regain control over
   its territory and population. In the ensuing heavy fighting, a Syrian
   tank force invaded northern Jordan to support the fedayeen but
   subsequently retreated. It is said by some people, such as Ahmad
   Jubreel, that King Hussein has asked the help from Israel, then Israel
   threatened that it will invade Jordan if Syria internvenes. By 22
   September, Arab foreign ministers meeting at Cairo had arranged a
   cease-fire beginning the following day. Sporadic violence continued,
   however, until Jordanian forces led by Habis Al-Majali and with the
   help of the Iraqi forces (which had basis in Jordan after the war of
   1967) won a decisive victory over the fedayeen in July 1971, expelling
   them from the country.

   At the Rabat summit conference in 1974, Jordan agreed, along with the
   rest of the Arab League, that the PLO was the "sole legitimate
   representative of the Palestinian people", thereby relinquishing to
   that organization its role as representative of the West Bank
   Palestinians.

Post Black September and Peace Treaty

   No fighting occurred along the 1967 Jordan River cease-fire line during
   the October 1973 Arab-Israeli war, but Jordan sent a brigade to Syria
   to fight Israeli units on Syrian territory. Jordan did not participate
   in the Gulf War of 1990-91. In 1991, Jordan agreed, along with Syria,
   Lebanon, and Palestinian fedayeen representatives, to participate in
   direct peace negotiations with Israel at the Madrid Conference,
   sponsored by the U.S. and Russia. It negotiated an end to hostilities
   with Israel and signed a declaration to that effect on July 25, 1994
   (see Washington Declaration). As a result, an Israeli-Jordanian peace
   treaty was concluded on October 26, 1994. Following the outbreak of
   Israel-Palestinian Authority fighting in September 2000, the Jordanian
   government offered its good offices to both parties. Jordan has since
   sought to remain at peace with all of its neighbors.

Recent events

   On November 9, 2005, Jordan experienced three simultaneous bombings at
   hotels in Amman. At least 57 people died and 115 were wounded. "
   Al-Qaeda in Iraq", a group led by terrorist Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, a
   native Jordanian, claimed responsibility.

   On September 4, 2006, a 38-year-old deranged zealot, and a known
   criminal, took a pistol to a Roman amphitheatre in the capital of Amman
   and proceeded to shoot at a group of Western tourists. One British man
   was killed and five others tourists wounded, including a Jordanian
   tourist security guard.

Politics

   King Abdullah II, Jordanian Head of State.
   Enlarge
   King Abdullah II, Jordanian Head of State.

Constitution

   Jordan is a constitutional monarchy based on the constitution
   promulgated on January 8, 1952. Executive authority is vested in the
   king and his council of ministers. The king signs and executes all
   laws. His veto power may be overridden by a two-thirds vote of both
   houses of the National Assembly. He appoints and may dismiss all judges
   by decree, approves amendments to the constitution, declares war, and
   commands the armed forces. Cabinet decisions, court judgments, and the
   national currency are issued in his name. The council of ministers, led
   by a prime minister, is appointed by the king, who may dismiss other
   cabinet members at the prime minister's request. The cabinet is
   responsible to the Chamber of Deputies on matters of general policy and
   can be forced to resign by a two-thirds vote of "no confidence" by that
   body

   The constitution provides for three categories of courts: civil,
   religious, and special. Administratively, Jordan is divided into twelve
   governorates, each headed by a governor appointed by the king. They are
   the sole authorities for all government departments and development
   projects in their respective areas.

   The Royal Armed Forces and General Intelligence Department of Jordan
   are under the control of the king.

Legal system and legislation

   Jordan's legal system is based on Islamic law and French codes.
   Judicial review of legislative acts occurs in a special High Tribunal.
   It has not accepted compulsory International Court of Justice
   jurisdiction.

   Legislative power rests in the bicameral National Assembly. The
   110-member Chamber of Deputies, elected by universal suffrage ("one
   man, one vote"), to a four-year term, is subject to dissolution by the
   king. Nine seats are reserved for Christians, six for women, and three
   for Circassians and Chechens. The forty-member Senate is appointed by
   the king for a four-year term.

Kings of Jordan and political events

   King Abdullah I ruled Jordan after independence from Britain. After the
   assassination of King Abdullah I in 1951, his son King Talal ruled
   briefly. King Talal's major accomplishment was the Jordanian
   constitution. King Talal was removed from the throne in 1952 due to
   mental illness. At that time his son, Hussein, was too young to rule,
   and hence a committee ruled over Jordan.

   After Hussein reached 18, he ruled Jordan as king from 1953 to 1999,
   surviving a number of challenges to his rule, drawing on the loyalty of
   his military, and serving as a symbol of unity and stability for both
   the Bedouin-related and Palestinian communities in Jordan. King Hussein
   ended martial law in 1991 and legalized political parties in 1992. In
   1989 and 1993, Jordan held free and fair parliamentary elections.
   Controversial changes in the election law led Islamist parties to
   boycott the 1997 elections.

   King Abdullah II succeeded his father Hussein following the latter's
   death in February 1999. Abdullah moved quickly to reaffirm Jordan's
   peace treaty with Israel and its relations with the United States.
   Abdullah, during the first year in power, refocused the government's
   agenda on economic reform.

   Jordan's continuing structural economic difficulties, burgeoning
   population, and more open political environment led to the emergence of
   a variety of political parties. Moving toward greater independence,
   Jordan's parliament has investigated corruption charges against several
   regime figures and has become the major forum in which differing
   political views, including those of political Islamists, are expressed.
   While King Abdullah remains the ultimate authority in Jordan, the
   parliament plays an important role.

Administrative divisions

   Governorates of Jordan
   Enlarge
   Governorates of Jordan

   Administratively, Jordan is divided into twelve governorates, each
   headed by a governor appointed by the king. They are the sole
   authorities for all government departments and development projects in
   their respective areas. Together they are subdivided into approximately
   fifty-two nahias. The governorates are:
     * Ajlun
     * Amman
     * Aqaba
     * Balqa
     * Irbid
     * Jerash
     * Kerak
     * Ma'an
     * Madaba
     * Mafraq
     * Tafilah
     * Zarqa

Geography

   Map of Jordan
   Enlarge
   Map of Jordan

   Jordan is a Middle Eastern country, bordered by Syria to the north,
   Iraq to the northeast, Saudi Arabia to the east and south and both
   Israel and the West Bank to the west. All these border lines add up to
   1,619 kilometers (1,006  mi). The Gulf of Aqaba and the Dead Sea also
   touch the country, and thus Jordan has a coastline of 26 kilometers
   (16 mi).

   Jordan consists mostly of arid desert plateau in the east, with
   Highland area in the west. The Great Rift Valley of the Jordan River
   separates Jordan and Israel. The highest point in the country is Jabal
   Ram (1,734 m; 5,689  ft), while the lowest is the Dead Sea (-486 m;
   -1,594 ft). Jordan is part of a region considered to be "the cradle of
   civilization".

   Major cities include the capital Amman in the northwest, Irbid and Az
   Zarqa, both in the north.

   The climate in Jordan is dry and hot, since the country is mainly
   desert. However, the western part of the country receives greater
   precipitation during the rainy season from November to April.

Economy

   One of Amman's (Jordan's capital) hotels.
   Enlarge
   One of Amman's (Jordan's capital) hotels.

   Jordan is a small country with limited natural resources. The country
   is currently exploring ways to expand its limited water supply and use
   its existing water resources more efficiently, including through
   regional cooperation. Jordan also depends on external sources for the
   majority of its energy requirements. During the 1990s, its crude
   petroleum needs were met through imports from Iraq and neighboring
   countries. Since early 2003, oil has been provided by some Gulf
   Cooperation Council member countries. In addition, the Arab Gas
   Pipeline from Egypt to the southern port city of Aqaba was completed in
   2003. The government plans to extend this pipeline north to the Amman
   area and beyond. Since 2000, exports of light manufactured products,
   principally textiles and garments manufactured in the Qualifying
   Industrial Zones (QIZ) that enter the United States tariff and quota
   free, have been driving economic growth. Jordan exported €5.6 million
   ($6.9 million) in goods to the U.S. in 1997, when two-way trade was
   €321 million ($395 million); it exported €538 million ($661 million) in
   2002 with two-way trade at €855 million ($1.05 billion). Similar growth
   in exports to the United States under the bilateral US-Jordan Free
   Trade Agreement that went into effect in December 2001, to the European
   Union under the bilateral Association Agreement, and to countries in
   the region, holds considerable promise for diversifying Jordan's
   economy away from its traditional reliance on exports of phosphates and
   potash, overseas remittances, and foreign aid. The government has
   emphasized the information technology (IT) and tourism sectors as other
   promising growth sectors. The low tax and low regulation Aqaba Special
   Economic Zone ( ASEZ) is considered a model of a government-provided
   framework for private sector-led economic growth.

   The Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the United States that went into
   effect in December 2001 will phase out duties on nearly all goods and
   services by 2010. The agreement also provides for more open markets in
   communications, construction, finance, health, transportation, and
   services, as well as strict application of international standards for
   the protection of intellectual property. In 1996, Jordan and the United
   States signed a civil aviation agreement that provides for "open skies"
   between the two countries, and a U.S.-Jordan treaty for the protection
   and encouragement of bilateral investment entered into force in 2003.
   Jordan has been a member of the World Trade Organization since 2000.

   Textile and clothing exports from Jordan to the United States shot up
   2,000 percent from 2000 to 2005, following introduction of the FTA.
   According to the National Labor Committee, a U.S.-based NGO, Jordan has
   experienced sharp increases in sweatshop conditions in its
   export-oriented manufacturing sector.

   Jordan is classified by the World Bank as a "lower middle income
   country." The per-capita GDP was approximately $1,817 (€1,479) for 2003
   and 14.5% of the economically active population, on average, was
   unemployed in 2003. The GDP per capita in 2005 is at $USD 4,200.
   Education and literacy rates and measures of social well-being are
   relatively high compared to other countries with similar incomes.
   Jordan's population growth rate is high, but has declined in recent
   years, to approximately 2.8% currently. One of the most important
   factors in the government’s efforts to improve the well-being of its
   citizens is the macroeconomic stability that has been achieved since
   the 1990s. However, unemployment rates remain high, with the official
   figure standing at 12.5%, and the unofficial around 30%. Rates of price
   inflation are low, at 2.3% in 2003, and the currency has been stable
   with an exchange rate fixed to the U.S. dollar since 1995.

   While pursuing economic reform and increased trade, Jordan's economy
   will continue to be vulnerable to external shocks and regional unrest.
   Without calm in the region, economic growth seems destined to stay
   below potential. On the positive side, however, there is huge potential
   in the solar energy falling on Jordan's deserts, not only for the
   generation of pollution-free electricity but also for such spin-offs as
   desalination of sea water (see Trans-Mediterranean Renewable Energy
   Cooperation (TREC)).

Tourism

   The Corinthium column is a popular tourist attraction in Jerash.
   Enlarge
   The Corinthium column is a popular tourist attraction in Jerash.

   Tourism is a very important sector of the Jordanian economy. In
   addition to the country's political stability, the geography offered
   makes Jordan an attractive tourist destination. Jordan's major tourist
   activities include visiting numerous ancient places and unspoilt
   natural locations to observing the cultural and religious sites and
   traditions. The best known attractions include:
     * Ancient Sightseeing
          + Petra in Ma'an, the home of Nabateans, is a complete city
            carved in a mountain. The rocks are colorful, mostly pink, and
            the entrance to the ancient city is a long, narrow, crack in
            the mountain - called the Siq. In the city are various
            structures, all (except 2) are carved in rock, including the
            treasury, which is now nominated by the New Seven Wonders
            organisation to be one of the New Seven Wonders of the World.
          + Umm Qais, a town located on the site of the ruined
            Hellenistic-Roman city of Gadara.
          + Ajlun, famous for the Islamic al- Rabadh Castle.
          + Jerash, famous for its its ancient Roman architecture, like
            columns and arches.
            The treasury, as seen from al-Siq.
            Enlarge
            The treasury, as seen from al-Siq.
          + Amman contains the Roman theatre, in addition to several
            museums.
          + Al Karak contains an important castle from the times of Salah
            al-Din, known as Al-Karak Castle.
     * Religion-related
          + Madaba is probably the centre for religion-related tourism in
            Jordan and contains several important religious objects such
            as:
               o The Madaba Map
               o The River Jordan, which is the river where Jesus Christ
                 was baptised, by John the Baptist.
               o Mount Nebo
     * Seaside
          + The Dead Sea, for the unusual floating and natural salts that
            occur excessively. It is the lowest point on earth, 402 meters
            below sea level, and becomes 1 meter lower each year . It is
            located near River Jordan.
          + Aqaba is a town on the shore of the Gulf of Aqaba with
            numerous shopping centers, hotels and access to water sports.

   An Araibian Desert castle in Al Azrak
   Enlarge
   An Araibian Desert castle in Al Azrak
     * Other Tourist Sites
          + Wadi Rum is a desert full of mountains and hills located south
            of Jordan. It is popular for its wonderful sights in addition
            to a variety of sports that are practiced there, such as
            rock-climbing.
          + Amman is a very modern city with lots of malls, shopping
            centers, hotels and an ancient Roman amphitheatre etc.
          + Mahis with Important religious sites, and wonderful landscape
            .

Influence of the Middle East conflict

   The ongoing Arab-Israeli conflict, the Gulf War, and other conflicts in
   the Middle East have made huge impacts on the economy of Jordan. The
   fact that Jordan has peace with the surrounding countries, combined
   with its stability, has made it a preference for many Palestinians,
   Lebanese, and people from the Persian Gulf immigrants and refugees.
   Though this may have resulted in a more active economy, it has also
   damaged it by substantially decreasing the amount of resources each
   person is entitled to. Jordan has a law that states that any
   Palestinian may immigrate and obtain Jordanian citizenship 'unless he
   is a Jew'. This law is not always enforced vis a vis the permiting of
   entrance to Palestinians. It is also illegal for a Jew to purchase land
   in the Kingdom. This violence has also led to a rise of extremism in
   Jordan. In November 2005, King Abdullah called for a "war on extremism"
   in the wake of three suicide bombings in Amman.

Foreign relations

   King Abdullah II on a visit to The Pentagon.
   Enlarge
   King Abdullah II on a visit to The Pentagon.

   Jordan has consistently followed a pro-Western foreign policy and
   traditionally has had close relations with the United States and the
   United Kingdom. These relations were damaged by Jordan's neutrality and
   maintaining relations with Iraq during the first Gulf War. It has a
   well earned reputation for usually following a pragmatic and
   non-confrontational foreign policy, leading to fair relations with its
   neighbors.

   Following the Gulf war, Jordan largely restored its relations with
   Western countries through its participation in the Middle East peace
   process and enforcement of UN sanctions against Iraq. Relations between
   Jordan and the Gulf countries improved substantially after King
   Hussein's death. Following the fall of the Iraqi regime, Jordan has
   played a pivotal role in supporting the restoration of stability and
   security to Iraq. The Government of Jordan signed a memorandum of
   understanding with the Coalition Provisional Authority in Iraq to
   facilitate the training of up to 30,000 Iraqi police cadets at a
   Jordanian facility.

   Jordan signed a nonbelligerency agreement with Israel (the Washington
   Declaration) in Washington, DC, on 25 July 1994. King Hussein and
   Yitzhak Rabin negotiated this treaty. Jordan and Israel signed a
   historic peace treaty on 26 October 1994, witnessed by President Bill
   Clinton, accompanied by US Secretary, Warren Christopher. The U.S. has
   participated with Jordan and Israel in trilateral development
   discussions in which key issues have been water-sharing and security;
   cooperation on Jordan Rift Valley development; infrastructure projects;
   and trade, finance, and banking issues. Jordan also participates in the
   multilateral peace talks. Jordan belongs to the UN and several of its
   specialized and related agencies, including the World Trade
   Organization (WTO), the International Meteorological Organization
   (IMO), Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), International Atomic
   Energy Agency (IAEA), and World Health Organization (WHO). Jordan also
   is a member of the World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF),
   Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), Nonaligned Movement
   (NAM), and Arab League.

   Since the outbreak of the Al-Aqsa Intifada in September 2000, Jordan
   has worked hard, in a variety of forums, to maintain lines of
   communication between the Israelis and the Palestinians to counsel
   moderation and to return the parties to negotiations of outstanding
   permanent status issues.

   Following the Al-Aqsa Intifada, though, Jordan along with Egypt
   withdrew its ambassadors from Israel. Following the Sharm-al-Sheik
   Summit in Egypt on 8 February 2005, both countries announced plans to
   return ambassadors to the country.

Demographics

   Graph showing the population of Jordan from 1960 to 2005.
   Enlarge
   Graph showing the population of Jordan from 1960 to 2005.

   Jordan has a population of 5.8 million. Most of the Jordanian
   population descend from bedouin or tribal origins and account for
   around 40% of the population. However, 55% of Jordan’s population are
   from Palestinian origins who fled Palestine or came as refuges to
   Jordan and gained citizenship after the Arab Israeli war in the year
   1948 and 1967. The remaining 5% of the population come from different
   ethnic minorities such as Circassians, Chechens, Armenians and Kurds,
   some of whom have needed to adapt to Arab culture.

   The number of Lebanese permanently settling in Jordan since the 2006
   Israel-Lebanon conflict has not been established, and is estimated to
   be very little.

   Christians form approximately 6% of the population and they have 9% of
   the seats in parliament. Most Christians belong to the Greek Orthodox
   church (called “Room Urthudux” in Arabic). The rest are Roman Catholics
   (called “Lateen”), Eastern Catholics (called “Room Katoleek” to
   distinguish them from "Western Catholics”), and various Protestant
   communities including Baptists. Christians in Jordan are of many
   nationalities, as evinced, for example, by the Catholic mass being
   celebrated in Arabic, English, French, Italian, Spanish, Tagalog and
   Sinhala, as well as in Iraqi dialects of Arabic.

   Since the Iraq War, many Christians from Iraq have settled permanently
   or temporarily in Jordan.

   The official language is Arabic, but English is used widely in commerce
   and government and among educated people. Arabic and English are
   obligatorily taught at public and private schools. French is taught at
   some public schools but is not obligatory.

   About 3 million people registered as Palestinian refugees and displaced
   persons reside in Jordan, most as citizens. Since 2003 many Iraqis
   fleeing the Iraq War have settled in Jordan; they have not yet been
   counted.

Education

   Jordan has given great attention to education in particular. Its
   educational system is of international standards and its secondary
   education program is accepted in world-class universities.

School education

   School education in Jordan could be categorized into two sections:
     * Basic education, which includes 10 years of school study. It is a
       requirement for all Jordanian citizens.
     * Secondary education, which consists of two years of school study,
       for students who have completed the 10-year basic cycle. It
       comprises two major tracks:

         1. Secondary education, which can either be academic or
            vocational. At the end of the two-year period, students sit
            for the general secondary examination ( Tawjihi) in the
            appropriate branch and those who pass are awarded the Tawjihi
            (General Secondary Education Certificate). The academic stream
            qualifies students for entrance to universities, whereas the
            vocational or technical type qualifies for entrance to
            Community colleges or universities or the job market, provided
            they pass the two additional subjects.
         2. Vocational secondary education, which provides intensive
            vocational training and apprenticeship, and leads to the award
            of a Certificate (not the Tawjihi). This type of education is
            provided by the Vocational Training Corporation, under the
            control of the Ministry of Labour / Technical and Vocational
            Education and Training Higher Council.

Foreign secondary education programs

   After completing the 8 or 10 years of basic education, Jordanians are
   free to choose any foreign secondary education program instead of the
   Tawjihi examinations (8 for IGCSE, 10 for SAT and IB). Such programs
   are usually offered by private schools. These programs include:
     * IGCSE
     * SAT
     * International Baccalaureate

   Private schools in Jordan also used to offer GCSE examinations, but
   they have now been replaced by IGCSE examinations.

   Upon graduation, the ministry of Higher Education, through a system
   similar to that of the UK tariff points, transforms the Grades/Marks of
   these foreign educational programs, into the same marks used in grading
   Tawjihi students. This system is controversial, both as to the
   conversion process and the number of places allocated to non-Tawjihi
   applicants.

   Another source of trouble is the system used to transform exam results
   of foreign education programs into the Tawjihi scale, which is a
   percentage out of 100. Again, some see the system as fair and in fact
   over lenient with non-Tawjihi graduates, while others see it as unfair.

Higher education

   Access to higher education is open to holders of the General Secondary
   Education Certificate who can then choose between private Community
   Colleges, public Community Colleges or universities (public and
   private). The credit-hour system, which entitles students to select
   courses according to a study plan, is implemented at universities. At
   present, there are eight public universities plus two newly- licensed
   ones, and thirteen private universities plus four newly- licensed ones.
   All post-secondary education is the responsibility of the Ministry of
   Higher Education and Scientific Research. The Ministry includes the
   Higher Education Council and the Accreditation Council.

Stages of studies

     * Non-university level post-secondary studies (technical/vocational
       type): Non-university and vocational studies are offered in
       community colleges, access to which is open to holders of all types
       of general secondary education certificates. The two-to three-year
       programme encompasses many fields, such as Arts, Science,
       Management, Business Administration and Engineering. As of 1997,
       all public Community Colleges are under the supervision of Al-Balqa
       Applied University. At the end of the two- or three-year course,
       students sit for a comprehensive examination (Al-Shamel). Those who
       pass are awarded the Associate Degree / Diploma.

     * University level studies:

          + University level first stage: Undergraduate level:

          The universities in Jordan follow the English-American education
          systems and associated with many American and English
          universities. Bachelor's Degrees normally take four years. In
          Dentistry, Pharmacy and Engineering, studies last for five
          years. In Medicine, they last for six years, followed by an
          Internship which lasts for one year. The Bachelor's Degree
          requires a total of 126-164 credit hours, depending on the field
          of study.

          + University level second stage: Postgraduate level:

          Master's degree is awarded after a further 1-2 years' study
          following upon the Bachelor's Degree. It can be obtained either
          by course work and a thesis (c. 24 credit hours of courses and
          nine credit hours of research), or by course work (c. 33 credit
          hours) and a comprehensive examination. Candidates should hold
          the Bachelor's Degree with "good" as a minimum rating.

          + University level third stage: Doctorate:

          A Doctorate Degree is awarded after three to five years of
          further study and the submission of an original dissertation. It
          requires, depending on the subject, 24 credit hours of course
          work and 24 credit hours of research. Candidates should hold a
          Master's Degree with "very good" as a minimum rating.

          + Teacher education: Training of pre-primary and primary/basic
            school teachers

          Basic school teachers must hold a Bachelor's Degree.
          Training of secondary school teachers:
          Secondary school teachers must hold a Bachelor's Degree and a
          one-year postgraduate Higher Diploma in Education.
          Training of higher education teachers:
          They must hold a Doctorate (PhD). In some cases a Master's
          Degree is sufficient.

          + Non-traditional studies: Distance higher education

          This type of education is offered at the newly-established
          branch of the Arab Open University.

     * Lifelong higher education

   Lifelong education is offered at public and private universities,
   public and private community colleges, the Jordan Institute of Public
   Administration, The Jordan Geographic Centre and The Royal Scientific
   Society, as well as in other institutions. Courses are offered in
   Engineering, Industry, Agriculture, Foreign Languages, Computer
   Sciences, Managerial Sciences, Secretarial Studies, Physical Education
   and subjects that can help the local community. Courses last between
   one week and six months at the end of which students obtain a
   Certificate of Attendance or Achievement. The qualifications needed
   depend on the subject and level of the course. Some are designed for
   specific occupations, in which case a work experience in the relevant
   field is needed to attend such courses.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jordan"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
