   #copyright

Juice

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Drink

   Orange juice
   Orange juice

   Juice is a liquid naturally contained in vegetable or fruit tissue. For
   example, orange juice is the liquid extract of the fruit of the orange
   tree. Juice may be supplied in concentrate form, requiring the user to
   add water to reconstitute the liquid back to its 'original state'
   (Generally, concentrates have a noticeably different taste than their
   comparable "fresh-squeezed" versions.) Juice should not be confused
   with a squash, which is usually an artificial juice to be diluted with
   water. Common methods for preservation and processing of fruit juices
   include evaporation and spray drying.

   Juice normally has a pretty defined level of purity; this is -100% in
   some countries. In Bulgaria and New Zealand (and possibly others),
   juice denotes a sweetened fruit extract, whereas nectar denotes a pure
   fruit or vegetable extract; these terms are reversed in other
   countries, Norway and Spain among them.

   Popular juices include apple, orange, lemon, cranberry, grapefruit,
   pineapple, tomato, blackcurrant, grape, and pomegranate. It has become
   increasingly popular to combine a variety of fruits into single juice
   drinks. One of the most popular examples is Carrot, Orange and Ginger.
   Prepackaged single fruit juices have lost market share to prepackaged
   fruit juice combinations. A number of new companies have had
   considerable success supplying prepackaged fruit juice combinations on
   the basis of this transition. "Innocent" and "P&J" are UK examples;
   "Nudie" is an Australian example. Over the same period, Juice bars have
   become commonplace across most of the western world and offer similar
   juices. Most of these juice bars offer freshly made fruit juices and
   claim that that confers greater health benefit. The rationale for this
   claim is that once the fruit has been juiced, its antioxidants start to
   react with oxygen free radicals and so lose their health benefit. Juice
   is also commonly found in many cooking recipies around the world. The
   most popoular are lime and lemon juice which help to add a slightly
   more sour or bitter taste to dishes.

   In the UK, the term "fruit juice" can only legally be used to describe
   a product which is 100% fruit juice, as required by the Fruit Juices
   and Fruit Nectars (England) Regulations and The Fruit Juices & Fruit
   Nectars (Scotland) Regulations 2003 However, the term "juice drink" can
   be used to describe any drink which includes juice, even if the juice
   content is 1% of the overall volume.

   Fruit juice consumption overall in Europe, Australia, New Zealand and
   the USA has increased in recent years , probably due to public
   perception of juices as a healthy natural nutrient source and increased
   public interest in health issues.

   However, fruit juice labels have been considered to be misleading, with
   juice companies actively hiding the actual content. "No added sugar" is
   commonly placed on labels, however the juice product is made from
   "reconstituted concentrates". It is difficult for the consumer to know
   the contents of the concentrates . Probably as a result, juice has also
   been seen as responsible for overweight children .
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Juice"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
