   #copyright

Kaffir lime

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Food and agriculture;
Plants

               iCitrus x hystrix
   Kaffir limes on sale
   Kaffir limes on sale
           Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Plantae
   Division: Magnoliophyta
   Class:    Magnoliopsida
   Subclass: Rosidae
   Order:    Sapindales
   Family:   Rutaceae
   Genus:    Citrus
   Species:  C. x

                                Binomial name

   Citrus x hystrix
   L.

   The Kaffir lime (Citrus hystrix DC., Rutaceae), also known as kieffer
   lime, is a Southeast Asian citrus plant with very aromatic leaves. The
   green lime fruits are distinguished by their bumpy exterior and their
   small size (approx. 4 cm wide), and the hourglass-shaped leaves
   (actually, the leaf and the leaf-shaped stem or phyllode) are widely
   used in Cambodian, Thai, and Lao Cuisine.

   Kaffir lime leaves are also popular in the Cambodia, but less so in
   Vietnam. Malay, Burmese and Indonesian (especially, Balinese; see also
   Indonesian bay leaf) cuisines use them sporadically with chicken and
   fish.

   The leaves can be used fresh or dried, and can be stored frozen.

   Although the most common product of the kaffir lime tree is its leaves
   (which impart a sharp lime/ neroli flavour to Cambodian base paste
   known as "Krueng", Thai dishes such as tom yum, and to Indonesian food
   such as sayur assam - literally sour vegetables), the juice and rinds
   of the small, dark green gnarled fruit (known as jeruk obat - literally
   medicine citrus) are used in traditional Indonesian medicine.

   As for the zest, it is widely used in creole cuisine and to impart
   flavor to "arranged" rums in the Réunion island and Madagascar.

   For other types of lime, see lime (fruit).

Terminology

   Kaffir lime (left), used in Southeast asian cooking, with galangal
   root.
   Enlarge
   Kaffir lime (left), used in Southeast asian cooking, with galangal
   root.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kaffir_lime"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
