   #copyright

Kakapo

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

                     iKakapo

                             Conservation status

   Critically endangered (CR)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom:   Animalia
   Phylum:    Chordata
   Class:     Aves
   Order:     Psittaciformes
   Family:    Psittacidae
   Subfamily: Psittacinae
   Tribe:     Strigopini
   Genus:     Strigops
              Gray, 1845
   Species:   S. habroptilus

                                Binomial name

   Strigops habroptilus
   Gray, 1845
   Photo of a 1-year-old Kakapo on Codfish Island
   Enlarge
   Photo of a 1-year-old Kakapo on Codfish Island

   The Kakapo ( Māori: kākāpō, meaning night parrot), Strigops habroptilus
   (from the Greek strix, genitive strigos: owl and ops: face; and habros:
   soft, and ptilon: feather), is a species of nocturnal parrot endemic to
   New Zealand. It is notable for being the world's only flightless
   parrot, the heaviest parrot, and the only parrot to have a lek breeding
   system. It is also the only flightless lek bird and is possibly one of
   the world's longest-living birds. It is the only species in the genus
   Strigops and the tribe Strigopini, which is placed in the subfamily
   Psittacinae, or alternatively the kakapo forms a subfamily of its own,
   Strigopinae.

   Kakapo are critically endangered, with only 86 living individuals
   known, all of whom are named. Prehistorically, the ancestral Kakapo
   migrated to the islands of New Zealand and, in the absence of mammalian
   predators, it lost the ability to fly. With Polynesian and European
   colonisation and the introduction of predators such as cats, rats, and
   stoats, almost all the Kakapo were wiped out. Conservation efforts
   began in the 1890s, but they were not very successful until the
   implementation of the Kakapo Recovery Plan in the 1980s. All surviving
   Kakapo are kept on two predator-free islands, Chalky Island in
   southwest Fiordland and Codfish Island/Whenuahou near Stewart
   Island/Rakiura, where they are closely monitored.

Physical description

   Kakapo are large, rotund parrots: males measure up to 60 centimetres
   (24 in) and weigh between 3 and 4 kilograms (7–9 lb) at maturity.
   Kakapo are unable to fly, having short wings for their size and lacking
   the pronounced keel bone ( sternum) that anchors the flight muscles of
   other birds. They use their wings for balance, support, and to brake
   their falls when leaping from trees. Unlike other land birds, Kakapo
   can accumulate large amounts of body fat to store energy.
   Kakapo, camouflaged Enlarge
   Kakapo, camouflaged

   Kakapo have moss-green feathers barred with black on the back, blending
   well with native vegetation. As the feathers do not need the strength
   and stiffness required for flight, they are exceptionally soft, giving
   rise to the specific epithet habroptilus. Their underbellies, necks,
   and faces are yellowish with great variability between individuals. It
   is known from museum specimens that some birds had completely yellow
   colouring. Kakapo have a facial disc of fine feathers, resembling the
   face of an owl; thus early European settlers called it the owl parrot.
   Their beaks are surrounded by delicate "whiskers", which they use to
   sense the ground as they walk with their heads lowered. The ends of
   their tail feathers often become worn from being continually dragged on
   the ground.

   The beak of the Kakapo is specially adapted for grinding food very
   finely. For this reason, Kakapo have very small gizzards compared to
   other birds of their size. Kakapo feet are large, scaly and, as in all
   parrots, zygodactyl (two toes face forward and two backward). They have
   pronounced claws that are particularly useful for climbing.
   The "whiskers" around the beak
   Enlarge
   The "whiskers" around the beak

   Kakapo have a well-developed sense of smell which complements their
   nocturnal lifestyle (Hagelin 2004). Kakapo can also discriminate among
   odours while foraging; this behaviour has only been reported for one
   other parrot species. One of the most striking characteristics of
   Kakapo is their pleasant and powerful odour, which has been variously
   described as like flowers and honey, an air freshener, or the inside of
   an antique violin case. Given the Kakapo's well-developed sense of
   smell this scent may be a social chemosignal. The smell has often led
   predators right to the relatively defenseless Kakapo.

Reproduction

   Kakapo are the only parrots in the world that have a lek breeding
   system. Males loosely gather in an arena and compete with each other to
   attract females to mate. Females watch the males display or "lek". They
   choose a mate based on the quality of his display; they are not pursued
   by the males in any overt way. No pair bond is formed and males and
   females meet only to mate.

   During the courting season, males leave their usual territories for
   hilltops and ridges where they each establish their own mating courts.
   These leks can be up to 7 kilometres (4 mi) from a Kakapo's usual
   territory and are an average of 50 metres (160 ft) apart within the lek
   arena. Males remain in the region of their court throughout the
   courting season. At the start of the breeding season, males will fight
   to try to secure the best courts. They confront each other with raised
   feathers, spread wings, open beaks, raised claws and loud screeching
   and growling. Fighting may leave birds with injuries.

   Each court consists of a series of bowl-like depressions dug in the
   ground by the male, up to 10 centimetres (4 in) deep and long enough to
   fit the half-meter length of the bird. Bowls are often created next to
   rock faces, banks, or tree trunks to help reflect sound. Each male’s
   bowls are connected by a network of trails or tracks which may extend
   50 metres (160 ft) along a ridge or 20 metres (60 ft) in diameter
   around a hilltop. Males meticulously clear their bowls and tracks of
   debris. One way researchers check whether bowls are visited at night is
   to place a few twigs in the bowl, knowing that if the male visits
   overnight he will pick them up in his beak and toss them away.

   To attract females, males make loud, low-frequency booming calls from
   their bowls by inflating a thoracic sac. They start with low grunts
   increasing in volume as the sac inflates. After a sequence of about 20
   loud booms, the volume drops off. The male Kakapo then stands up for a
   short while before again lowering his head, inflating his chest and
   starting another sequence of booms. The booms can be heard for at least
   one kilometre (0.6 mi) on a still night and wind can carry the sound at
   least five kilometres (3 mi). Males boom for an average of eight hours
   a night; each male may produce thousands of booms in this time. This
   may continue every night for three or four months during which time the
   male may lose half his body weight. Each male moves around the bowls in
   his court so that the booms are sent out in different directions.

   Females are attracted by the booms of the competing males; they too may
   need to walk several kilometers from their territories to the arena.
   There a female enters the court of one of the males. The male then
   performs a display in which he will rock from side to side and make
   clicking noises with his beak. He will turn his back to the female,
   spread his wings in display and walk backwards towards her. When in the
   presence of a female, males apparently become sexually excited, and may
   attempt to copulate with objects other than female Kakapo. Little is
   known about copulation but it is believed to be brief. Once the birds
   have mated, the female returns to her home territory to lay eggs and
   raise the chicks. The male continues booming in the hope of attracting
   another female.

   Female Kakapo lay between one and four eggs per breeding cycle. They
   nest on the ground under the cover of plants or in cavities such as
   hollow tree trunks. They incubate the eggs faithfully, but are forced
   to leave them every night in search of food. Predators are known to eat
   the eggs. They may also freeze to death in the mother's absence. Kakapo
   eggs usually hatch within 30 days, bearing fluffy gray chicks that are
   quite helpless. The young chicks are just as vulnerable to predators as
   the eggs, and young have been killed by many of the same predators that
   attack adults. Chicks fledge and leave the nest at about 10 to 12 weeks
   of age. As they gain greater independence, their mothers may feed the
   chicks sporadically for up to 6 months.

   Since Kakapo are quite long-lived, they tend to enjoy an adolescence
   before beginning breeding. Males do not start to boom until about 5
   years of age. Females do not seek out males until they are between 9
   and 11 years old. Although this is quite a long delay before they start
   to reproduce, Kakapo are thought to live at least 60 years, leaving
   plenty of time to perpetuate the species. Kakapo do not breed every
   year and have one of the lowest rates of reproduction among birds.
   Breeding occurs only in years when trees mast (fruit heavily),
   providing a plentiful food supply. Rimu mast occurs only every three to
   five years, so in rimu-dominant forest such as on Codfish Island,
   Kakapo breeding occurs as infrequently.

Ecology and behaviour

   Historic distribution of the Kakapo.
   Enlarge
   Historic distribution of the Kakapo.

   The ancestors of the Kakapo migrated to the islands of New Zealand
   millions of years ago. It is hypothesised that when they arrived, they
   were smaller and more like other parrots. Over time, they became
   larger, heavier, and lost the ability to fly. Interestingly, the only
   mammals native to New Zealand are three species of small bats (one now
   extinct), and it seems that birds have adapted to fill the niches that
   mammals occupy in other parts of the world. Before the arrival of
   humans, Kakapo were wildly successful; it is thought that there were
   millions alive at any one time.

   Kakapo once ranged throughout the three main islands of New Zealand.
   They lived in a wide variety of habitats including tussocklands,
   scrublands and coastal areas. They also inhabited a variety of forests
   including those dominated by podocarps ( rimu, matai, kahikatea,
   totara), beeches, tawa, and rata. They particularly favored forest
   margins and areas of regenerating forest for the wider variety of
   vegetation in a compact area. In Fiordland, areas of avalanche and slip
   debris with regenerating and heavily fruiting vegetation such as five
   finger, wineberry, bush lawyer, tutu, hebes, and coprosmas became known
   as "Kakapo gardens".

   Kakapo are primarily nocturnal, roosting under cover in trees or on the
   ground during the day and roving their territories at night. Though the
   Kakapo cannot fly, they are excellent climbers, ascending to the crowns
   of the tallest trees. They have also been known to "parachute" from
   heights by spreading their wings, floating gently to the forest floor.
   Having lost the ability to fly, Kakapo have developed very strong legs.
   In the course of a night's feeding they may walk several kilometres and
   climb 300 metres (1000 ft) up hills and down again. Kakapo are able to
   run at a fair speed, but cannot sustain their speed for long distances.

   Kakapo are generally herbivorous, eating a wide variety of native
   plants, seeds, fruits, pollens and even the sapwood of trees. They are
   particularly fond of the fruit of the rimu tree, and will feed on it
   exclusively during seasons when it is abundant. Kakapo have a
   distinctive habit of grabbing a leaf or frond with a foot and stripping
   the nutritious parts of the plant out with their beaks, leaving a ball
   of indigestible fibre, similar to the way humans eat only the tender
   parts of artichokes. The little clumps of plant fibers are a
   distinctive sign of the presence of Kakapo. Kakapo have also been
   observed to occasionally eat insects and other invertebrates.

   Kakapo are naturally curious, and though they live solitary lives in
   remote places, they have been known to enjoy the occasional company of
   humans. Conservation staff and volunteers have interacted extensively
   with some birds, and they are known to have distinct, and often
   charming, personalities.

   Like many parrots, Kakapo have a wide range of calls used for various
   purposes. In addition to the "booms" and "chings" of their mating
   calls, they are often known to "skraark" to announce their location to
   other birds.

   One behaviour that has not recently served the Kakapo well is their
   reaction to a predator or threat. When Kakapo feel threatened, they
   simply freeze, hoping to blend in with the vegetation that they so
   resemble. This was a good strategy to foil their main native predator,
   the giant Haast's Eagle. However, it does not protect them from their
   new mammalian predators, which rely on an excellent sense of smell.

Conservation

   The population of Kakapo in New Zealand has been significantly reduced
   since human habitation of the country. Since 1891 conservation efforts
   have been attempted to prevent extinction. The most successful scheme
   has been the Kakapo Recovery Plan which was implemented in 1989.

Human impact

   Size comparison against an average human
   Enlarge
   Size comparison against an average human

   The first factor in the decline of the Kakapo was the arrival of humans
   about a thousand years ago. Māori settlers from Polynesia hunted the
   Kakapo for food and for their skins and feathers, which were made into
   luxurious capes. They also used the dried heads as ear ornaments. With
   its flightlessness, strong scent and habit of freezing in the face of
   danger, the Kakapo was easy prey for Māori and the dogs they brought to
   the islands. Their eggs and chicks were also predated by the Polynesian
   Rat or kiore which Māori also brought to New Zealand. Furthermore, the
   deliberate clearing of vegetation by Māori reduced the habitable range
   for Kakapo. Kakapo were extinct in many parts of the islands by the
   time Europeans arrived.

   From the 1840s, European settlers cleared huge amounts of land for
   farming and grazing, further jeopardising the Kakapo and their habitat.
   They also brought more mammalian predators including cats, bigger
   species of rats and more dogs, all of which killed either adult or
   young Kakapo. Europeans knew little of the Kakapo until George Gray of
   the British Museum described it from a skin in 1845. Like Māori, early
   European explorers and their dogs fed on Kakapo. In the late 1800s,
   Kakapo became well known as a scientific curiosity, and thousands were
   captured or killed for zoos, museums and collectors. Most captured
   specimens died within months. From at least the 1870s, collectors knew
   that Kakapo were declining and possibly on the way to extinction.
   Unfortunately, their prime concern was to collect as many as possible
   before they were all gone.
   Thousands of Kakapo were collected for museums across the world.
   Enlarge
   Thousands of Kakapo were collected for museums across the world.

   In the 1880s, mustelids (stoats, ferrets and weasels) were released in
   large numbers in New Zealand in an attempt to reduce rabbit numbers
   (Murphy & Dowding 1995). They also preyed heavily on many native
   species including the Kakapo. Other browsing animals, such as
   introduced deer, also compete with Kakapo for food, and have caused the
   extinction of some preferred plant species.

Early protection efforts

   In 1891, the New Zealand government set aside Resolution Island in
   Fiordland as a nature reserve and in 1894 appointed Richard Henry as
   caretaker. A keen naturalist, Henry was aware that native birds were
   declining because of introduced predators, particularly rats and
   stoats. Seeing the value of a predator-free island such as Resolution
   Island, he began catching and moving Kakapo and kiwi from the mainland
   to Resolution. In six years, he moved over 200 Kakapo to Resolution
   Island. Sadly, by 1900 stoats had swum to Resolution Island, colonised
   it, and killed all the Kakapo there within 6 years.

   In 1903, three Kakapo were moved from Resolution Island to the nature
   reserve of Hauturu/Little Barrier Island north-east of Auckland, but
   feral cats were present on the island and the Kakapo were never seen
   again. In 1912, three Kakapo were moved to another reserve, Kapiti
   Island north-west of Wellington. One of them survived until at least
   1936, despite the presence of feral cats for part of that period.

   Unfortunately, world events superseded conservation efforts during the
   World Wars and the Great Depression. While most people's attention was
   understandably elsewhere, the Kakapo population continued to decline.
   By the 1920s, Kakapo were extinct on the North Island and their range
   and numbers on the South Island greatly reduced. One of their last
   refuges was rugged Fiordland. There, during the 1930s, they were often
   seen or heard, and occasionally eaten, by hunters or roadworkers. By
   the 1940s, reports of Kakapo were becoming scarce.

New Zealand Wildlife Service

   In the 1950s, the New Zealand Wildlife Service was established and
   began making regular expeditions to search for Kakapo, mostly in
   Fiordland and what is now the Kahurangi National Park in the northwest
   of the South Island. Seven Fiordland expeditions between 1951 and 1956
   found only a few recent signs. Finally, in 1958 a Kakapo was caught and
   released in the Milford Sound catchment area in Fiordland. Because of
   fears that introduced deer and chamois would colonise the area and eat
   out important food sources, as had happened elsewhere, the decision was
   made to take birds into captivity. In 1961 six Kakapo were captured,
   one being released and the other five transferred to the aviaries of
   the Mount Bruce Native Bird Reserve near Masterton in the North Island.
   Within months, four of the birds had died and the fifth died after
   about four years. In the next 12 years regular expeditions found few
   signs of Kakapo, indicating that numbers were continuing to decline.
   Only one bird was sighted during these years. It was captured in 1967
   and, despite optimism about improved techniques for keeping Kakapo in
   captivity, died the following year.

   By the early 1970s, it was uncertain whether Kakapo had survived. The
   availability of helicopters, however, enabled expeditions to reach
   previously inaccessible places. In early 1974, two Kakapo were captured
   in the Milford Sound catchment and moved to Maud Island in the
   Marlborough Sounds at the north of the South Island. As they were
   different sizes, it was hoped that one was female and the other male.
   After the suspected female was killed by a dog in 1977, the post mortem
   revealed it was a male.

   At the end of 1974, searchers located several more male birds and made
   the first scientific observations of Kakapo booming. The observations
   led Don Merton to speculate for the first time that Kakapo had a lek
   breeding system. One bird was captured in the Milford area in 1975,
   christened "Richard Henry," and transferred to Maud Island. He is still
   living as of 2005 and judged to be over 50 years old. In 1976, four
   male Kakapo were discovered in the Transit Valley, the next catchment
   south of Milford Sound.

   From 1974 to 1976, 14 Kakapo were discovered but all appeared to be
   males. This raised the possibility that all the females had died,
   perhaps killed by stoats while nesting, and that the species was
   functionally extinct. All the birds the Wildlife Service discovered
   from 1951 to 1976 were in U-shaped glaciated valleys flanked by
   almost-vertical cliffs and surrounded by high mountains. Such extreme
   terrain had slowed colonisation by browsing mammals such as deer and
   possums, leaving virtual islands of unmodified native vegetation.
   However, even here, stoats were present and by 1976 Kakapo were gone
   from the valley floors and only a few males survived high on the most
   inaccessible parts of the cliffs.

   Although Kakapo expeditions had been mounted in the South Island, and
   occasionally in the North Island, since 1951, no expedition went to
   Stewart Island/Rakiura until 1977. This was despite government workers
   seeing a Kakapo there and snatching feathers from it in 1949. In 1970,
   a deerhunter photographed a Kakapo there and reported it to a Forest
   Service officer who apparently ignored the report. The 1977 expedition
   found a track and bowl system on its first day and soon located several
   dozen Kakapo, raising hope that the population would include females.
   In 1980, muzzled tracker dogs were brought in and a number of birds,
   including five females, were captured. The total population was
   estimated at 100 to 200 birds.

   It was realised at the same time that although Stewart Island/Rakiura
   was free of stoats and other mustelids, feral cats were killing Kakapo
   at an alarming rate. Over 1980 and 1981, three females and a male were
   moved to Maud Island to join Richard Henry, the only Fiordland bird
   still alive. Between 1977 and 1982, cats killed 50% of the Kakapo that
   had been identified on Stewart Island/Rakiura. Thus, in 1982, eleven
   males and seven females were relocated to Hauturu/Little Barrier
   Island, from which feral cats had been eradicated in 1980. They were
   joined there by Richard Henry and the three surviving Stewart Island
   birds from Maud Island. Their removal from Maud Island was sparked by
   the discovery that a pregnant stoat had swum the 900 m distance from
   the mainland.

   Possums were eradicated from Codfish Island, off the north-west corner
   of Stewart Island/Rakiura, in 1987, and 10 females and 20 males were
   moved there from Stewart Island/Rakiura between 1987 and 1992. A
   further two females and three males were moved to Maud Island, since
   cleared of its stoat family, between 1989 and 1991. By 1995, the known
   world population of Kakapo had dropped to 50 individuals, of which just
   19 were females.

Kakapo Recovery Plan

   Following the implementation of the Kakapo Recovery Plan Kakapo numbers
   have increased steadily.
   Enlarge
   Following the implementation of the Kakapo Recovery Plan Kakapo numbers
   have increased steadily.

   In 1989, a Kakapo Recovery Plan was developed and a Kakapo Recovery
   Group established to implement it. As no breeding had occurred on
   Hauturu/Little Barrier Island in the seven years birds had been there,
   supplementary feeding of some females there began. Four birds laid eggs
   and in 1991, two young were successfully raised. The birds on Codfish
   Island bred for the first time in 1992 but unfortunately the expected
   bumper crop of rimu fruit failed to ripen. Three malnourished chicks
   were taken to Auckland Zoo where two died. The third, named Hoki, was
   successfully hand-reared and then settled on Maud Island.

   It was five years before any more Kakapo fledged, when birds mated on
   Codfish Island in 1997. Again, the rimu crop failed to ripen but with
   supplementary feeding of mothers, three chicks fledged. Richard Henry
   was returned from Hauturu/Little Barrier Island to Maud Island in 1996
   and in 1998, he fathered three chicks, the first fledglings for many
   years with South Island genes.

   While Codfish Island and Hauturu/Little Barrier Island were free of
   cats, mustelids, Black Rats and Brown Rats, both had the smaller
   Polynesian Rat. It was not initially known that Polynesian Rats too
   would predate Kakapo eggs and chicks, as well as competing with Kakapo
   for food. With this realisation, steps were taken to eradicate rats
   from Codfish Island. At the same time it was decided to move the Kakapo
   from Hauturu/Little Barrier Island to Maud Island, not only because of
   the rats but because only two young had fledged there, after
   supplementary feeding, and the rugged terrain made close management
   difficult. Ironically, both these planned movements produced breeding
   surprises. When birds were being captured on Hauturu/Little Barrier
   Island for removal in 1999, a female who had not been seen since 1984
   was discovered incubating three eggs. Incubation was completed
   artificially and three female chicks fledged. In 1998, the Codfish
   Island population was moved to nearby Pearl Island for two years while
   rats were poisoned on Codfish Island. Despite the presence on Pearl
   Island of rats and predatory weka, in 1999 five females unexpectedly
   laid eggs. Eggs were removed for artificial incubation and three chicks
   fledged, making a total of six for the year. In three years the total
   population had jumped from 50 to 62.
   Since 2003, Kakapo have been kept on Chalky and Codfish Islands in the
   South of New Zealand. Kakapo are moved between the islands to take
   advantage of optimum breeding conditions.
   Enlarge
   Since 2003, Kakapo have been kept on Chalky and Codfish Islands in the
   South of New Zealand. Kakapo are moved between the islands to take
   advantage of optimum breeding conditions.

   In 2001, scientists predicted that rimu on Codfish Island would mast
   (fruit heavily) in the coming season, providing a stimulus to Kakapo
   breeding. They moved all 21 breeding-age females to Codfish Island. All
   but one laid eggs and 24 chicks fledged in early 2002, compared with 15
   in the previous 20 years combined. In one season, the world’s known
   population jumped 39%, from 62 to 86.

   Rimu did not mast in the following two years and consequently Kakapo
   did not breed. As rimu masts only every three to five years, breeding
   on rimu-dominant Codfish Island is expected only that often. Other tree
   species such as beech mast more frequently. In an attempt to get Kakapo
   breeding more frequently, a number of them have been moved to
   beech-dominant Chalky Island. These birds include many of those who
   hatched in 2002. It is hoped that as they mature on Chalky Island they
   will key into the masting cycle of beech and so breed more frequently
   when they reach breeding age. Eighteen of the two-year-olds were moved
   from Codfish Island to Chalky Island in July 2004. Between three and
   five days after translocation, three of the females died from
   septicemia due to erysipelas (infection by the bacterium Erysipelothrix
   rhusiopathiae). The remaining translocated birds were vaccinated
   against Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae infection and treated with
   antibiotics. With these deaths, the number of living birds dropped from
   86 to 83.

Current status

   The surviving Kakapo population is intensively managed by the Kakapo
   Recovery Group in an attempt to preserve the species. The ongoing
   success of Kakapo conservation relies on the management of the
   reproduction of the remaining birds. Birds are moved between the
   islands both to keep them safe from predators and to optimise their
   chances of breeding. Males believed to be infertile are kept separate
   from females to avoid unproductive mating. In order to maximise genetic
   diversity they seek to prevent just a few males from dominating
   breeding. As the only bird originating in the South Island, Richard
   Henry is particularly important for genetic diversity. He has a more
   yellow colouration than the other Kakapo and booms in a different
   "dialect" than the others. Although he fathered two sons and a daughter
   in 1998, he has shown no interest in mating since then.

   Artificial insemination has been considered since the 1990s as a way of
   reducing inbreeding, but has been hindered by the difficulty of
   collecting sperm. Early attempts used a fake female kakapo mounted on a
   radio-controlled toy car, which would approach a male in the midst of
   his lek display. Other techniques have involved electrical stimulation
   under anaesthesia or, most recently, a form of massage. These new
   methods, while increasingly successful, have revealed that the semen
   from many males contains abnormal sperm or no sperm at all. The poor
   sperm quality, probably resulting from inbreeding, may help explain the
   low fertility rates observed in recent seasons.

   Females are given supplementary food at personal "feeding stations" in
   the hope that they will produce young every year, rather than just in
   mast years. Sometimes, chicks are removed from their mothers to
   encourage the laying of a second brood. Older females can function as
   "surrogate mothers" and have successfully raised chicks. Other chicks
   have been artificially incubated and hand-reared. Conservators employ
   many methods and devices to monitor Kakapo nests. Many faithfully watch
   over their charges with closed-circuit cameras, while others use
   electronic-eye "doorbells" to alert them when the mother leaves the
   nest to forage at night. At that time, staff swoop into action and
   cover the eggs with a heating pad to keep them warm. Nests are also
   sprinkled with flea powder after one mother accidentally crushed an egg
   while scratching.

   Though the future looks brighter with the increase in population since
   1997 and the fledging of 24 chicks in 2002, Kakapo are still in an
   extremely perilous position as demonstrated by the sudden death in July
   2004 of three of the 15 females hatched in 2002. An unexpected 2005
   breeding season saw 26 eggs laid of which 11 were fertile. Five chicks
   hatched, although one has since died, and one adult male Kakapo died in
   winter 2005. The total population stands at 86 as of 2006.

   Between 1997 and 2005 the adult population rose from 50 to 83. But of
   the 83 birds, 45 were males and 38 females. The females were producing
   twice as many sons as daughters. Uniquely among parrots, the male plays
   no part in raising the young; consequently the survival prospects of
   the species were not enhanced by this biased sex ratio. The Kakapo
   Recovery Group devised a more sophisticated feeding schedule; it took
   account of each female's starting weight and she was fed to the point
   where she was capable of reproducing, but not much further. The sex
   ratio appears to have settled down at a more sensible 50:50. As yet it
   has not actually dropped to favour daughters.

   If the birds continue to breed successfully, the next obstacle to
   future conservation efforts is the lack of a large predator-free island
   capable of holding more than 100 Kakapo, where the birds could look
   after themselves. In November 2005, plans were announced for a new
   wildlife sanctuary on the South Island mainland, to include many rare
   native species including Kakapo. The sanctuary, to be located at
   Orokonui, north of Dunedin, is scheduled for completion in 2007, and
   should create a large predator-free environment for the Kakapo.

   Every known Kakapo has been given a name by Kakapo Recovery Programme
   officials. An affectionate way for conservation staff to refer to
   individual birds, it is also a striking reminder of how few remain. A
   detailed list of the individuals, and the parentage and age of the
   recently hatched chicks can be found at list of Kakapo.

   The conservation of the Kakapo has made the species well known.
   Numerous books for adults and children and many documentaries detailing
   the plight of the Kakapo have been produced in recent years.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kakapo"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
