   #copyright

Karachi

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Asia

                                                Karachi
                                                                    كراچى
                                          General Information
                                           Province                  Sindh
                                           Location 24°51′36″N, 67°00′36″E
                                           Altitude          8 metres AMSL
                                               Area              3,527 km²
                                       Calling code                    021
                                          Time zone           PST ( UTC+5)
                                       No. of Towns                     18
                                         Population         9,339,023 1998
                                           Estimate        13,969,284 2006
                                            density      3,394 persons/km²
                                              Government
                                 City Mayor (Nazim)     Syed Mustafa Kamal
                              No. of Union Councils                    178
                                                Emblem
                                                Website
                                      Karachi Government Website

   Karachi ( Urdu: كراچى, Sindhi: ڪراچي) is the capital of the province of
   Sindh, and the most populated city in Pakistan, sometimes known as the
   City of Light and the City of Quaid (شہرِ قائد), after Muhammad Ali
   Jinnah the founder of Pakistan. It is located on the coast of the
   Arabian Sea / Indian Ocean, northwest of the Indus Delta. The city is
   the financial and commercial centre as well as the largest port of
   Pakistan.

   Karachi is an ethnically and religiously diverse city. Urdu, Behari,
   Bengali and Gujarati speaking settlers make up majority of the
   population in four out of five dsitricts of Karachi. District Malir is
   predominantly Sindhi and Balochi. In the 1980s and early 1990s, Karachi
   witnessed a major influx of refugees from the war in Afghanistan, and
   increasing political and sectarian violence between Punjabi, Pashtun,
   Sindhi and Mohajirs (descendants of immigrants from India). The
   intervention of the Pakistani army, ISI and martial law scarred the
   city, but a national economic boom in the early 21st century has
   resulted in economic growth and prosperity for the city. As of 2006
   Karachi has an estimated population of 13.9 million.

History

   The Baloch tribes from Balochistan and Makran established a small
   settlement of fishing community and called it Kolachi. For sometimes,
   it was also called Goth jo Kolachi. Today, the word has changed to
   Karachi. Even today, Karachi is home to the largest Balochi population,
   numbering to more than two million inhabitants. Balochis are a major
   part of society in Malir, Lyari and Karachi west districts.

   The modern port-city of Karachi was developed by authorities of the
   British Raj in the 19th century. Upon the creation of Pakistan in 1947,
   the city was selected to become the national capital, and was exposed
   to a massive influx of immigrants from India, which radically expanded
   the city's population and transformed the demographics and economy.
   Karachi has faced major infrastructural and socio-economic challenges,
   but modern industries and businesses have developed in the city, and
   the population expanded even after the capital was moved to Islamabad
   in August 1960. Karchi was a Hindu majority city before the Pakistan
   movement resulted in ethnic cleansing during the middle of 20th
   Century.

   The area of Karachi has been known to the ancient Greeks by many names.
   Krokola, the place where Alexander the Great camped to prepare a fleet
   for Babylonia after his campaign in the Indus valley; 'Morontobara'
   port (probably the modern Manora Island near the Karachi harbour), from
   where Alexander's admiral Nearchus sailed for back home; and
   Barbarikon, a sea port of the Indo-Greek Bactrian kingdom. It was also
   known as the port of Debal to the Arabs, from where Muhammad Bin Qasim
   led his conquering force into South Asia in 712AD. According to the
   British historian Eliot, parts of city of Karachi and the island of
   Manora constituted the city of Debal.
   An old image of Karachi from 1889
   Enlarge
   An old image of Karachi from 1889

   According to another legend, the present city started its life as a
   fishing settlement where a Balochi fisherwoman by the name of Mai
   Kolachi took up residence and started a family. The village that later
   grew out of this settlement was known as Kolachi-jo-Goth (The Village
   of Kolachi in Sindhi). By the late 1700’s this village started trading
   across the sea with Muscat and the Persian Gulf region which led to its
   gaining importance. A small fort was constructed for its protection,
   armed with cannons imported from Muscat. The fort had two main
   gateways: one facing the sea, known as Khara Darwaaza (Brackish Gate)
   and the other facing the adjoining Lyari river known as the Meetha
   Darwaaza (Sweet Gate). The location of these gates corresponds to the
   present-day city localities of Khaaradar (Khārā Dar) and Meethadar
   (Mīṭhā Dar) respectively.

   In 1795, the village became a domain of the Balochi Talpur rulers of
   Sindh. A small factory was opened by the British in September 1799, but
   was closed down within a year. After sending a couple of exploratory
   missions to the area, the British East India Company conquered the town
   on February 3rd, 1839. The village was later annexed to the British
   Indian Empire when the province of Sindh was conquered by Charles
   Napier in 1843. Kolachi was added along with the rest of Sindh to the
   jurisdiction of the Bombay Presidency.
   Saint Patrick's Cathedral
   Enlarge
   Saint Patrick's Cathedral

   The British realized its importance as a military cantonment and a port
   for exporting the produce of the Indus basin, and rapidly developed its
   harbour for shipping. The foundations of a city municipal government
   were laid down and infrastructure development was undertaken. New
   businesses started opening up and the population of the town started
   rising rapidly. Karachi quickly turned into a city, making true the
   famous quote by Napier who is known to have said: Would that I could
   come again to see you in your grandeur!

   In 1857, the First Indian War for Independence broke out in the
   sub-continent and the 21st Native Infantry stationed in Karachi
   declared allegiance to revolters, joining their cause on September 10,
   1857. However, the British were rapidly able to reassert their control
   over Karachi and defeat the uprising.

   In 1864, the first telegraphic message was sent from India to England
   when a direct telegraph connection was laid down between Karachi and
   London. In 1878, the city was connected to the rest of British India by
   railway line. Public building projects such as the Frere Hall (1865)
   and the Empress Market (1890) were undertaken. In 1876, Muhammad Ali
   Jinnah, the founder of Pakistan, was born in the city to a famous
   Ismaili Khoja family, which by now had become a bustling city with
   railroad, churches, mosques, courthouses, markets, paved streets and a
   magnificent harbour. By 1899 Karachi had become the largest wheat
   exporting port in the East (Feldman 1970:57). The population of the
   city had also risen to about 105,000 inhabitants by the end of the 19th
   century and was a cosmopolitan mix of Hindus and Muslims, European
   traders, Parsis, Iranians, Lebanese, and Goan merchants. By the turn of
   the century, the city faced street congestion, which led to India’s
   first tramway system being laid down in 1900.
   Frere Hall - a prime example of colonial architecture built during the
   British Raj
   Enlarge
   Frere Hall - a prime example of colonial architecture built during the
   British Raj

   By 1914, Karachi had become the largest grain exporting port of the
   British Empire. In 1924, an aerodrome was built and Karachi became the
   main airport of entry into India. An airship mast was also built in
   Karachi in 1927 as part of the Imperial Airship Communications scheme,
   which was later abandoned. In 1936, Sindh was separated from the Bombay
   Presidency and Karachi was made the capital of the new province. By the
   time the new country of Pakistan was formed in 1947, Karachi had become
   a bustling metropolitan city with beautiful classical and colonial
   European styled buildings lining the city’s thoroughfares.

   Karachi was chosen as the capital city of Pakistan and accommodated a
   huge influx of migrants and refugees to the newly formed country. The
   demographics of the city also changed drastically. However, it still
   maintained a great cultural diversity as its new inhabitants arrived
   from all parts of the subcontinent. In 1958, the capital of Pakistan
   was shifted from Karachi to Rawalpindi and then to Islamabad in 1960.
   This marked the start of a long period of decline in the city, owing to
   a lack of governmental attention and development. The 1980’s and 90’s
   saw an influx of refugees from the Afghan war into Karachi. Political
   tensions between the Mohajir groups (descendents of migrants from the
   partition era) and other groups also erupted and the city was wracked
   with political and sectarian violence. Most of these tensions have now
   simmered down.

   Karachi continues to be an important financial and industrial centre
   for the country and handles most of the overseas trade of Pakistan and
   the Central Asian countries. It accounts for a large portion of the GDP
   of Pakistan and a large chunk of the country's white collar workers.
   Karachi's population has continued to grow and is estimated to have
   passed the 15 million mark, although official figures still show a
   population of around 13.5 million. The current economic boom in
   Pakistan has also resulted in a new period of resurgence in the economy
   of Karachi and a lot of new opportunities have opened up in the city.
   The city government is also undertaking a massive upgrading of the
   city’s infrastructure, which promises to again put Karachi into the
   lineup of one of the world’s greatest metropolitan cities.

Geography and climate

   Karachi is located in the south of Pakistan, on the coast of the
   Arabian Sea. The city covers an area of approximately 3,530 square
   kilometers, comprised largely of flat or rolling plains, with hills on
   the western and northern boundaries of the urban sprawl. Two rivers
   pass through the city: the Malir River which flows from the east
   towards the south and centre, and the Lyari River, which flows from
   north to the south west. The Karachi Harbour is a sheltered bay to the
   south-west of the city, protected from storms by the Sandspit Beach,
   the Manora Island and the Oyster Rocks. The Arabian Sea beach lines the
   southern coastline of Karachi. Dense mangroves and creeks of the Indus
   Delta can be found towards the south east side of the city. Towards the
   west and the north is Cape Monze, an area marked with projecting sea
   cliffs and rocky sandstone promontories. Some excellent beaches can
   also be found in this area.

   Located on the coast, Karachi tends to have a relatively mild climate
   with low levels of average precipitation (approximately 10 inches per
   annum), the bulk of which occurs during the July-August monsoon season.
   Winters are mild and the summers are hot, however the proximity to the
   sea maintains humidity levels at a near-constant high and cool sea
   breezes relieve the heat of the summer months. Due to high temperatures
   during the summer (ranging from 30 to 44 degrees Celsius from April
   through August), the winter months (November through February) are
   generally considered the best times to visit Karachi. July, December
   and January have pleasing and cloudy weather when most of the social
   events, ranging from weddings to charity fundraisers, frequently take
   place. Tourists and expatriates visit Karachi in these months.

    Karachi temperatures Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
    Avg. high (in °C)    25  26  29  32  34  34  33  31  31  33  31  27
    Avg. low (in °C)     13  14  19  23  26  28  27  26  25  22  18  14

Government

   The City of Karachi Municipal Act was promulgated in 1933. Initially
   the Municipal Corporation comprised the mayor, the deputy mayor and 57
   councilors. The Karachi Municipal Corporation was changed to a
   Metropolitan Corporation in 1976. The administrative area of Karachi
   was a second-level subdivision known as Karachi Division, which was
   subdivided into five districts: Karachi Central, Karachi East, Karachi
   South, Karachi West and Malir. In 2000, the government of Pakistan
   designed a new devolution plan in order to decentralize the political,
   administrative and financial resources and responsibilities. This plan
   abolished the earlier second-level division and merged the five
   districts of Karachi into a Karachi District. When the devolution plan
   was implemented in 2001, this district officially became a City
   District, with the City District Government of Karachi handling its
   government. Karachi now has a three-tier federated system, formed by:
     * The City District Government (CDG)
     * Town Municipal Administrations
     * Union Council Administrations

   The City-District of Karachi is divided into eighteen towns governed by
   elected municipal administrations responsible for infrastructure and
   spatial planning, development facilitation, and municipal services
   (water, sanitation, solid waste, repairing roads, parks, street lights,
   and traffic engineering), with some functions being retained by the
   CDG.

   The towns are sub-divided into 178 localities governed by elected union
   councils (UC's), which are the core element of the local government
   system. Each UC is a body of thirteen directly elected members
   including a Nazim ( mayor) and a Naib Nazim ( deputy mayor). The UC
   Nazim heads the union administration and is responsible for
   facilitating the CDG to plan and execute municipal services, as well as
   for informing higher authorities about public concerns and complaints.

   In the local body elections of 2005, Syed Mustafa Kamal was elected
   City Nazim of Karachi to succeed Naimatullah Khan & Nasreen Jalil was
   elected as the City Naib Nazim. Mustafa Kamal was the provincial
   minister for information technology in Sindh before assuming office as
   the city's mayor. His predecessor, Naimatullah Khan was chosen as one
   of the best mayors of 2004-05 in Asia. Mustafa Kamal is advancing the
   development trail left by Naimatullah Khan, and has been actively
   involved in maintaining care of the city's municipal systems.
     * Baldia Town
     * Bin Qasim Town
     * Gadap Town
     * Gulberg Town
     * Gulshan Town
     * Jamshed Town

                       * Kemari Town
                       * Korangi Town
                       * Landhi Town
                       * Liaquatabad Town
                       * Lyari Town
                       * Malir Town

                                           * New Karachi Town
                                           * North Nazimabad Town
                                           * Orangi Town
                                           * Saddar Town
                                           * Shah Faisal Town
                                           * SITE Town

     * Note: Defense Housing Society Karachi is located in Karachi but is
       not a town of Karachi nor part of any town of Karachi. It is
       administered by the Defence Housing Authority, Karachi of Pakistan
       Army.

Demographics

       Year                                               Urban Population
       __________________________________________________________________

       1856                                                         56,875
       1872                                                         56,753
       1881                                                         73,560
       1891                                                        105,199
       1901                                                        136,297
       1911                                                        186,771
       1921                                                        244,162
       1931                                                        300,799
       1941                                                        435,887
       1951                                                      1,068,459
       1961                                                      1,912,598
       1972                                                      3,426,310
       1981                                                      5,208,132
       1998                                                      9,269,265
       2006                                                     13,969,284

   Trend of Population Growth in Karachi
   Enlarge
   Trend of Population Growth in Karachi

   The population and demographic distribution in Karachi has undergone
   numerous changes over the past 150 years. Non-governmental and
   international sources report that Karachi's current population is
   estimated to be 15 to 20 million — a thirty-seven-fold increase over
   its population in 1947 (400,000). The city's population is currently
   growing at about 5% per year (mainly on account of rural-urban internal
   migration), including an estimated 45,000 migrant workers coming to the
   city every month from different parts of Pakistan. Karachi is the one
   of the largest megacities in the world.

   Before the partition of India, Karachi had large communities of
   Muslims, Hindus, Balochis, Gujaratis, Kachhis, Tharis, Sindhis, Parsis,
   Goans, Lebanese, Iranians, and European merchants. After partition of
   India, a large number of Muslim migrants from the newly created India
   settled in Karachi. Likewise, a large number of Hindus left the city
   for India. Predominantly Urdu speaking, the migrant refugees known as
   Muhajirs formed the dominant ethnic group in Karachi. Muhajirs hailed
   from a lot of different parts of India and brought with them their
   local cultures and cuisines, thus further adding to the already diverse
   mix of people that earlier inhabited Karachi. Currently, these older
   groups of people and continuing migration from different parts of
   Pakistan have contributed to a rich and diverse mix of people that
   inhabit Karachi. This has given the city a very metropolitan character,
   and has earned it the title as the Melting Pot of Pakistan.

   The new government of the Pakistan Muslim League alotted most of the
   property left over by the departing Hindus and other groups to the
   Indian Muslim refugees which had taken an active part in the creation
   of Pakistan, in order to help them settle into the new country.
   However, the large number of Muhajirs also formed the dominant
   political majority in the city, which gave them substantial political
   clout, to the chagrin of the earlier provincial Sindhi and Balochi
   inhabitants. Also, the vagaries of mass migration of populations
   between the two newly independent countries gave rise to ethnic
   tensions which have surfaced in Karachi from time to time.

   A large community of Zoroastrian-Persian Parsis have also lived in
   Karachi since pre-Independence days. The Parsis of Karachi have played
   important roles in the history and development of the city serving in
   key government positions, undertaking large philanthropic projects and
   conducting business in the city. Since independence however, most of
   them migrated to western nations and currently, the Parsi population of
   the city numbers about 15,000. There is also a large community of Goan
   Catholic Christians who settled in Karachi during the British era.

   Since 1979, due to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and continued
   upheavals in their country, a steady stream of Afghan refugees have
   also taken up permanent residence in and around Karachi. These refugees
   now number more than one million and themselves consist of a number of
   ethnic groups: Pakhtuns, Tajiks, Hazaras, Uzbeks, and Turkmen. There
   are also hundreds of thousands of Bengalis, Arabs, Iranians, Arakani
   Muslim refugees (from Rakhine State in Myanmar) and African immigrants
   who are also settled in Karachi. Most refugee minorities of the city
   live in slum areas.

   According to 1998 census the linguistic distribution of population is:
   [[Urdu speaking Mohajirs]] 60%; Punjabi 4%; Sindhi 9.92%; Pushto 8.42%;
   Balochi 8.94%; Gujaratis 3.11%; others 7%. The others include Seraikis,
   Dawoodi Bohra, Memon, Ghanchi, Brahui, Makrani, Khowar, Burushaski,
   Arabic, Persian and Bengali. The religious breakdown of the city is:
   Muslim 94.49%; Christian 1.35%; Hindu 3.83%; Ahmadi 0.17%; others
   0.13%. The others include Parsi, Jews and Buddhist.

Economy

   A view of the I. I. Chundrigar Rd skyline
   Enlarge
   A view of the I. I. Chundrigar Rd skyline

   Karachi is the financial capital of Pakistan; it accounts for the
   lion's share of GDP and generates approximately 65% percent of the
   Provincial Revenue where as whole province Sindh generates almost 23%
   of the total National Revenue . Most of Pakistan's public and private
   banks have their head offices in Karachi. Nearly all of these are
   located on I.I Chundrigar Road (Pakistan's Wall Street). During the
   1960s, Karachi was seen as an economic role model around the developing
   world, and there was much praise for the way its economy was
   progressing. Many countries sought to emulate Pakistan's economic
   planning strategy and one of them, South Korea, copied the city's
   second "Five-Year Plan, 1960-65".

   Besides being the banking and finance capital of the country, Karachi
   also hosts the offices of almost every major foreign multinational
   corporation as well as corporations based in Pakistan. It is home to
   the largest stock exchange in Pakistan: the Karachi Stock Exchange,
   which was considered by many economists to be one of the prime reasons
   for Pakistan's 7% GDP growth across 2005. The Port of Karachi and
   nearby Port Qasim are the two main seaports of Pakistan, and Jinnah
   International Airport is the largest airport in Pakistan. All ports,
   Steel Mill and Jinnah Intl. Airport are situated in the Malir district.

   The recent trends involving ICTs ( Information & Communications
   Technology), electronic media and call centers have become a
   significant part of Karachi's business hierarchy. Call centers for
   foreign companies have been targeted as a significant area of growth,
   with the government making efforts to reduce taxes by as much as 80% in
   order to gain foreign investments in the IT sector. Karachi is also the
   software outsourcing hub of Pakistan. Many of Pakistan’s independent
   television and radio channels are headquartered in Karachi. Geo, ARY,
   Hum and AAJ TV are the most popular ones; some of the local stations
   include KTN, Sindh TV, and Kashish TV .

   Karachi has a huge industrial base, with several large industrial zones
   located on the fringes of the main city. The primary areas are
   textiles, pharmaceuticals, steel, and automobiles. In addition, Karachi
   has a vibrant cottage industry and there is a rapidly flourishing Free
   Zone with an annual growth rate of nearly 6.5%. Karachi has an expo
   centre which hosts many regional and international exhibitions.

   Toyota and Suzuki Motor Company are located in Karachi. Among others,
   Millat Tractors, Adam Motor Company, HinoPak Buses and Trucks
   manufacturing plants are also located in Karachi. The automobile
   manufacturing sector is one of the fastest growing industries in
   Pakistan, and a large vendor industry associated with it is also
   located principally in Karachi.

Development

   Emaar's Crescent Bay in Pakistan
   Enlarge
   Emaar's Crescent Bay in Pakistan

   There are many development projects proposed, approved and under
   construction in Karachi city. Among the projects of note, Emaar
   Properties is proposing to invest $43bn (£22.8bn) in Karachi to develop
   Bundal Island, which is a 12,000 acre island just off the coast of
   Karachi. The Karachi Port Trust is envisioning another Rs. 20 billion
   project, the Port Tower Complex, which will be 1,947 feet high, the
   height indicating the Independence of Pakistan (14th August 1947), and
   is slated for completion within six years. It is expected to comprise a
   hotel, a shopping center, and an exhibition centre. The main feature of
   the venture is supposed to be a revolving restaurant, which will also
   contain a viewing gallery offering a panoramic view of the coastline
   and the city. The Tower is planned to be located at the Clifton
   shoreline.

   Some other mega projects that are proposed or under construction
   include: MCB Tower (completed), Port tower complex (proposed}, Crescent
   Bay, Karachi (approved), Karachi Creek Marina (under construction),
   Dolmen Towers (under construction), I.T Tower (approved), Bundal Island
   (approved), Buddo Island (approved), Square One Towers (under
   construction), Sign Tower (approved), Karachi Mass Transit System,
   Enshaa Towers (approved), Karachi FPCCI Tower (proposed) and, Karachi
   Waterfront (approved)

Culture

   Mohatta Palace
   Enlarge
   Mohatta Palace

   Karachi is home to some of Pakistan's important cultural institutions.
   The National Academy of Performing Arts, located in the newly renovated
   Hindu Gymkhana offers a two year diploma course in performing arts that
   include classical music and contemporary theatre. The All Pakistan
   Musical Conference, linked to the 45-year old similar institution in
   Lahore, has been holding its Annual Music Festival since its inception
   in 2004. The Festival is now a well-established feature of the city
   life of Karachi that is awaited anxiously and attended by more than
   3000 citizens of Karachi as well as people from other cities. The
   National Arts Council (Koocha-e-Saqafat) also has musical performances
   and Mushaira (poetry recitations). Karachi has a few museums including
   the Mohatta Palace museum that regularly has exhibitions as well as the
   National Museum of Pakistan. The Kara Film Festival organized annually
   showcases independent Pakistani and international films and
   documentaries.

   The everyday lifestyle of Karachi differs substantially from that of
   other Pakistani towns. The culture of Karachi is characterized by the
   blending of Middle Eastern, South Asian and Western influences, as well
   as the status of the city as a major international business centre. As
   a whole, there is considerable diversity in culture, and this diversity
   has produced unique cultural amalgam of its own type. Karachi also
   hosts the largest middle class stratum of the country. Karachi is the
   provincial capital of Sindh Provincial region.

Education

   The Karachi campus of the FAST Institute of Computer Science university
   Enlarge
   The Karachi campus of the FAST Institute of Computer Science university

   Karachi has the highest literacy rate in Pakistan along with the most
   universities and colleges. The city is well-known for its young student
   population who flock there from all parts of Pakistan. Most
   universities of Karachi are considered to be amongst the premier
   educational institutions of Pakistan with competitive admissions
   processes.

Sports

   Popular sports in Karachi include cricket, hockey, boxing, football and
   horse racing. The major venue for cricket matches is the National
   Stadium but matches are also hosted at the UBL Sports Complex, the A.
   O. Cricket Stadium, the KCCA Cricket Ground, the Karachi Gymkhana Field
   and the DHA Cricket Stadium. The city also has facilities for hockey
   (the Hockey Stadium of Pakistan, UBL Hockey Ground), boxing (KPT Sports
   Complex), squash ( Jehangir Khan Squash Complex) and football (Peoples
   Football Stadium and the Polo Grounds). In 2005, the city hosted the
   SAFF Cup Football Tournament at the People's Football Stadium. Marinas
   and Boating Clubs also add to the diverse sporting activities in
   Karachi.
   Karachi Karsaz Golf Club
   Enlarge
   Karachi Karsaz Golf Club

   Karachi has a number of sporting clubs such as the Karachi Gymkhana,
   the Sindh Club, the Karachi Club, the Muslim Gymkhana, the Creek Club
   and the DHA Club that provide sporting facilities to their members,
   including tennis, badminton and squash courts, swimming pools, jogging
   tracks, gymnasiums, billiards and much more. There are two world class
   golf clubs, at DHA and Karsaz. Informal sporting activities are also
   popular, such as night-time cricket which can be seen at weekends when
   people play brightly-lit night matches on less traversed city streets.

Sites of interest

   Camel ride on a Karachi beach
   Enlarge
   Camel ride on a Karachi beach
   DHA Marina Club, Karachi
   Enlarge
   DHA Marina Club, Karachi
   A quiet residential neighborhood in Karachi
   Enlarge
   A quiet residential neighbourhood in Karachi
   Empress Market, Saddar, Karachi
   Enlarge
   Empress Market, Saddar, Karachi
   KANUPP beach from the eyes of Zuhair siddiqui
   Enlarge
   KANUPP beach from the eyes of Zuhair siddiqui
   KANUPP beach from the eyes of Zuhair siddiqui
   Enlarge
   KANUPP beach from the eyes of Zuhair siddiqui
     * General
          + Mazar-e-Quaid (National Mausoleum of Pakistan - Muhammad Ali
            Jinnah the Tomb of the founder or Founding Father)
          + Koocha-e-Saqafat (National Arts Council)
          + Masjid e Tooba (Largest single-domed mosque in the world)
          + Ibrahim Ismail Chundrigar Road (Karachi's Wall Street)
          + Aga Khan University and the Aga Khan University Hospital

     * Beaches and Waterfront
          + Manora Beach
          + Clifton beach and the Jehangir Kothari Parade
          + Seaview, Clifton beach
          + Hawke's Bay Beach (breeding ground for endangered turtles)
          + Paradise Point (a rock promontory in the sea with a natural
            arch)
          + Sandspit Beach
          + French Beach
          + Russian Beach
          + Port Fountain Jet (600 ft high pressure water fountain)
          + Zamzama Commercial Area (famous for its designer outlets and
            cafes)
          + Abdullah Shah Ghazi Mausoleum ( Ummayad general and Karachi's
            patron Sufi saint)

     * Museums
          + Pakistan Air Force Museum
          + Pakistan Maritime Museum
          + National Museum of Pakistan
          + The Mohatta Palace Museum of Karachi and regional history
          + Karachi Expo Centre

     * Colonial Buildings
          + Merewether Tower
          + Frere Hall
          + Khaliq Deena Hall
          + Jehangir Kothari Parade
          + Governor's House
          + St. Patrick's Cathedral
          + Sindh High Court
          + Former Victoria Museum (later used by the Supreme Court)
          + Hindu Gymkhana (now National Academy of Performing Arts)
          + Empress Market
          + Sind Club

     * Islands
          + Clifton Oyster Rocks
          + Manora Island
          + Bundal Island
          + Bhit Shah

     * Amusement Parks
          + Bin Qasim Park (Old Clifton)
          + Safari Park (University Road)
          + Aladdin Park (Rashid Minhas Road)
          + Sindbad
          + Karachi Zoological Gardens‎ (Gandhi Garden)
          + Sea View's Park
          + Aziz Bhatti Park
          + Old Sabzi Mandi Park (University Road)
          + Hill Park

     * Farm Houses
          + Memon Farm House

     * Resorts
          + Dream World Resort
     * Race Course
          + Race Course of University Road

     * Cinema
          + Capri Cinema
          + Nishat Cinema
          + Prince Cinema
          + Lyric Cinema
          + Universe Cineplex (Clifton)

     * Food
          + Hyderabad Colony
          + Burns Road
          + Many other places like Clifton, DHA, Shahrah-e-Faisal, North
            Nazimabad, Karimabad, Gulshan-e-Iqbal, Gulistan-e-Jauhar, etc.

   Clifton beach recently suffered a recent oil spill disaster, the beach
   has been partly cleaned and has floodlights installed for nighttime
   visitors. The government has embarked on the beautification of
   Karachi's coastline by building a Beach park in Clifton that will
   eventually be connected to the Jehangir Kothari parade and Bagh Ibn-
   Qasim. There are other beaches near the city such as Sandspit, Hawke's
   Bay, the French Beach, Russian beach and Paradise Point (a sandstone
   rock promontory with a natural arch) that are frequented by visitors
   every day.

Shopping

   Sunday textile market on the sidewalks of Karachi
   Enlarge
   Sunday textile market on the sidewalks of Karachi

   Karachi is dotted with many shopping areas, large and small, attracting
   large crowds of shoppers in the evenings. Saddar, Gulf Shopping Mall,
   Bahadurabad, Tariq Road, Zamzama, Zaib-un-nissa Street (Elphinestone
   Street) and Hyderi are the most famous shopping areas in the city. One
   can find all sorts of clothing, garments, and fabrics in Karachi's
   bazaars, as well as a number of other items. The Saddar area in
   downtown Karachi is also home to countless large and small markets
   dealing from everyday household items to clothing and fabrics to
   electronics. Empress Market in Saddar is a large Victorian-era market,
   home to wholesalers of spices and other items. Saddar is also home to
   the Rainbow Centre, one of the largest hubs of pirated CDs in the
   world. Some other notable shopping areas include Paposh Market and
   Hydari. Every Sunday, a weekly birds and animals market and a nursery
   is also held in Liaquatabad.

   Karachi also has a number of large modern shopping malls, among which
   the Park Towers, The Forum, Millennium Mall and Dolmen Mall are
   notable. More of these malls are currently being built, including the
   Atrium Mall, Jumeira Mall, IT Tower and the Dolmen City Mall.

Transportation

   Jinnah Terminal of the Quaid-e-Azam International Airport, Karachi
   Enlarge
   Jinnah Terminal of the Quaid-e-Azam International Airport, Karachi

   The Malir District of Karachi has a modern international airport called
   the Jinnah International Airport, Pakistan's busiest. The city's old
   airport terminals are now used for Hajj flights, cargo facilities, and
   ceremonial visits from heads of state. U.S. Coalition forces used the
   old terminals for their logistic supply operations as well. The city
   also has two other airstrips used primarily by the armed forces.

   Karachi has the largest shipping ports in Pakistan at the Port of
   Karachi and Port Qasim in the Malir District. These seaports have
   modern facilities and not only handle trade for Pakistan, but also
   serve as ports for Afghanistan and the land-locked Central Asian
   countries. Plans have been announced for new passenger facilities at
   Karachi Port. Karachi is linked by rail to the rest of the country by
   the Pakistan Railways. The Karachi City Station and Karachi Cantonment
   Station are the city's two major railway stations. The railway system
   handles a large amount of freight to and from the Karachi port apart
   from providing passenger services to people travelling up country.
   There are plans to extend the circular railway system to play a part in
   the city's mass transit. Currently, primarily motorists and minibuses
   handle commuter traffic, but there are plans to construct a light-rail
   based mass transit system in the city to decongest the roads and
   provide quick service to commuters.

Land ownership

   Karachi is located in semi-arid coastal desert area with very limited
   agriculture land along the two small seasonal rivers, Lyari River and
   Malir River that pass through the city. Before independence, the area
   around Karachi had sparse Balochi nomadic and fishing population and
   most of the land was state owned. At the time of independence, Karachi
   was chosen as the first capital of Pakistan and the land area came
   under tight state control. According to the data prepared by the Master
   Plan and Environmental Control Unit of the Karachi Development
   Authority (KDA) in 1988, nearly 400,000 acres (1600 km²) of the 425,529
   acres (1722 km²) that make up Karachi's metropolitan area is in some
   form of public ownership. Government of Sindh owns 137,687 acres (557
   km²), KDA 124,676 acres, Karachi Port Trust (KPT) 25,259 acres, Karachi
   Metropolitan Corporation (KMC) 24,189 acres, Army Cantonment Board
   18,596 acres, Pakistan Steel Mills 19,461 acres, Defense Housing
   Society 16,567 acres, Port Qasim 12,961 acres, Government of Pakistan
   4,051 acres and Pakistan Railways 3,119 acres. In late 1990s the
   undeveloped land belonging to KDA was transferred to the Malir
   Development Authority (MDA) and Lyari Development Authority (LDA). The
   Defence Housing Authority has purchased 12,000 acres (49 km²) of land
   from the Sindh government along the Super Highway and will build Phase
   II of Defense Housing Society.

Problems

   As one of the most rapidly growing cities in the world, Karachi faces
   problems that are central to many developing metropolises including
   overpopulation, overcrowding, traffic, pollution, poverty, terrorism
   and crime.

   Karachi faces a very severe problem of excessive traffic. According to
   official statistics, 550 people are killed annually in road traffic
   accidents. The number of cars is more than the existing road
   infrastructure was designed for. This makes driving a considerable
   danger and causes loss of time due to traffic congestion. A number of
   projects are underway in Karachi to battle these problems, including
   construction of flyovers and underpasses at various choke points.

   The excess of traffic and lack of control on vehicle exhaust inevitably
   creates a home to numerous air pollutants. The level of air pollution
   in Karachi is estimated to be 20 times higher than World Health
   Organization standards. Additionally, burning debris is common practice
   and the lack of discipline in general has also given way to soot and
   pollutants.

   To further worsen matters, recently many trees have been cleared in the
   city to expand the roads, with no arrangement for restoration. In
   response to many citizens' and naturalists' complains concerning the
   further deterioration of air quality that the ongoing activity may
   cause, the city government has announced a tree-planting in the
   September of 2006 that would last for the upcoming three months.

   Recently Karachi has faced a slew of new problems. Water shortages are
   very common, and most of the city can only obtain water from private
   sources. Power is the second major problem, during the heat of the
   summer in 2006 power went out almost everyday, often for several hours.
   While the government promises improvement it is not clear where the
   money will come from as even though Karachi produces a majority of
   Pakistan's GDP the majority is siphoned off by the federal government.

City Partnership

   Karachi has city partnerships with:
     * People's Republic of China Shanghai, China: Since 1984

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karachi"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
