   #copyright

Kargil War

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Military History and War

   Kargil War
   Part of the Indo-Pakistani Wars
   An Indian Bofors 155 mm howitzer field gun being repositioned for
   aiming at Pakistani positions during the war.

      Date     May-July 1999
    Location   Kargil district, Kashmir
     Result    India regains possession of Kargil
   Casus belli Pakistani troops and Kashmir militants infiltrate into the
               Indian side of LOC and take over vital peaks in Kargil.
   Territorial
   changes     Status quo ante bellum
   Combatants
   India Pakistan,
   Kashmiri secessionists
   Strength
   30,000 5,000
   Casualties
   Indian Official Figures:
   527 killed,
   1,363 wounded
   1 POW Pakistani Estimates:
   357–4,000+ killed
   (Pakistan troops)
   665+ soldiers wounded

   8 POWs.
                   Indo-Pakistani Wars
   War of 1947 – War of 1965 – War of 1971 – Kargil War

   The Kargil War, also known as the Kargil conflict, was an armed
   conflict between India and Pakistan that took place between May and
   July 1999 in the Kargil district of Kashmir. The cause of the war was
   the infiltration of Pakistani soldiers and Kashmiri militants into
   positions on the Indian side of the Line of Control, which serves as
   the de facto border between the two nations. Pakistan blamed the
   fighting entirely on independent Kashmiri insurgents; however,
   documents left behind by casualties and later statements by Pakistan's
   Prime Minister and Chief of Army Staff showed involvement of Pakistani
   paramilitary forces. The Indian Army, supported by the air force,
   attacked the Pakistani positions and, with international diplomatic
   support, eventually forced a Pakistani withdrawal across the Line of
   Control (LoC).

   The war is one of the most recent examples of high altitude warfare in
   mountainous terrain, and posed significant logistical problems for the
   combating sides. This was the first ground war between the two
   countries after they had developed nuclear weapons. (India and Pakistan
   both test-detonated fission devices in May 1998, though the first
   Indian nuclear test was conducted in 1974.) The conflict led to
   heightened tensions between the two nations and increased defence
   spending on the part of India. In Pakistan, the aftermath caused
   instability to the government and the economy, and on October 12, 1999
   a coup d'etat by the military placed army chief Pervez Musharraf in
   power.

Location

   Location of conflict
   Enlarge
   Location of conflict

   Before the Partition of India in 1947, Kargil was part of
   Gilgit-Baltistan, a region of many diverse linguistic, ethnic and
   religious groups, due in part to the many isolated valleys separated by
   some of the world's highest mountains. The First Kashmir War (1947-48)
   resulted in most of the Kargil region remaining an Indian territory;
   then, after Pakistan's defeat in the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, the
   remaining areas, including strategic military posts, also passed into
   Indian territory. Notably, Kargil is the only district in the Ladakh
   subdivision that has a Muslim majority. The town and district of Kargil
   is in what is now called Jammu and Kashmir. The town lies on the Line
   of Control (LOC), the defacto border for the two nations, located 120
   km (75 miles) from Srinagar, facing the Northern Areas of Pakistan.
   Like other areas in the Himalayas, it has a temperate climate. Summers
   are cool with frigid nights, while winters are long and cold with
   temperatures often dropping to −40 °C (−40 °F). A national highway
   connecting Srinagar to Leh cuts through Kargil.

   The area that witnessed the infiltration and fighting is a 160 km long
   stretch on the border of the LOC, overlooking a vital highway on the
   Indian side of Kashmir. Apart from the district capital, Kargil, the
   front line in the conflict encompassed the tiny town of Drass as well
   as the Batalik sector, Mushko Valley and other nearby areas along the
   de facto border. The military outposts on these ridges were generally
   around 5,000 metres (16,000 feet) high, with a few as high as 5,600
   metres (18,000 feet). One of the main reasons why Kargil was
   specifically targeted for incursions was its terrain lent itself to a
   pre-emptive seizure. With tactically vital features and well-prepared
   defensive posts atop the peaks, it provided an ideal high ground for a
   defender akin to a fortress. Any attack to dislodge the enemy and
   reclaim high ground in a mountain warfare would require a far higher
   ratio of attackers to defenders, which is further exacerbated by the
   high altitude and freezing temperatures. Additionally, Kargil was just
   173 km (108 mi) from the Pakistan town of Skardu, which was capable of
   providing logistical and artillery support to the Pakistani combatants.
   All these tactical reasons, plus the Kargil district being a Muslim
   majority, were probably contributing factors to why Kargil was chosen
   as the location to attack.

Background

   After the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971, there had been a long
   period of relative calm among the two neighbours. But during the 1990s,
   escalating tensions and conflict with separatists in Kashmir as well as
   nuclear tests by both countries in 1998 changed the scenario. Despite
   the belligerent atmosphere, both countries signed the Lahore
   Declaration in February 1999 to provide a peaceful and bilateral
   solution to the Kashmiri issue. However, elements in the Military of
   Pakistan covertly trained and sent troops and paramilitary forces, some
   allegedly in the guise of mujahideen, into the Indian territory. The
   aim was to sever the link between Kashmir and Ladakh, and cause Indian
   forces to withdraw from the Siachen Glacier, thus forcing India to
   negotiate a settlement of the broader Kashmir dispute. Pakistan also
   believed that any tension in the region would internationalise the
   Kashmir issue, helping it to secure a speedy resolution. Yet another
   goal may have been to boost the morale of the decade-long rebellion in
   Indian-held Kashmir by taking a proactive role. Some writers have
   speculated that the operation's objective may also have been as a
   retalliation for India's Operation Meghdoot in 1984 that seized much of
   Siachen Glacier.

   According to India's then army chief Ved Prakash Malik, and many other
   scholars, the infiltration was code named "Operation Badr", and much of
   the background planning, including construction of logistical supply
   routes, had been undertaken much earlier. On more than one occasion,
   the army had given past Pakistani leaders (namely Zia ul Haq and
   Benazir Bhutto) similar proposals for an infiltration in the Kargil
   region in the 1980s and 1990s. However, the plans had been shelved for
   fear of drawing the nations into all-out war. Some analysts believe
   that the blueprint of attack was reactivated when Pervez Musharraf was
   appointed chief of army staff in October 1998. In a disclosure made by
   Nawaz Sharif, the then Prime Minister of Pakistan, he states that he
   was unaware of the preparation of the intrusion, and it was an urgent
   phone call from Atal Bihari Vajpayee, his counterpart in India, that
   informed him about the situation. Responding to this, Musharaf asserted
   that the Prime Minister had been briefed on the Kargil operation 15
   days ahead of Vajpayee's journey to Lahore on February 20. Sharif had
   attributed the plan to Musharraf and "just two or three of his
   cronies", a view shared by some Pakistani writers who have stated that,
   only four generals, including Musharraf, knew of the plan.

War progress

   There were three major phases to the Kargil War. First, Pakistan
   captured several strategic high points in the Indian-controlled section
   of Kashmir. India responded by first capturing strategic transportation
   routes, then militarily pushing Pakistani forces back across the Line
   of Control.

Occupation by Pakistan

   Because of the extreme winter weather in Kashmir, it was common
   practice for the Indian and Pakistan Army to abandon forward posts and
   reoccupy them in the spring. That particular spring, the Pakistan Army
   reoccupied the forward posts before the scheduled time.
   Infiltration and military build-up.
   Enlarge
   Infiltration and military build-up.

   In early May 1999, the Pakistan Army decided to occupy the Kargil
   posts, numbering around 130, and thus control the area. Troops from the
   elite Special Services Group as well as four to seven battalions of the
   Northern Light Infantry (a paramilitary regiment not part of the
   regular Pakistani army at that time) backed by Kashmiri guerrillas and
   Afghan mercenaries covertly and overtly set up bases on the vantage
   points of the Indian-controlled region. Initially, these incursions
   were not spotted due to the heavy artillery fire by Pakistan across the
   Line of Control, which provided cover for the infiltrators. But by the
   second week of May, the ambushing of an Indian patrol team, acting on a
   tip-off by a local shepherd in the Batalik sector, led to the exposure
   of the infiltration. Initially with little knowledge of the nature or
   extent of the encroachment, the Indian troops in the area claimed that
   they would evict them within a few days. However, reports of
   infiltration elsewhere along the LoC made it clear that the entire plan
   of attack was on a much bigger scale. The total area seized by the
   ingress is generally accepted to between 130 Km^2 - 200 Km^2; Musharraf
   however, stated that 500 Mi^2 (1,300 Km^2) of Indian territory was
   occupied.

   The Government of India responded with Operation Vijay, a mobilisation
   of 200,000 Indian troops. However, because of the nature of the
   terrain, division and corps operations could not be mounted; the scale
   of most fighting was at the regimental or battalion level. In effect,
   two divisions of the Indian Army, numbering 20,000, plus several
   thousand from the Indian Paramilitary Forces and the air force were
   deployed in the conflict zone. The total number of Indian soldiers that
   were involved in the military operation on the Kargil-Drass sector was
   thus close to 30,000. The number of infiltrators, including those
   providing logistical backup, has been put at approximately 5,000 at the
   height of the conflict. This figure includes troops from
   Pakistan-administered Kashmir that were involved in the war providing
   additional artillery support.

Protection of National Highway No. 1A

   The terrain of Kashmir is mountainous and at high altitudes; even the
   best roads, such as National Highway No. 1 (NH 1) from Leh to Srinagar,
   are only two lanes. The rough terrain and narrow roads slowed traffic,
   and the high altitude, which affected the ability of aircraft to carry
   loads, made control of NH 1A (the actual stretch of the highway which
   was under Pakistani fire) a priority for India. From their observation
   posts, the Pakistani forces had a clear line of sight to lay down
   indirect artillery fire on NH 1A. This was a serious problem for the
   Indian Army as the highway was its main logistical and supply route.
   The Pakistani shelling of the arterial road posed the threat of Leh
   being cut off, though an alternative (and longer) road to Leh existed
   via Himachal Pradesh.

   The infiltrators, apart from being equipped with small arms and grenade
   launchers, were also armed with mortars, artillery and anti-aircraft
   guns. Many posts were also heavily mined, with India later recovering
   nearly 9,000 anti-personnel mines according to ICBL. Pakistan's
   reconnaissance was done through unmanned aerial vehicles and AN/TPQ-36
   Firefinder radars supplied by the US. The initial Indian attacks were
   aimed at controlling the hills overlooking NH 1A, with high priority
   being given to the stretches of the highway near the town of Kargil.
   The majority of posts along the Line of Control were adjacent to the
   highway, and therefore the recapture of nearly every infiltrated post
   increased both the territorial gains and the security of the highway.
   The protection of this route and the recapture of the forward posts
   were thus ongoing objectives throughout the war. Though most of the
   posts in the vicinity of the highway were cleared by mid-June, some
   parts of the highway near Drass witnessed sporadic shelling until the
   end of the war.

Indian territory recovery

   One of the major Indian operations was the recapture of Tiger Hill.
   Shown here is the Kargil-Drass region. The highlighted area marks Tiger
   Hill.
   Enlarge
   One of the major Indian operations was the recapture of Tiger Hill.
   Shown here is the Kargil-Drass region. The highlighted area marks Tiger
   Hill.

   Once India regained control of the hills overlooking NH 1A, the Indian
   Army turned to driving the invading force back across the Line of
   Control, but elected not to pursue forces further into the
   Pakistani-controlled portion of Kashmir. The Battle of Tololing, among
   other assaults, slowly tilted the combat in India's favour.
   Nevertheless, some of the posts put up a stiff resistance, including
   Tiger Hill (Point 5140) that fell only later in the war. A few of the
   assaults occurred atop hitherto unheard of peaks – most of them unnamed
   with only Point numbers to differentiate them – which witnessed fierce
   hand to hand combat. As the operation was fully underway, about 250
   artillery guns were brought in to clear the infiltrators in the posts
   that were in the line of sight. The Bofors field howitzer (infamous in
   India due to the Bofors scandal) played a vital role, with Indian
   gunners making maximum use of the terrain that assisted such an attack.
   However, its success was limited elsewhere due to the lack of space and
   depth to deploy the Bofors gun. It was in this type of terrain that
   aerial attacks were introduced. The Indian Air Force launched Operation
   Safed Sagar but was limited by the high altitude, which in turn limited
   bomb loads and the number of airstrips that could be used. The IAF lost
   a MiG-27 strike aircraft due to an engine failure as well as a MiG-21
   fighter which was shot down by Pakistan; Pakistan said it shot down
   both jets after they crossed into its territory and one Mi-8 helicopter
   to Stinger SAMs. During attacks the IAF used laser-guided bombs to
   destroy well-entrenched positions of the Pakistani forces. It is
   estimated that in the war, nearly 700 intruders were killed by air
   action alone.

   In some vital points, neither artillery nor air power could dislodge
   the outposts manned by the Pakistan soldiers, who were out of visible
   range. The Indian Army mounted some direct frontal ground assaults
   which were slow and took a heavy toll given the steep ascent that had
   to be made on peaks as high as 18,000 feet (5,500 m). Since any
   daylight attack would be suicidal, all the advances had to be made
   under the cover of darkness, escalating the risk of freezing.
   Accounting for the wind chill factor, the temperatures were often as
   low as −11 °C to −15 °C (12 °F to 5 °F) near the mountain tops. Based
   on military tactics, much of the costly frontal assaults by the Indians
   could have been avoided if the Indian Military had chosen to blockade
   the supply route of the opposing force, virtually creating a siege.
   Such a move would have involved the Indian troops crossing the LoC as
   well as initiating aerial attacks on Pakistan soil, a manoeuvre India
   was not willing to exercise fearing an expansion of the theatre of war
   and reducing international support for its cause.

   Meanwhile, the Indian Navy also readied itself for an attempted
   blockade of Pakistani ports (primarily Karachi port) to cut off supply
   routes. Later, the then- Prime Minister of Pakistan Nawaz Sharif
   disclosed that Pakistan was left with just six days of fuel to sustain
   itself if a full-fledged war had broken out. As Pakistan found itself
   entwined in a prickly position, the army had covertly planned a nuclear
   strike on India, the news of which alarmed U.S. President Bill Clinton,
   resulting in a stern warning to Nawaz Sharif. Two months into the
   conflict, Indian troops had slowly retaken most of the ridges they had
   lost; according to official count, an estimated 75%–80% of the intruded
   area and nearly all high ground was back under Indian control.

   Following the Washington accord on July 4, where Sharif agreed to
   withdraw the Pakistan-backed troops, most of the fighting came to a
   gradual halt. In spite of this, some of the militants still holed up
   did not wish to retreat, and the United Jihad Council (an umbrella for
   all extremist groups) rejected Pakistan's plan for a climb-down,
   instead deciding to fight on. Following this, the Indian army launched
   its final attacks in the last week of July; as soon as the last of
   these Jihadists in the Drass subsector had been cleared, the fighting
   ceased on July 26. The day has since been marked as Kargil Vijay Diwas
   (Victory Day) in India. By the end of the war, India had resumed
   control of all territory south and east of the Line of Control, as was
   established in July 1972 as per the Shimla Accord.

World opinion

   Pakistan was criticised by the International community for allowing its
   paramilitary forces and insurgents to cross the Line of Control.
   Pakistan's primary diplomatic response, one of plausible deniability
   linking the incursion to what it officially termed as "Kashmiri freedom
   fighters", was in the end not successful. Veteran analysts argued that
   the battle was fought at heights where only seasoned troops could
   survive, so poorly equipped "freedom fighters" would neither have the
   ability nor the wherewithal to seize land and defend it. Moreover,
   while the army had initially denied the involvement of its troops in
   the intrusion, two soldiers were awarded the Nishan-E-Haider
   (Pakistan's highest military honour). Another 90 soldiers were also
   given gallantry awards, most of them posthumously, confirming
   Pakistan's role in the episode. India also released taped phone
   conversations between the Army Chief and a senior Pakistani general
   where the latter is recorded saying: "the scruff of [the militants]
   necks is in our hands," although Pakistan dismissed it as a "total
   fabrication". Concurrently, Pakistan made several contradicting
   statements, confirming its role in Kargil, when it defended the
   incursions saying that the LOC itself was disputed. Pakistan also
   attempted to internationalize the Kashmir issue, by linking the crisis
   in Kargil to the larger Kashmir conflict but, such a diplomatic stance
   found few backers on the world stage.

   As the Indian counter-attacks picked up momentum, Pakistani prime
   minister Nawaz Sharif flew to meet U.S. president Bill Clinton on July
   4 to obtain support from the United States. Clinton rebuked Sharif,
   however, and asked him to use his contacts to rein in the militants and
   withdraw Pakistani soldiers from Indian territory. Clinton would later
   reveal in his autobiography that "Sharif’s moves were perplexing" since
   the Indian prime minister had travelled to Lahore to promote bilateral
   talks aimed at resolving the Kashmir problem and "by crossing the Line
   of Control, Pakistan had wrecked the [bilateral] talks." On the other
   hand, he applauded Indian restraint for not crossing the LoC and
   escalating the conflict into an all-out war. The other G8 nations, too,
   supported India and condemned the Pakistani violation of the LoC at the
   Cologne summit. The European Union was also opposed to the violation of
   the LoC. China, a long-time ally of Pakistan, did not intervene in
   Pakistan's favour, insisting on a pullout of forces to the LoC and
   settling border issues peacefully. Other organizations like the ASEAN
   Regional Forum too supported India's stand on the inviolability of the
   LOC. Faced with growing international pressure, Sharif managed to pull
   back the remaining soldiers from Indian territory. The joint statement
   issued by Clinton and Sharif conveyed the need to respect the Line of
   Control and resume bilateral talks as the best forum to resolve all
   disputes.

WMDs and the nuclear factor

   One of the main concerns in the international community during the
   Kargil crisis was that both neighbours had access to weapons of mass
   destruction, and if the war intensified, it could have led to nuclear
   war. Both countries had tested their nuclear capability a year before
   in 1998; India conducted its first test in 1974 while it was Pakistan's
   first-ever nuclear test. Many pundits believed the tests to be an
   indication of the escalating stakes in the scenario in South Asia. With
   the outbreak of clashes in Kashmir just a year after the nuclear tests,
   many nations took notice of the conflict and desired to end it.

   The first hint of the possible use of a nuclear bomb was on May 31 when
   Pakistani foreign secretary Shamshad Ahmad made a statement warning
   that an escalation of the limited conflict could lead Pakistan to use
   "any weapon" in its arsenal. This was immediately interpreted as an
   obvious threat of a nuclear retaliation by Pakistan in the event of an
   extended war, and the leader of Pakistan's senate noted, "The purpose
   of developing weapons becomes meaningless if they are not used when
   they are needed." Many such ambiguous statements from officials of both
   countries were viewed as an impending nuclear crisis. The limited
   nuclear arsenals of both sides, paradoxically could have led to
   'tactical' nuclear warfare in the belief that a nuclear strike would
   not have ended in total nuclear warfare with mutual assured
   destruction, as could have occurred between the United States, the USSR
   or the People's Republic of China. Some experts believe that following
   nuclear tests in 1998, Pakistani military was emboldened by its nuclear
   deterrent cover to markedly increase coercion against India.

   The nature of the India-Pakistan conflict took a more sinister
   proportion when the U.S. received intelligence that Pakistani nuclear
   warheads were being moved towards the border. Bill Clinton tried to
   dissuade Pakistan prime minister Nawaz Sharif from nuclear
   brinkmanship, even threatening Pakistan of dire consequences. According
   to a White House official, Sharif seemed to be genuinely surprised by
   this supposed missile movement and responded that India was probably
   planning the same. This was later confirmed in an article in May 2000,
   which stated that India too had readied at least five nuclear-tipped
   ballistic missiles. Sensing a deteriorating military scenario,
   diplomatic isolation, and the risks of a larger conventional and
   nuclear war, Sharif ordered the Pakistani army to vacate the Kargil
   heights. He later claimed in his official biography that General Pervez
   Musharraf had moved nuclear warheads without informing him. Recently
   however, Pervez Musharraf revealed in his memoirs that Pakistan’s
   nuclear delivery system was not operational during the Kargil war;
   something that would have put Pakistan under serious disadvantage if
   the conflict went nuclear.

   Additionally, the threat of WMD included a suspected use of chemical
   and even biological weapons. Pakistan accused India of using chemical
   weapons and incendiary weapons such as napalm against the Kashmiri
   fighters. India, on the other hand, showcased a cache of gas masks,
   among other firearms, as proof that Pakistan may have been prepared to
   use non-conventional weapons. One militant group even claimed to
   possess chemical weapons; this was later found to be a hoax, and even
   the gas masks were most likely intended by the Pakistanis as protection
   from an Indian attack. The Pakistani allegations of India using banned
   chemicals in its bombs were proven to be unfounded by the U.S.
   administration at the time and the OPCW.

Aftermath

India

   The aftermath of the war saw the rise of the Indian stock market by
   over 1,500 points. The next Indian national budget included major
   increases in military spending. From the end of the war until February
   2000, the economy of India was bullish. There was a surge in
   patriotism, with many celebrities pitching in towards the Kargil cause.
   Indians were also angered by the death of pilot Ajay Ahuja under
   controversial circumstances, and especially after Indian authorities
   reported that Ahuja had been murdered and his body mutilated by
   Pakistani troops. The war had also produced higher than expected
   fatalities for the Indian military, with a sizeable percentage of them
   including newly commissioned officers. One month later, the Atlantique
   Incident - where a Pakistan Navy plane was shot down by India - briefly
   reignited fears of a conflict between the two countries.

   After the war, the Indian government severed ties with Pakistan and
   increased defence preparedness. Since the Kargil conflict, India raised
   its defence budget as it sought to acquire more state of the art
   equipment; however, a few irregularities came to light during this
   period of heightened military expenditure. There was also severe
   criticism of the intelligence agencies like RAW, which failed to
   predict either the intrusions or the identity/number of infiltrators
   during the war. An internal assessment report by the armed forces,
   published in an Indian magazine, showed several other failings,
   including "a sense of complacency" and being "unprepared for a
   conventional war" on the presumption that nuclearism would sustain
   peace. It also highlighted the lapses in command and control, the
   insufficient troop levels and the dearth of large- calibre guns like
   the Bofors. In 2006, retired Air Chief Marshal, A.Y. Tipnis, alleged
   that the Indian Army did not fully inform the government about the
   intrusions, adding that the army chief Ved Prakash Malik, was initally
   reluctant to use the full strike capability of the Indian Air Force,
   instead requesting only helicopter gunship support. Soon after the
   conflict, India also decided to complete the project - previously
   stalled by Pakistan - to fence the entire LOC.

   The Kargil victory was followed by the 13th Indian General Elections to
   the Lok Sabha, which gave a decisive mandate to the NDA government. It
   was re-elected to power in Sept–Oct 1999 with a majority of 303 seats
   out of 545 in the Lok Sabha. On the diplomatic front, the conflict was
   a major boost to Indo-U.S. relations, as the United States appreciated
   Indian attempts to restrict the conflict to a limited geographic area.
   These ties were further strengthened following the 9/11 attacks and a
   general shift in foreign policy of the two nations. Relations with
   Israel – which had discreetly aided India with ordnance supply and
   matériel such as unmanned aerial vehicles, laser-guided bombs, as well
   as satellite imagery – also were bolstered following the end of the
   conflict.

Pakistan

   Faced with the possibility of international isolation, the already
   fragile Pakistani economy was weakened further. The morale of its
   forces after the withdrawal was affected as many units of the Northern
   Light Infantry were destroyed, and the government refused to even
   recognise the dead bodies of its soldiers, an issue that provoked
   outrage and riots in the Northern Areas. Pakistan initially did not
   acknowledge many of its casualties, but Sharif later said that over
   4,000 Pakistani troops were killed in the operation and that Pakistan
   had lost the conflict. Responding to this, Pakistan President Pervez
   Musharraf said, "It hurts me when an ex-premier undermines his own
   forces," and claimed that Indian casualties were more than that of
   Pakistan.

   Many in Pakistan had expected a victory over the Indian military based
   on Pakistani official reports on the war, but were dismayed by the turn
   of events and questioned the eventual retreat. The military leadership
   is believed to have felt let down by the prime minister's decision to
   withdraw the remaining fighters. However, some authors, including ex-
   CENTCOM Commander Anthony Zinni, and ex-PM Nawaz Sharif, state that it
   was the General who requested Sharif to withdraw the Pakistani troops.
   With Sharif placing the onus of the Kargil attacks squarely on the army
   chief Pervez Musharraf, there was an atmosphere of uneasiness between
   the two. On October 12, 1999, General Musharraf staged a bloodless coup
   d'état, ousting Nawaz Sharif.

   Benazir Bhutto, an opposition leader and former prime minister, called
   the Kargil War "Pakistan's greatest blunder". Many ex-officials of the
   military and the ISI (Pakistan's principal intelligence agency) also
   were of the view that "Kargil was a waste of time" and "could not have
   resulted in any advantage" on the larger issue of Kashmir. A retired
   Pakistani Army General, Lt Gen Ali Quli Khan Khattak, lambasted the war
   as "a disaster bigger than the East Pakistan tragedy", adding that the
   plan was "flawed in terms of its conception, tactical planning and
   execution" that ended in "sacrificing so many soldiers.". The Pakistani
   media too was vocal in its criticism of the whole plan and the eventual
   climbdown from the Kargil heights since there were no gains to show for
   the loss of lives and only resulted in international condemnation for
   its actions.

   Despite calls by many for a probe, no public commission of inquiry was
   set up to investigate the people responsible for initiating the
   conflict. However, the Pakistani political party, PML(N) recently
   unveiled a white paper which states that Nawaz Sharif constituted an
   inquiry committee that recommended a court martial for General Pervez
   Musharraf. The party alleges that Musharraf "stole the report" after
   toppling the government, to save himself. The report also claims that
   India knew about the plan 11 months before its launch, enabling a
   complete victory for India on military, diplomatic and economic fronts.
   Though the Kargil conflict had brought the Kashmir dispute into
   international focus – which was one of the aims of Pakistan – it had
   done so in negative circumstances that eroded its credibility, since
   the infiltration came just after a peace process between the two
   countries was underway. The sanctity of the LoC too received
   international recognition.

   A few changes were made to the army. In recognition of its part in the
   war, the Northern Light Infantry regiment was incorporated into the
   regular army. The war showed that despite a tactically sound plan that
   had the element of surprise, little groundwork had been done to gauge
   the politico-diplomatic ramifications. And like previous unsuccessful
   infiltrations attempts like Operation Gibraltar that sparked the 1965
   war, there was little coordination or information sharing among the
   branches of the Pakistan military. One U.S. Intelligence study is
   reported to have stated that Kargil was yet another example of
   Pakistan’s (lack of) grand strategy, repeating the follies of the
   previous wars. All these factors contributed to a strategic failure for
   Pakistan in Kargil.

Kargil War in the arts

   The brief conflict has provided considerable material for both
   filmmakers and authors alike in India. Some documentaries which were
   shot on the subject were even used by the ruling party coalition, led
   by BJP, in furthering its election campaign that immediately followed
   the war. The following is a list of the major films and dramas on the
   subject.
     * LOC: Kargil (2003), a Hindi Bollywood movie which depicts most of
       the incidents from the Kargil War was one of the longest in
       Bollywood history running for more than four hours.
     * Lakshya (2004), another Bollywood movie portraying a fictionalised
       account of the conflict. Movie critics have generally appreciated
       the realistic portrayal of characters. The film also received good
       reviews in Pakistan because it portrays both sides fairly.
     * Dhoop (2003), directed by national award winner Ashwini Chaudhary,
       which depicted the life of Anuj Nayyar's parents after his death.
       Anuj Nayyar was a captain in the Indian army and was awarded Maha
       Vir Chakra posthumously. Om Puri plays the role of S.K. Nayyar,
       Anuj's father.
     * Mission Fateh - Real Stories of Kargil Heroes, a TV series telecast
       on Sahara channel chronicling the Indian Army's missions.
     * Fifty Day War - A theatrical production on the war, the title
       indicating the length of the Kargil conflict. This was claimed to
       be the biggest production of its kind in Asia, involving real
       aircraft and explosions in an outdoor setting.

   Many other movies like Tango Charlie also drew heavily upon the Kargil
   episode, which still continues to be a plot for mainstream movies with
   a Malayalam movie "Keerthi Chakra", being based on an incident in
   Kargil. The impact of the war in the sporting arena was also visible
   during the India-Pakistan clash in the 1999 Cricket World Cup, which
   coincided with the Kargil timeline. The game witnessed heightened
   passions and was one of the most viewed matches in the tournament.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kargil_War"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
