   #copyright

Karl Popper

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Philosophers

   Western Philosophy
   20th-century philosophy
   Karl Popper
   Name: Karl Raimund Popper
   Birth: 1902 July 28 (Vienna, Austria)
   Death: 1994 September 17 (London, England)
   School/tradition: critical rationalism, fallibilism, evolutionary
   epistemology
   Main interests: Epistemology, philosophy of science, social and
   political philosophy
   Notable ideas: falsifiability, hypothetico-deductive method, open
   society
   Influences: Socrates (via Plato), Kant, Schopenhauer, Albert Einstein,
   Vienna Circle, Alfred Tarski, Otto Selz, Charles Peirce
   Influenced: Friedrich Hayek, Imre Lakatos, Paul Feyerabend, George
   Soros, David Miller, Joseph Agassi, William Warren Bartley, Ian Jarvie,
   Paul Levinson, Helmut Schmidt, Peter Munz, Bryan Magee, Konrad Lorenz
   and Jeremy Shearmur

   Sir Karl Raimund Popper, CH, MA, Ph.D., D.LITT, FBA, FRS ( July 28,
   1902 – September 17, 1994), was an Austrian and British philosopher and
   a professor at the London School of Economics. He is counted among the
   most influential philosophers of science of the 20th century, and also
   wrote extensively on social and political philosophy. Popper is perhaps
   best known for repudiating the classical observationalist- inductivist
   account of scientific method by advancing empirical falsifiability as
   the criterion for distinguishing scientific theory from non-science;
   and for his vigorous defense of liberal democracy and the principles of
   social criticism which he took to make the flourishing of the " open
   society" possible.

Life

   Karl Popper was born in Vienna (then in Austria-Hungary) in 1902 to
   middle-class parents of Jewish origins, who had both converted to
   Christianity. Popper was educated at the University of Vienna. His
   father was a bibliophile who was rumoured to have 10,000 volumes in his
   library at home. He took a PhD in philosophy in 1928, and taught in
   secondary school from 1930 to 1936.

   In 1934 he published his first book, Logik der Forschung ( The Logic of
   Scientific Discovery), in which he criticised psychologism, naturalism,
   inductionism, and logical positivism, and put forth his theory of
   potential falsifiability being the criterion for what should be
   considered science.

   In 1937, the rise of Nazism and the threat of the Anschluss led Popper
   to emigrate to New Zealand, where he became lecturer in philosophy at
   Canterbury University College New Zealand (at Christchurch). In 1946,
   he moved to England to become reader in logic and scientific method at
   the London School of Economics, where he was appointed professor in
   1949. He was president of the Aristotelian Society from 1958 to 1959.
   He was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II in 1965, and was elected a Fellow
   of the Royal Society in 1976. He retired from academic life in 1969,
   though he remained intellectually active until his death in 1994. He
   was invested with the Insignia of a Companion of Honour in 1982. Popper
   was a member of the Academy of Humanism and described himself as an
   agnostic, showing respect for the moral teachings of Judaism and
   Christianity.

   Popper won many awards and honours in his field, including the
   Lippincott Award of the American Political Science Association, the
   Sonning Prize, and fellowships in the Royal Society, British Academy,
   London School of Economics, King's College London, and Darwin College
   Cambridge. Austria awarded him the Grand Decoration of Honour in Gold.

Popper's philosophy

Philosophy of Science

   Popper coined the term critical rationalism to describe his philosophy.
   The term indicates his rejection of classical empiricism, and of the
   observationalist-inductivist account of science that had grown out of
   it. Popper argued strongly against the latter, holding that scientific
   theories are universal in nature, and can be tested only indirectly, by
   reference to their implications. He also held that scientific theory,
   and human knowledge generally, is irreducibly conjectural or
   hypothetical, and is generated by the creative imagination in order to
   solve problems that have arisen in specific historico-cultural
   settings. Logically, no number of positive outcomes at the level of
   experimental testing can confirm a scientific theory, but a single
   counterexample is logically decisive: it shows the theory, from which
   the implication is derived, to be false. Popper's account of the
   logical asymmetry between verification and falsification lies at the
   heart of his philosophy of science. It also inspired him to take
   falsifiability as his criterion of demarcation between what is and is
   not genuinely scientific: a theory should be considered scientific if
   and only if it is falsifiable. This led him to attack the claims of
   both psychoanalysis and contemporary Marxism to scientific status, on
   the basis that the theories enshrined by them are not falsifiable.
   Popper also wrote extensively against the famous Copenhagen
   interpretation of quantum mechanics. He strongly disagreed with Niels
   Bohr's instrumentalism and supported Albert Einstein's realist approach
   to scientific theories about the universe. Popper's falsificationism
   resembles Charles Peirce's fallibilism. In Of Clocks and Clouds (1966),
   Popper said he wished he had known of Peirce's work earlier.

   In All Life is Problem Solving (1999), Popper sought to explain the
   apparent progress of scientific knowledge—how it is that our
   understanding of the universe seems to improve over time. This problem
   arises from his position that the truth content of our theories, even
   the best of them, cannot be verified by scientific testing, but can
   only be falsified. If so, then how is it that the growth of science
   appears to result in a growth in knowledge? In Popper's view, the
   advance of scientific knowledge is an evolutionary process
   characterised by his formula:

           PS_1 \rightarrow TT_1 \rightarrow EE_1 \rightarrow PS_2

   In response to a given problem situation (PS[1]), a number of competing
   conjectures, or tentative theories (TT), are systematically subjected
   to the most rigorous attempts at falsification possible. This process,
   error elimination (EE), performs a similar function for science that
   natural selection performs for biological evolution. Theories that
   better survive the process of refutation are not more true, but rather,
   more "fit"—in other words, more applicable to the problem situation at
   hand (PS[1]). Consequently, just as a species' "biological fit" does
   not predict continued survival, neither does rigorous testing protect a
   scientific theory from refutation in the future. Yet, as it appears
   that the engine of biological evolution has produced, over time,
   adaptive traits equipped to deal with more and more complex problems of
   survival, likewise, the evolution of theories through the scientific
   method may, in Popper's view, reflect a certain type of progress:
   toward more and more interesting problems (PS[2]). For Popper, it is in
   the interplay between the tentative theories (conjectures) and error
   elimination (refutation) that scientific knowledge advances toward
   greater and greater problems; in a process very much akin to the
   interplay between genetic variation and natural selection.

   Where does "truth" fit into all this? As early as 1934 Popper wrote of
   the search for truth as one of the "strongest motives for scientific
   discovery." Still, he describes in Objective Knowledge (1972) early
   concerns about the much-criticised notion of truth as correspondence.
   Then came the semantic theory of truth formulated by the logician
   Alfred Tarski. (Its first published form was in 1933.) Popper writes of
   learning in 1935 of the consequences of Tarski's theory, to his intense
   joy. The theory met critical objections to truth as correspondence and
   thereby rehabilitated it. The theory also seemed to Popper to support
   metaphysical realism and the regulative idea of a search for truth.

   According to this theory, the conditions for the truth of a sentence as
   well as the sentences themselves are part of a metalanguage. So, for
   example, the sentence "Snow is white" is true if and only if snow is
   white. Although many philosophers have interpreted, and continue to
   interpret, Tarski's theory as a deflationary theory, Popper refers to
   it as a theory in which "is true" is replaced with "corresponds to the
   facts." He bases this interpretation on the fact that examples such as
   the one described above refer to two things: assertions and the facts
   to which they refer. He identifies Tarski's formulation of the truth
   conditions of sentences as the introduction of a "metalinguistic
   predicate" and distinguishes the following cases:

   1) "John called" is true.
   2) "It is true that John called."

   The first case belongs to the metalanguage whereas the second is more
   likely to belong to the object language. Hence, "it is true that"
   possesses the logical status of a redundancy. "Is true", on the other
   hand, is a predicate necessary for making general observations such as
   "John was telling the truth about Phillip."

   Upon this basis, along with that of the logical content of assertions
   (where logical content is inversely proportional to probability),
   Popper went on to develop his important notion of verisimilitude. In
   words, the intuitive idea behind verisimilitude is that the assertions
   or hypotheses of scientific theories can be objectively measured with
   respect to the amount of truth and falsity that they imply. And, in
   this way, one theory can be evaluated as more or less true than another
   on a quantitative basis which, Popper emphasizes forcefully, has
   nothing to do with "subjective probabilities" or other merely
   "epistemic" considerations.

   The simplest mathematical formulation that Popper gives of this concept
   can be found in the tenth chapter of Conjectures and Refutations.. Here
   he defines it as:

                          Vs(a)=CT_v(a)-CT_f(a) \,

   where Vs(a) is the verisimilitude (or truthlikeness) of a, Ct[v](a) is
   a measure of the content of truth of a, and CT[f](a) is a measure of
   the content of the falsity of a.

   Knowledge, for Popper, was objective, both in the sense that it is
   objectively true (or truthlike), and also in the sense that knowledge
   has an ontological status (i.e., knowledge as object) independent of
   the knowing subject (Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach,
   1972). He proposed three worlds (see Popperian cosmology): World One ,
   being the phenomenal world, or the world of direct experience; World
   Two , being the world of mind, or mental states, ideas, and
   perceptions; and World Three, being the body of human knowledge
   expressed in its manifold forms, or the products of the second world
   made manifest in the materials of the first world (i.e.–books, papers,
   paintings, symphonies, and all the products of the human mind). World
   Three, he argued, was the product of individual human beings in exactly
   the same sense that an animal path is the product of individual
   animals, and that, as such, has an existence and evolution independent
   of any individual knowing subjects. The influence of World Three, in
   his view, on the individual human mind (World Two) is at least as
   strong as the influence of World One. In other words, the knowledge
   held by a given individual mind owes at least as much to the total
   accumulated wealth of human knowledge, made manifest, as to the world
   of direct experience. As such, the growth of human knowledge could be
   said to be a function of the independent evolution of World Three
   (compare with Memetics). Many contemporary philosophers have not
   embraced Popper's Three World conjecture, due mostly, it seems, to its
   resemblance to Cartesian dualism.

Political philosophy

   The Liberalism series,
   part of the Politics series
   Development
   History of liberal thought
   Contributions to liberal theory
   Schools
   Classical liberalism
   Conservative liberalism
   Cultural liberalism
   Economic liberalism
   Libertarianism
   Neoliberalism
   Ordoliberalism
   Paleoliberalism
   Social liberalism
   National variants
   American liberalism
   Canadian liberalism
   Australian liberalism
   British liberalism
   Ideas
   Individual rights
   Individualism
   Liberal democracy
   Liberal neutrality
   Negative & positive Liberty
   Free market
   Mixed economy
   Open society
   Organizations
   Liberal parties worldwide
   Liberal International · Iflry
   ELDR/ ALDE · Lymec
   CALD · ALN · Relial. CLH
     __________________________________________________________________

   Politics Portal

   In The Open Society and Its Enemies and The Poverty of Historicism,
   Popper developed a critique of historicism and a defence of the 'Open
   Society' and liberal democracy. Historicism is the theory that history
   develops inexorably and necessarily according to knowable general laws
   towards a determinate end. Popper argued that this view is the
   principal theoretical presupposition underpinning most forms of
   authoritarianism and totalitarianism. He argued that historicism is
   founded upon mistaken assumptions regarding the nature of scientific
   law and prediction. Since the growth of human knowledge is a causal
   factor in the evolution of human history, and since "no society can
   predict, scientifically, its own future states of knowledge", it
   follows, he argued, that there can be no predictive science of human
   history. For Popper, metaphysical and historical indeterminism go hand
   in hand.

Problem of Induction

   Among his contributions to philosophy is his answer to David Hume's
   Problem of Induction. Hume stated that just because the sun has risen
   every day for as long as anyone can remember, doesn't mean that there
   is any rational reason to believe it will come up tomorrow. There is no
   rational way to prove that a pattern will continue on just because it
   has before.

   Popper's reply is characteristic, and ties in with his criterion of
   falsifiability. He states that while there is no way to prove that the
   sun will come up, we can theorize that it will. If it does not come up,
   then it will be disproven, but since right now it seems to be
   consistent with our theory, the theory is not disproven. Thus, Popper's
   demarcation between science and non-science serves as an answer to an
   old logical problem as well. This approach was criticised by Peter
   Singer for masking the role induction plays in empirical discovery.

Influence

   By all accounts, Popper has played a vital role in establishing the
   philosophy of science as a vigorous, autonomous discipline within
   analytic philosophy, through his own prolific and influential works,
   and also through his influence on his own contemporaries and students.
   Popper founded the Philosophy department at the London School of
   Economics and there lectured and influenced both Imre Lakatos and Paul
   Feyerabend, two of the foremost philosophers of science in the next
   generation of analytic philosophy. (Lakatos significantly modified
   Popper's position, and Feyerabend repudiated it entirely, but the work
   of both is deeply influenced by Popper and engaged with many of the
   problems that Popper set.)

   While there is some dispute as to the matter of influence, Popper had a
   long standing and close friendship with economist Friedrich Hayek, who
   was also brought to the London School of Economics from Vienna. Each
   found support and similarities in each other's work, citing each other
   often, though not without qualification. In a letter to Hayek in 1944,
   Popper stated, "I think I have learnt more from you than from any other
   living thinker, except perhaps Alfred Tarski." (See Hacohen, 2000).
   Popper dedicated his Conjectures and Refutations to Hayek. For his
   part, Hayek dedicated a collection of papers, Studies in Philosophy,
   Politics, and Economics, to Popper, and in 1982 said, "...ever since
   his Logik der Forschung first came out in 1934, I have been a complete
   adherent to his general theory of methodology." (See Weimer and
   Palermo, 1982).

   Popper also had long and mutually influential friendships with art
   historian Ernst Gombrich, biologist Peter Medawar, and neuro-scientist
   John Carew Eccles.

   Popper's influence, both through his work in philosophy of science and
   through his political philosophy, has also extended beyond the academy.
   Among Popper's students and advocates at the London School of Economics
   is the multibillionaire investor George Soros, who says his investment
   strategies are modelled on Popper's understanding of the advancement of
   knowledge through falsification. Among Soros's philanthropic
   foundations is the Open Society Institute, a think-tank named in honour
   of Popper's The Open Society and Its Enemies, which Soros founded to
   advance the Popperian defense of the open society against
   authoritarianism and totalitarianism.

   Popperian philosophy also inspired the creation of Taking Children
   Seriously, a movement arguing that children and adults should try to
   resolve their differences without coercion.

   Political philosopher Ayaan Hirsi Ali stated that her ideas of
   liberalism had been influenced by Popper's The Open Society and its
   Enemies.

Critics

   The Quine-Duhem thesis argues that it's impossible to test a single
   hypothesis on its own, since each one comes as part of an environment
   of theories. Thus we can only say that the whole package of relevant
   theories has been collectively falsified, but cannot conclusively say
   which element of the package must be replaced. An example of this is
   given by the discovery of the planet Neptune: when the motion of Uranus
   was found not to match the predictions of Newton's laws, the theory
   "There are seven planets in the solar system" was rejected, and not
   Newton's laws themselves. Popper discussed this critique of naïve
   falsificationism in Chapters 3 & 4 of The Logic of Scientific
   Discovery. For Popper, theories are accepted or rejected via a sort of
   'natural selection'. Theories that say more about the way things appear
   are to be preferred over those that do not; the more generally
   applicable a theory is, the greater its value. Thus Newton’s laws, with
   their wide general application, are to be preferred over the much more
   specific “the solar system has seven planets”.

   Thomas Kuhn’s influential book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions
   argued that scientists work in a series of paradigms, and found little
   evidence of scientists actually following a falsificationist
   methodology. Popper's student Imre Lakatos attempted to reconcile
   Kuhn’s work with falsificationism by arguing that science progresses by
   the falsification of research programs rather than the more specific
   universal statements of naïve falsificationism. Another of Popper’s
   students Paul Feyerabend ultimately rejected any prescriptive
   methodology, and argued that the only universal method characterizing
   scientific progress was anything goes.

   Popper seems to have anticipated Kuhn's observations. In his collection
   Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge (Harper
   & Row, 1963), Popper writes, "[S]cience must begin with myths, and with
   the criticism of myths; neither with the collection of observations,
   nor with the invention of experiments, but with the critical discussion
   of myths, and of magical techniques and practices. The scientific
   tradition is distinguished from the pre-scientific tradition in having
   two layers. Like the latter, it passes on its theories; but it also
   passes on a critical attitude towards them. The theories are passed on,
   not as dogmas, but rather with the challenge to discuss them and
   improve upon them."

   Another objection is that it is not always possible to demonstrate
   falsehood definitively, especially if one is using statistical criteria
   to evaluate a null hypothesis. More generally, it is not always clear
   that if evidence contradicts a hypothesis that this is a sign of flaws
   in the hypothesis rather than of flaws in the evidence. However, this
   is a misunderstanding of what Popper's philosophy of science sets out
   to do. Rather than proffering a set of instructions that merely need to
   be followed diligently to achieve science, Popper makes clear in The
   Logic of Scientific Discovery his belief that the resolution of
   conflicts between hypotheses and observations can only be a matter of
   the collective judgement of scientists, in each individual case.

   Other critics seek to vindicate the claims of historicism or holism to
   intellectual respectability, or psychoanalysis or Marxism to scientific
   status. It has been argued that Popper's student Imre Lakatos, for
   example, transformed Popper's philosophy using historicist and updated
   Hegelian historiographic ideas.

   Charles Taylor accuses Popper of exploiting his worldwide fame as an
   epistemologist to diminish the importance of philosophers of the 20th
   century continental tradition. According to Taylor, Popper's criticisms
   are completely baseless, but they are received with an attention and
   respect that Popper's "intrinsic worth hardly merits".

   In 2004 philosopher and psychologist Michel ter Hark ( Groningen, The
   Netherlands) published a book, called Popper, Otto Selz and the rise of
   evolutionary epistemology, in which he claims that Popper got part of
   his ideas from his tutor, the German-Jewish psychologist Otto Selz.
   Selz himself never published his ideas, partly because of the rise of
   Nazism which forced him to quit his work in 1933, and the prohibition
   of referencing to Selz' work.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karl_Popper"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
