   #copyright

Kenya

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Countries;
Countries

   SOS Children works in Kenya. For more information see SOS Children in
   Kenya
                            Jamhuri Ya Kenya
   Republic of Kenya

   Flag of Kenya Coat of arms of Kenya
   Flag          Coat of arms
   Motto: " Harambee"  ( Swahili)
   "Let us all pull together"
   Anthem: Ee Mungu Nguvu Yetu
   "Oh God of All Creation"
   Location of Kenya
   Capital
   (and largest city)    Nairobi
                         1°16′S 36°48′E
    Official languages   Swahili, English
   Government            Republic
    - President          Mwai Kibaki
       Independence      from the United Kingdom
    - Date               December 12, 1963
    - Republic declared  December 12, 1964
                                  Area
    - Total              580,367 km² ( 47th)
                         224,080 sq mi
    - Water (%)          2.3
                               Population
    - July 2005 estimate 34,256,000^a ( 34th)
    - 2002 census        31,138,735
    - Density            59/km² ( 140th)
                         153/sq mi
        GDP ( PPP)       2005 estimate
    - Total              $48.33 billion ( 76th)
    - Per capita         $1,445 ( 156th)
        HDI  (2003)      0.474 (low) ( 154th)
         Currency        Kenyan shilling ( KES)
         Time zone       EAT ( UTC+3)
    - Summer ( DST)      not observed ( UTC+3)
       Internet TLD      .ke
       Calling code      +254
   ^a According to cia.gov, estimates for this country explicitly take
   into account the effects of mortality due to AIDS; this can result in
   lower life expectancy, higher infant mortality and death rates, lower
   population and growth rates, and changes in the distribution of
   population by age and sex than would otherwise be expected.

   The Republic of Kenya is a country in Eastern Africa. It is bordered by
   Ethiopia to the north, Somalia to the east, Tanzania to the south,
   Uganda to the west, and Sudan to the northwest, with the Indian Ocean
   running along the southeast border.

History

Prehistory

   Fossils found in East Africa suggest that primates roamed the area more
   than 20 million years ago. Recent finds near Kenya's Lake Turkana
   indicate that hominids such as Homo habilis (1.8 and 2.5 million years
   ago) and Homo erectus (1.8 million to 350,000 years ago) are possible
   direct ancestors of modern Homo sapiens and lived in Kenya during the
   pleistocene. In 1984 one particular discovery made at Lake Turkana by
   famous paleanthropologist Richard Leakey and Kamoya Kimeu was the
   skeleton of a Turkana boy belonging to Homo erectus from 1.6 million
   years ago.

   As a rare site of dinosaur fossils in Africa, two hundred Cretaceous
   dinosaur/ theropod and giant crocodile fossils were discovered in Kenya
   in 2004: from the Mesozoic Era (over 200 million years ago), the
   fossils were found in an excavation conducted by a team from the
   University of Utah and the National Museums of Kenya in July-August
   2004 at Lokitaung Gorge, near Lake Turkana.

Colonial history

   The Portuguese were the first Europeans to explore Kenya, Vasco da Gama
   having visited Mombasa in 1498. There followed a period of Portuguese
   rule centered mainly on the coastal strip ranging from Malindi to
   Mombasa. The Portuguese colonial presence in East Africa officially
   begins after 1505, when flagships under the command of Dom Francisco de
   Almeida bombarded and plundered Kilwa, an island located in what is now
   southern Tanzania. Following this, the Portuguese sacked Mombasa
   following the refusal of the town's leadership to pay tribute. Attacks
   followed on Hoja (now known as Ungwana, located at the mouth of the
   Tana River), Barawa, Angoche, Pate and other coastal towns until the
   western Indian Ocean was a safe haven for Portuguese commercial
   interests and tribute was paid to the Portuguese crown by all of the
   city-states along the East African coast. The Portuguese colonial
   presence in East Africa served two primary purposes: the extraction of
   tribute from coastal polities and the control of trade within the
   Indian Ocean through piracy. The first objective was only mildly
   successful by all accounts as local East African rulers rebelled
   against the Portuguese frequently. However, Portuguese naval vessels
   were very disruptive to commerce within the western Indian Ocean and
   were able to demand high tariffs on items transported through the sea
   due to their strategic control of ports and shipping lanes. The
   construction of Fort Jesus in Mombasa in 1593 was meant to solidify
   Portuguese hegemony in the region, but their influence was clipped by
   the British, Dutch and Omani Arab incursions into the region during the
   seventeenth century. The Omani Arabs posed the most direct challenge to
   Portuguese influence in East Africa and besieged Portuguese fortresses,
   openly attacked naval vessels and completely expelled the Portuguese
   from the Kenyan and Tanzanian coasts by 1730.

   Omani Arab colonization of the Kenyan and Tanzanian coasts brought the
   once independent city-states under closer foreign scrutiny and
   domination than was experienced during the Portuguese period. Like
   their predecessors, the Omani Arabs were primarily able only to control
   the coastal areas, not the interior. However, the creation of clove
   plantations, intensification of the slave trade and relocation of the
   Omani capital to Zanzibar in 1839 by Seyyid Said had the effect of
   consolidating the Omani power in the region. Arab governance of all the
   major ports along the East African coast continued until British
   interests aimed particularly at ending the slave trade and creation of
   a wage-labor system began to put pressure on Omani rule. By the late
   nineteenth century, the slave trade on the open seas had been
   completely outlawed by the British and the Omani Arabs had little
   ability to resist the British navy’s ability to enforce the directive.
   The Omani presence continued in Zanzibar and Pemba until the 1964
   revolution, but the official Omani Arab presence in Kenya was checked
   by German and British seizure of key ports and creation of crucial
   trade alliances with influential local leaders in the 1880s. However,
   the Omani Arab legacy in East Africa is currently found through their
   numerous descendants found along the coast that can directly trace
   ancestry to Oman and are typically the wealthiest and most politically
   influential members of the Kenyan coastal community.

   However, most historians consider that the colonial history of Kenya
   dates from the establishment of a German protectorate over the Sultan
   of Zanzibar's coastal possessions in 1885, followed by the arrival of
   the Imperial British East Africa Company in 1888. Incipient imperial
   rivalry was forestalled when Germany handed its coastal holdings to
   Britain in 1890. This followed the building of the Kenya-Uganda railway
   passing through the country. Although this was also resisted by some
   tribes, notably the Nandi led by Orkoiyot Koitalel arap Samoei for ten
   years from 1895 to 1905, these did not stop the British building the
   railway. It is believed that the Nandi were the first tribe to be put
   in a native reserve to stop them from disrupting the building of the
   railway.

   At the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914, the governors of
   British East Africa (as the Protectorate was generally known) and
   German East Africa agreed a truce in an attempt to keep the young
   colonies out of direct hostilities. However Lt Col Paul von
   Lettow-Vorbeck took command of the German Military forces, determined
   to tie down as many British resources as possible. Completely cut off
   from Germany by the British Navy, von Lettow conducted an effective
   guerrilla campaign, living off the land, and captured British supplies,
   and remaining undefeated. He eventually surrendered in Zambia eleven
   days after the Armistice was signed in 1918. To chase von Lettow the
   British deployed Indian Army troops from India and then needed large
   numbers of porters to overcome the formidable logistics of transporting
   supplies far into the interior by foot. The Carrier Corps was formed
   and ultimately mobilised over 400,000 Africans, contributing to their
   long term politicisation.

   During the early part of the twentieth century, the interior central
   highlands were settled by British and other European farmers, who
   became wealthy farming coffee and tea. By the 1930s, approximately
   30,000 settlers lived in the area and were offered undue political
   powers because of their effects on the economy. The area was already
   home to over a million members of the Kĩkũyũ tribe, most of whom had no
   land claims in European terms (but the land belonged to the ethnic
   group), and lived as itinerant farmers. To protect their interests, the
   settlers banned the growing of coffee, introduced a hut tax, and the
   landless were granted less and less land in exchange for their labour.
   A massive exodus to the cities ensued as their ability to provide a
   living from the land dwindled.

   In 1951, Sir Horace Hector Hearne became Chief Justice in Kenya (coming
   from Ceylon, where he had been Chief Justice) and sat in the Supreme
   Court, Nairobi). He held that position until 1954 when he became an
   Appeal Justice of the West African Court of Appeal. On the night of the
   death of George VI, 5 February 1952, Hearne escorted the Princess
   Elizabeth, as she then was, to a state dinner at the Treetops Hotel,
   which is now a very popular tourist retreat. It was there that she
   "went up a princess and came down a Queen". She returned immediately to
   England, accompanied by Hearne.

   From October 1952 to December 1959, Kenya was under a state of
   emergency arising from the Mau Mau rebellion against British rule. The
   governor requested and obtained British and African troops, including
   the King's African Rifles. In January 1953, Major General Hinde was
   appointed as director of counter-insurgency operations. The situation
   did not improve for lack of intelligence, so General Sir George Erskine
   was appointed commander-in-chief of the colony's armed forces in May
   1953, with the personal backing of Winston Churchill. The capture of
   Warǔhiǔ Itote ( General China) on 15 January 1954 and the subsequent
   interrogation led to a better understanding of the Mau Mau command
   structure. Operation Anvil opened on 24 April 1954 after weeks of
   planning by the army with the approval of the War Council. The
   operation effectively placed Nairobi under military siege, and the
   occupants were screened and the Mau Mau supporters moved to detention
   camps. May 1953 also saw the Home Guard officially recognized as a
   branch of the Security Forces. The Home Guard formed the core of the
   government's anti-Mau Mau strategy as it was composed of loyalist
   Africans, not foreign forces like the British Army and King's African
   Rifles. By the end of the emergency the Home Guard had killed no fewer
   than 4,686 Mau Mau, amounting to 42% of the total insurgents. The
   capture of Dedan Kimathi on 21 October 1956 in Nyeri signified the
   ultimate defeat of the Mau Mau and essentially ended the military
   offensive.

Post-colonial history

   The first direct elections for Africans to the Legislative Council took
   place in 1957. Despite British hopes of handing power to "moderate"
   African rivals, it was the Kenya African National Union (KANU) of Jomo
   Kenyatta, that formed a government shortly before Kenya became
   independent on 12 December 1963. A year later, Kenyatta became Kenya's
   first president. At Kenyatta's death in 1978, Daniel arap Moi became
   President. Daniel arap Moi retained the Presidency, being unopposed in
   elections held in 1979, 1983 ( snap elections) and 1988, all of which
   were held under the single party constitution. The 1983 elections were
   held a year early, and were a direct result of an abortive military
   coup attempt on August 1, 1982. The abortive coup was masterminded by a
   lowly ranked Airforce serviceman, Senior Private Hezekiah Ochuka and
   was staged mainly by enlisted men in the Air Force. The attempt was
   quickly suppressed by Loyalist forces led by the Army, the General
   Service Unit (GSU) — paramilitary wing of the police — and later the
   regular police, but not without civilian casualties. This event led to
   the disbanding of the entire Airforce and a large number of its former
   members were either dismissed or court-martialled. The election held in
   1988 saw the advent of the mlolongo (queuing) system where voters were
   supposed to line up behind their favoured candidates instead of secret
   ballot. This was seen as the climax of a very undemocratic regime and
   it led to widespread agitation for constitutional reform. Several
   contentious clauses, including the one allowing only one political
   party were changed in the following years. In democratic, multiparty
   elections in 1992 and 1997, Daniel arap Moi won re-election. In 2002,
   Moi was constitutionally barred from running, and Mwai Kǐbakǐ, running
   for the opposition coalition "National Rainbow Coalition" — NARC, was
   elected President. The elections, judged free and fair by local and
   international observers, marked a turning point in Kenya's democratic
   evolution.

Politics

   Politics of Kenya takes place in a framework of a presidential
   representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Kenya is
   both head of state and head of government, and of a pluriform
   multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government.
   Legislative power is vested in both the government and the National
   Assembly. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the
   legislature.

   Since independence, Kenya has maintained remarkable stability despite
   changes in its political system and crises in neighboring countries.
   Particularly since the re-emergence of multiparty democracy, Kenyans
   have enjoyed an increased degree of freedom.

   A cross-party parliamentary reform initiative in the fall of 1997
   revised some oppressive laws inherited from the colonial era that had
   been used to limit freedom of speech and assembly. This improved public
   freedoms and contributed to generally credible national elections in
   December 1997.

   In December 2002, Kenyans held democratic and open elections, which
   were judged free and fair by international observers. The 2002
   elections marked an important turning point in Kenya’s democratic
   evolution in that power was transferred peacefully from the single
   party that had ruled the country since independence to a new coalition
   of parties

   Under the presidency of Mwai Kibaki, the new ruling coalition promised
   to focus its efforts on generating economic growth, combating
   corruption, improving education, and rewriting its constitution. These
   promises have only been partially met, however, as the new government
   has been preoccupied with internal wrangling and power disputes. In
   November 2005, the Kenyan electorate resoundingly defeated a new draft
   constitution supported by Parliament and President Kibaki. Kibaki
   responded by dismissing his entire cabinet. Kibaki eventually appointed
   a new slate of faithful ministers.

   The next general elections are set to be held in December 2007.
   President Kibaki is expected to rerun, but has not yet confirmed or
   denied it.

Administrative divisions

   The provinces of Kenya.
   Enlarge
   The provinces of Kenya.

   Kenya comprises eight provinces each headed by a centrally-appointed
   Provincial Commissioner, and one area. The provinces (mikowa) are
   subdivided into seventy-one districts ( wilaya'at) which are then
   subdivided into 262 divisions (taarafa). The divisions are then
   subdivided into approximately 1,088 locations (kata) and then
   sublocations (kata ndogo). The City of Nairobi enjoys the status of a
   full administrative province. The government supervises administration
   of districts and provinces. The provinces are:

   1 Central
   2 Coast
   3 Eastern
   4 Nairobi

            5 North Eastern
            6 Nyanza
            7 Rift Valley
            8 Western

Geography

   Map of Kenya

   Satellite image of Kenya, generated from raster graphics data supplied
   by The Map Library
   Enlarge
   Satellite image of Kenya, generated from raster graphics data supplied
   by The Map Library

   At 224,961  mi² (582,646  km²), Kenya is the world's forty-seventh
   largest country (after Madagascar). It is comparable in size to France,
   and is somewhat smaller than the US state of Texas.

   From the coast on the Indian Ocean the Low plains rise to central
   highlands. The highlands are bisected by Great Rift Valley; fertile
   plateau in west. The Kenyan Highlands comprise one of the most
   successful agricultural production regions in Africa. The highlands are
   the site of the highest point in Kenya (and the second highest in
   Africa): Mount Kenya, which reaches 5,199 meters (17,057  ft) and is
   also the site of glaciers. Climate varies from tropical along the coast
   to arid in interior.

Environment

   Kenya has considerable land area of wildlife habitat, including maasai
   mara, where blue wildebeest and other bovids participate in a large
   scale annual migration. Up to 250,000 blue wildebeest perish each year
   in the long and arduous movement to find forage in the dry season. The
   "big five" animals of Africa can also be found in Kenya: the lion,
   leopard, buffalo, rhino and elephant. A significant population of other
   wild animals, reptiles and birds can be found in the national parks and
   game reserves in the country. The environment of Kenya is threatened by
   high population growth and its side-effects.

Climate

   Kenya enjoys a tropical climate. It is hot and humid at the coast,
   temperate inland and very dry in the north and northeast parts of the
   country.

   CAPTION: Average annual temperatures

     City            note         Altitude (m) Max (°C) Min (°C)
   Mombasa       coastal town     17           30.3     22.4
   Nairobi       capital city     1,661        25.2     13.6
   Eldoret                        3,085        23.6     9.5
   Lodwar    dry north plainlands 506          34.8     23.7
   Mandera   dry north plainlands 506          34.8     25.7

   The country receives a great deal of sunshine all the year round and
   summer clothes are worn throughout the year. However, it is usually
   cool at night and early in the morning.

   The long rain season occurs from April to June. The short rain season
   occurs from October to December. The rainfall is sometimes heavy and
   often falls in the afternoons and evenings. The hottest period is from
   February to March and coldest in July to August.

   The annual migration occurs between June and September with millions of
   wildlife taking part. It has been a popular event for filmmakers to
   capture.

Economy

   Times Tower, headquarters for the Kenya Revenue Authority and the
   tallest building in East Africa, located in Nairobi, Kenya.
   Enlarge
   Times Tower, headquarters for the Kenya Revenue Authority and the
   tallest building in East Africa, located in Nairobi, Kenya.

   After independence, Kenya promoted rapid economic growth through public
   investment, encouragement of smallholder agricultural production, and
   incentives for private (often foreign) industrial investment. Gross
   domestic product (GDP) grew at an annual average of 6.6% from 1963 to
   1973. Agricultural production grew by 4.7% annually during the same
   period, stimulated by redistributing estates, diffusing new crop
   strains, and opening new areas to cultivation.

   Between 1974 and 1990, however, Kenya's economic performance declined.
   Inappropriate agricultural policies, inadequate credit, and poor
   international terms of trade contributed to the decline in agriculture.
   Kenya's inward-looking policy of import substitution and rising oil
   prices made Kenya's manufacturing sector uncompetitive. The government
   began a massive intrusion in the private sector. Lack of export
   incentives, tight import controls, and foreign exchange controls made
   the domestic environment for investment even less attractive.

   From 1991 to 1993, Kenya had its worst economic performance since
   independence. Growth in GDP stagnated, and agricultural production
   shrank at an annual rate of 3.9%. Inflation reached a record 100% in
   August 1993, and the government's budget deficit was over 10% of GDP.
   As a result of these combined problems, bilateral and multilateral
   donors suspended program aid to Kenya in 1991.

   In 1993, the Government of Kenya began a major program of economic
   reform and liberalization. A new minister of finance and a new governor
   of the central bank undertook a series of economic measures with the
   assistance of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
   As part of this program, the government eliminated price controls and
   import licensing, removed foreign exchange controls, privatized a range
   of publicly owned companies, reduced the number of civil servants, and
   introduced conservative fiscal and monetary policies. From 1994-96,
   Kenya's real GDP growth rate averaged just over 4% a year.

   In 1997, however, the economy entered a period of slowing or stagnant
   growth, due in part to adverse weather conditions and reduced economic
   activity prior to general elections in December 1997. In 2000, GDP
   growth was negative, but improved slightly in 2001 as rainfall returned
   closer to normal levels. Economic growth continued to improve slightly
   in 2002 and reached 1.4% in 2003; it was 4.3% in 2004 and 5.8% in 2005.

   In July 1997, the Government of Kenya refused to meet commitments made
   earlier to the IMF on governance reforms. As a result, the IMF
   suspended lending for 3 years, and the World Bank also put a
   $90-million structural adjustment credit on hold. Although many
   economic reforms put in place in 1993-94 remained, conservative
   economists believe that Kenya needs further reforms, particularly in
   governance, in order to increase GDP growth and combat the poverty that
   afflicts more than 57% of its population.

   The Government of Kenya took some positive steps on reform, including
   the 1999 establishment of the Kenyan Anti-Corruption Authority, and
   measures to improve the transparency of government procurements and
   reduce the government payroll. In July 2000, the IMF signed a $150
   million Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF), and the World
   Bank followed suit shortly after with a $157 million Economic and
   Public Sector Reform credit. The Anti-Corruption Authority was declared
   unconstitutional in December 2000, and other parts of the reform effort
   faltered in 2001. The IMF and World Bank again suspended their
   programs. Various efforts to restart the program through mid-2002 were
   unsuccessful.

   Under the leadership of President Kibaki, who took over on December 30,
   2002, the Government of Kenya began an ambitious economic reform
   program and has resumed its cooperation with the World Bank and the
   IMF. The new National Rainbow Coalition (NARC) government enacted the
   Anti-Corruption and Economic Crimes Act and Public Officers Ethics Act
   in May 2003 aimed at fighting graft in public offices. Other reforms
   especially in the judiciary, public procurement etc., have led to the
   unlocking of donor aid and a renewed hope at economic revival. In
   November 2003, following the adoption of key anti-corruption laws and
   other reforms by the new government, donors reengaged as the IMF
   approved a three-year $250 million Poverty Reduction and Growth
   Facility and donors committed $4.2 billion in support over 4 years. The
   renewal of donor involvement has provided a much-needed boost to
   investor confidence.

   However, the government’s ability to stimulate economic demand through
   fiscal and monetary policy remains fairly limited while the pace at
   which the government is pursuing reforms in other key areas remains
   slow. The Privatization Bill is yet to be enacted and civil service
   reform has been limited despite the government’s assertion that reforms
   would be undertaken. The main challenges include building consensus
   within the loosely bound NARC government, taking candid action on
   corruption, enacting anti-terrorism and money laundering laws, bridging
   budget deficits, rehabilitating and building infrastructure,
   maintaining sound macroeconomic policies, and addressing structural
   reforms needed to reverse slow economic growth.

   Nairobi continues to be the primary communication and financial hub of
   East Africa. It enjoys the region's best transportation linkages,
   communications infrastructure, and trained personnel, although these
   advantages are less prominent than in past years. A wide range of
   foreign firms maintain regional branch or representative offices in the
   city. In March 1996, the Presidents of Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda
   re-established the East African Cooperation (EAC). The EAC's objectives
   include harmonizing tariffs and customs regimes, free movement of
   people, and improving regional infrastructures. In March 2004, the
   three East African countries signed a Customs Union Agreement.

   CAPTION: Economic summary

   GDP $12.7 billion (2003)
   Annual growth rate 5.8% (2005)
   Per capita income $371
   Natural resources Wildlife, land (5% arable)
   Agricultural produce   tea, coffee, sugarcane, horticultural products,
   corn, wheat, rice, sisal, pineapples, pyrethrum, dairy products, meat
   and meat products, hides, skins
   Industry petroleum products, grain and sugar milling, cement, beer,
   soft drinks, textiles, vehicle assembly, paper and light manufacturing,
   tourism

   CAPTION: Trade in 2002

   Exports $2.2 billion tea, coffee, horticultural products, petroleum
   products, cement, pyrethrum, soda ash, sisal, hides and skins,
   fluorspar
   Major markets Uganda, Tanzania, United Kingdom, Germany, Netherlands,
   Ethiopia, Rwanda, Egypt, South Africa, United States
   Imports $3.2 billion machinery, vehicles, crude petroleum, iron and
   steel, resins and plastic materials, refined petroleum products,
   pharmaceuticals, paper and paper products, fertilizers, wheat
   Major suppliers   United Kingdom, Japan, South Africa, Germany, United
   Arab Emirates, Italy, India, France, United States, Saudi Arabia

Oil exploration

   Early in 2006, Chinese President Hu Jintao signed an oil exploration
   contract with Kenya.The latest in a series of deals designed to keep
   Africa's natural resources flowing to China's booming economy.

   The deal allowed for China's state-controlled offshore oil and gas
   company, CNOOC Ltd., to prospect for oil in Kenya, which is just
   beginning to drill its first exploratory wells on the borders of Sudan
   and Somalia and in coastal waters. No oil has been produced yet, and
   there has been no formal estimate of the possible reserves.

Demographics

   Ethnicity and dialects in Kenya.
   Enlarge
   Ethnicity and dialects in Kenya.

   Kenya is a country of great ethnic diversity. Tension between the
   various groups accounts for many of Kenya's problems. During the early
   1990s, politically instigated tribal clashes killed thousands and left
   tens of thousands homeless. The KANU regime at the time headed by
   former President Daniel Toroitich arap Moi was blamed for instigating
   the violence as a way of discouraging multiparty politics and clinging
   to power. Ethnically split opposition groups allowed the regime of
   Daniel arap Moi, in power from 1978 until 2002, to be re-elected for
   four terms, with the election in 1997 being marred by violence and
   fraud.

   Ethnic groups
          Gĩkũyũ 22%, Luhya 14%, Luo 13%, Kalenjin 12%, Kamba 11%, Kisii
          6%, Ameru 6%, Somali 3% other African (including Maasai)12%,
          non-African ( Asian/ Desi, European, and Arab) 1%.

   Religious affiliation
          Various Protestant 35%, Roman Catholic 23%, Muslim 18%,
          Seventh-day Adventist: 10.0%, Traditional Religions 10%. Others
          include Hinduism, Jainism & the Bahá'í Faith.

   Largest cities
          Nairobi, Mombasa, Kisumu, Nakuru and Eldoret.
          See also: List of cities in Kenya

Geographic locale

Flag of Sudan  Sudan       Flag of Ethiopia  Ethiopia            Flag of Somalia
                                                                 Somalia
Flag of Uganda  Uganda     North
                           West    Flag of Kenya  Kenya     East
                           South
Flag of Tanzania  Tanzania                                       Indian Ocean

     Provinces of Kenya

   Central • Coast • Eastern • Nairobi • North Eastern • Nyanza •
   Rift Valley • Western
   Countries of East Africa

   Djibouti • Eritrea • Ethiopia • Kenya • Somalia • Tanzania • Uganda
   Countries of Africa

   Sovereign states: Algeria • Angola • Benin • Botswana • Burkina Faso •
   Burundi • Cameroon • Cape Verde • Central African Republic • Chad •
   Democratic Republic of the Congo • Republic of the Congo • Comoros •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Djibouti • Egypt ^1 • Equatorial Guinea • Eritrea •
   Ethiopia • France ^2 • Gabon • The Gambia • Ghana • Guinea-Bissau •
   Guinea • Kenya • Lesotho • Liberia • Libya • Madagascar • Malawi • Mali
   • Mauritania • Mauritius • Morocco • Mozambique • Namibia • Niger •
   Nigeria • Portugal ^2 • Rwanda • Senegal • Seychelles • Sierra Leone •
   Somalia • South Africa • Spain ^2 • Sudan • Swaziland • São Tomé and
   Príncipe • Tanzania • Togo • Tunisia • Uganda • Yemen ^3 • Zambia •
   Zimbabwe

   Dependencies: British Indian Ocean Territory (UK) • French Southern and
   Antarctic Lands (France) • Mayotte (France) • Réunion (France) • Saint
   Helena ^4 (UK)

   Unrecognized countries: Somaliland • Western Sahara •

   ^1  Partly in Asia. ^2  Mostly in Europe. ^3  Mostly in Asia.
   ^4 Includes the dependencies of Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha.
   Countries and territories on the Indian Ocean

   Eurasia: Bahrain • Bangladesh • Christmas Island • Cocos (Keeling)
   Islands • India • Indonesia • Iran • Iraq • Israel • Kuwait • Malaysia
   • Maldives • Myanmar • Oman • Pakistan • Qatar • Saudi Arabia • Sri
   Lanka • Thailand • United Arab Emirates • Yemen

   Africa: Comoros • Djibouti • Eritrea • Kenya • Madagascar • Mauritius •
   Mayotte • Mozambique • Seychelles • Somalia • Somaliland • South Africa
   • Sudan • Tanzania

   Oceania: Australia • Christmas Island • Cocos (Keeling) Islands

   Islands: Bahrain • Christmas Island • Cocos (Keeling) Islands •
   Madagascar • Maldives • Mauritius • Mayotte • Seychelles • Sri Lanka
   Member states of the African Union

   Algeria • Angola • Benin • Botswana • Burkina Faso • Burundi •
   Cameroon • Cape Verde • Central African Republic • Chad • Comoros •
   Democratic Republic of the Congo • Republic of the Congo •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Djibouti • Egypt • Eritrea • Ethiopia •
   Equatorial Guinea • Gabon • The Gambia • Ghana • Guinea •
   Guinea-Bissau • Kenya • Lesotho • Liberia • Libya • Madagascar •
   Malawi • Mali • Mauritania • Mauritius • Mozambique • Namibia • Niger •
   Nigeria • Rwanda • São Tomé and Príncipe • Senegal • Seychelles •
   Sierra Leone • Somalia • South Africa • Sudan • Swaziland • Tanzania •
   Togo • Tunisia • Uganda • Western Sahara  (SADR) • Zambia • Zimbabwe
   Group of Fifteen (G15)

   Flag of Algeria  Algeria Flag of Argentina  Argentina Flag of Brazil
   Brazil Flag of Chile  Chile Flag of Egypt  Egypt Flag of India  India
   Flag of Indonesia  Indonesia Flag of Iran  Iran Flag of Jamaica
   Jamaica Flag of Kenya  Kenya Flag of Malaysia  Malaysia Flag of Mexico
    Mexico Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria Flag of Peru  Peru Flag of Senegal
   Senegal Flag of Sri Lanka  Sri Lanka Flag of Venezuela  Venezuela Flag
   of Zimbabwe  Zimbabwe
   Cushitic-speaking nations

   Cushitic
   Flag of Djibouti  Djibouti • Flag of Eritrea  Eritrea • Flag of
   Ethiopia  Ethiopia • Flag of Kenya  Kenya • Flag of Somalia  Somalia
   Beja
   Flag of Egypt  Egypt • Flag of Eritrea  Eritrea • Flag of Sudan  Sudan
   Niger-Congo-speaking nations
   Kordofanian

   Flag of Sudan  Sudan
   Mande

   Flag of The Gambia  The Gambia • Flag of Guinea  Guinea • Flag of
   Guinea-Bissau  Guinea-Bissau • Flag of Mali  Mali • Flag of Mauritania
    Mauritania • Flag of Senegal  Senegal • Flag of Sierra Leone  Sierra
   Leone
   Atlantic-Congo

   Atlantic

   Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Burkina Faso  Burkina Faso • Flag of
   Cameroon  Cameroon • Flag of Central African Republic  Central African
   Republic • Flag of Chad  Chad • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire •
   Flag of The Gambia  The Gambia • Flag of Guinea  Guinea • Flag of
   Guinea-Bissau  Guinea-Bissau • Flag of Liberia  Liberia • Flag of Mali
    Mali • Flag of Mauritania  Mauritania • Flag of Niger  Niger • Flag of
   Senegal  Senegal • Flag of Sierra Leone  Sierra Leone • Flag of Sudan
   Sudan • Flag of Togo  Togo

   Ijoid: Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria - Dogon: Flag of Mali  Mali
   Volta-Congo

   Senufo: Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire •
   Flag of Mali  Mali

   Gur: Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Burkina Faso  Burkina Faso • Flag
   of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire • Flag of Ghana  Ghana • Flag of Mali
   Mali • Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria • Flag of Togo  Togo

   Adamawa-Ubangi: Flag of Cameroon  Cameroon • Flag of Central African
   Republic  Central African Republic • Flag of Chad  Chad • Flag of
   Nigeria  Nigeria

   Kru: Flag of Burkina Faso  Burkina Faso • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte
   d'Ivoire • Flag of Liberia  Liberia

   Kwa: Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire • Flag
   of Ghana  Ghana • Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria • Flag of Togo  Togo
   Benue-Congo

   Bantu

   Flag of Angola  Angola • Flag of Botswana  Botswana • Flag of Burundi
   Burundi • Flag of Cameroon  Cameroon • Flag of Democratic Republic of
   the Congo  Democratic Republic of the Congo • Flag of Republic of the
   Congo  Republic of the Congo • Flag of Equatorial Guinea  Equatorial
   Guinea • Flag of Gabon  Gabon • Flag of Kenya  Kenya • Flag of Nigeria
    Nigeria • Flag of Malawi  Malawi • Flag of Mozambique  Mozambique •
   Flag of Namibia  Namibia • Flag of Rwanda  Rwanda • Flag of Somalia
   Somalia • Flag of South Africa  South Africa • Flag of Swaziland
   Swaziland • Flag of Tanzania  Tanzania • Flag of Uganda  Uganda • Flag
   of Zambia  Zambia • Flag of Zimbabwe  Zimbabwe

   Yoruba and Igbo: Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kenya"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
