   #copyright

Kestrel

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

                  iKestrel
   Adult male Common Kestrel
   Adult male Common Kestrel
         Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Aves
   Order:   Falconiformes
   Family:  Falconidae
   Genus:   Falco (part)

                                   Species

   See text.

   The name kestrel is given to several different members of the falcon
   genus, Falco. Kestrels are most easily distinguished by their typical
   hunting behaviour which is to hover at a height of around 10–20 m over
   open country and swoop down on prey, usually small mammals, lizards or
   large insects. Other falcons are more adapted to active hunting on the
   wing.

   Kestrels require a slight headwind in order to hover, hence a local
   name of windhover for Common Kestrel. Their ability to spot prey is
   enhanced by being able to see ultraviolet which is strongly reflected
   by vole urine.

   Plumage typically differs between male and female, and (as is usual
   with monogamous raptors) the female is slightly larger than the male.
   This allows a pair to fill different feeding niches over their home
   range. Kestrels are bold and have adapted well to human encroachment,
   nesting in buildings and hunting by major roads.

   Kestrels do not build their own nests, but use nests built by other
   species.

   Bird species known by this name include:
     * The Common Kestrel, found in Europe, Asia, and Africa
     * The smaller Lesser Kestrel, found in southern Europe, India, and
       Mediterranean Africa
     * The American Kestrel, found in North America and South America
     * The Fox Kestrel, found in Equatorial Africa
     * The Gray Kestrel, found in Central to Southern Africa
     * Dickinson's Kestrel, found in Eastern to Southern Africa
     * The Greater Kestrel, found in Eastern to South Africa
     * The Madagascar Kestrel
     * The Banded Kestrel, found on Madagascar
     * The Seychelles Kestrel
     * The Mauritius Kestrel
     * The Spotted Kestrel, found in Indonesia
     * The Nankeen Kestrel, found in Australia and New Guinea

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kestrel"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
