   #copyright

Kevin Spacey

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Actors, models and
celebrities

   Kevin Spacey
   Birth name    Kevin Spacey Fowler
   Born          July 26, 1959 (age 47)
                 South Orange, New Jersey
   Height        5'10" (178cm)
   Notable roles Roger "Verbal" Kint in The Usual Suspects
                 Lester Burnham in American Beauty
                 Bobby Darin in Beyond the Sea
                 Lex Luthor in Superman Returns
   Academy
    Awards       Won: Best Supporting Actor ( 1995) for The Usual Suspects
                 Best Actor ( 1999) for American Beauty

   Kevin Spacey (born Kevin Spacey Fowler on July 26, 1959) is a two-time
   Academy Award winning actor (film and stage) and director.

   Spacey grew up in California, and began his career as a stage actor
   during the 1980s, before being cast in supporting roles in film and
   television. He gained critical acclaim in the early 1990s, culminating
   in his first Oscar for 1995's The Usual Suspects, followed by a Best
   Actor Oscar win for 1999's American Beauty. Spacey has since spent time
   working on stage productions in London, and has remained in the public
   eye, starring in several major Hollywood films, including Se7en, Pay It
   Forward, The Usual Suspects, L.A. Confidential, and his most recent
   role in Superman Returns.

Biography

Early life

   Spacey was born in South Orange, New Jersey to Thomas Geoffrey Fowler,
   a technical writer, and Kathleen Spacey, a secretary; he has two older
   siblings, a sister and a brother, Randy. His father, who has been
   alleged by Fox News to have been a member of the American Nazi Party,
   was often unemployed, causing the family to move frequently, eventually
   settling in Southern California in 1963. Spacey attended Northridge
   Military Academy after he set his sister's treehouse on fire, but was
   asked to leave after throwing a tire at another student at the academy,
   and subsequently attended Chatsworth High School in Chatsworth,
   California. In the twelfth grade, he starred in the school's senior
   production of The Sound of Music, playing the part of Captain Georg von
   Trapp, opposite Maria (played by Mare Winningham). While in high
   school, he took his mother's maiden name, "Spacey" (originally a Welsh
   name, belonging to his great-great-grandfather, spelled "Spacy"), as
   his acting surname. Several reports have incorrectly suggested that he
   took the name in tribute to actor Spencer Tracy, combining Tracy's
   first and last names.

   Spacey had tried to succeed as a stand-up comedian for several years,
   before attending the Juilliard School in New York City, where he
   studied drama, between 1979 and 1981. During this time period, Spacey
   performed stand-up comedy in bowling alley talent contests.

Career

   Spacey's first professional stage appearance was as a messenger in a
   New York Shakespeare Festival performance of Henry VI, part 1 in 1981.
   The following year he made his first Broadway appearance in a
   production of Henrik Ibsen's Ghosts. He made his first major television
   appearance in the second season premiere of Crime Story, playing a
   Kennedy-esque American Senator. Although his interest soon turned to
   film, Spacey remained actively involved in the live theatre community.
   In 1991, he won a Tony Award for his portrayal of "Uncle Louie" in Neil
   Simon's Broadway hit Lost in Yonkers. Spacey's father was unconvinced
   that Spacey could make a career for himself as an actor, and did not
   change his mind until Spacey became a well known theatre actor.

   Some of Spacey's earlier roles include a widowed eccentric millionaire
   on L.A. Law, the made-for-television film The Murder of Mary Phagan
   (1988) opposite Jack Lemmon, and the Richard Pryor/ Gene
   Wilder-starring comedy See No Evil, Hear No Evil (1989). Spacey earned
   an avid fan following after playing the criminally insane arms dealer
   Mel Profitt on the television series Wiseguy. He quickly developed a
   reputation as a character actor, and was cast in bigger roles,
   including one-half of the bickering Connecticut couple in the dark
   comedy The Ref (1994), a malicious Hollywood studio boss in the satire
   Swimming with Sharks, and the put-upon office manager in the all-star
   ensemble film Glengarry Glen Ross (1992), gaining him positive notices
   by critics.

   In 1995, Spacey played a Serial Killer in Se7en who murders people he
   thinks guilty of the seven deadly sins, and the enigmatic criminal
   Verbal Kint in The Usual Suspects. His role in The Usual Suspects
   launched him to A-list status and won him an Academy Award for Best
   Supporting Actor. In 1996, he played an egomaniacal district attorney
   in A Time to Kill, and founded Trigger Street Productions in 1997 with
   the purpose of producing and developing entertainment across various
   media.

   Spacey won universal praise and a Best Actor Oscar for his role as a
   depressed suburban father who re-evaluates his life in 1999's American
   Beauty; the same year, he was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk
   of Fame. During the several years following American Beauty's release,
   Spacey appeared in films that he believes "hadn't done as well
   critically or in terms of box office". He played a physically and
   emotionally scarred grade school teacher in Pay It Forward, a patient
   in a mental institution who may or may not be an alien in K-Pax, and
   singer Bobby Darin in Beyond the Sea. Beyond The Sea was a lifelong
   dream project for Spacey, who took on co-writing, directing, and
   starring duties in the biography/musical about Darin's life, career,
   and relationship with late actress Sandra Dee. Spacey provided his own
   vocals on the Beyond the Sea soundtrack and appeared in several tribute
   concerts around the time of the film's release. He received mostly
   positive reviews for his singing, as well as a Golden Globe nomination
   for his performance. However, some reviewers criticized the age
   disparity between Spacey and Darin, noting that Spacey was too old to
   convincingly portray him. Spacey has noted that despite the criticism,
   he is still proud of the film.

   In 2001, Kevin co-hosted with Dame Judi Dench Unite for the Future
   Gala, the UK's fundraiser for the British Victims of 9/11 and Medecins
   Sans Frontieres at London's Old Vic Theatre, produced by Harvey
   Goldsmith and Dominic Madden.

   In February 2003, Spacey announced that he was returning to London to
   become the artistic director of the Old Vic, one of the city's oldest
   theatres. Spacey directed the new Old Vic Theatre Company, which stages
   shows eight months out of the year, starting in 2004. Spacey starred in
   two shows a season, in addition to directorial duties. During the
   2004-05 season, Spacey directed a performance of the play Cloaca by
   Maria Goos, and performed in productions of National Anthems by Dennis
   McIntyre, as well in The Philadelphia Story by Philip Barry. During the
   2005-06 season, Spacey performed in the title role of Richard II
   (directed by Trevor Nunn). He was awarded an Honorary Doctorate by
   London South Bank University in November 2005. Spacey has noted that he
   is "having the time of [his] life" working at the Old Vic, and
   explained that at this point in his career, he feels that he is "trying
   to do things now that are much bigger than myself and outside of
   myself".

   Spacey hosted the season finale of Saturday Night Live on May 20, 2006.
   He participated in six sketches, including playing the roles of a
   detective, a falconer, and Neil Young. He also starred in a sketch with
   Andy Samberg, spoofing The Usual Suspects.

   Spacey's most recent film role is as the villainous Lex Luthor in the
   Bryan Singer-directed superhero film, Superman Returns. The film opened
   on June 28, 2006. Spacey also appears in Edison Force (originally
   titled Edison), co-starring Morgan Freeman and Justin Timberlake;
   Edison Force received a direct-to-video release on July 18, 2006.

   Spacey is well-known in Hollywood for his skillful impersonations -
   when he appeared on Inside the Actors Studio he imitated, at the
   request of host James Lipton: Jimmy Stewart, Johnny Carson, Katherine
   Hepburn, Clint Eastwood, John Gielgud, Marlon Brando, Christopher
   Walken, Al Pacino and Jack Lemmon.

Personal life

   Spacey's sexual orientation has been the subject of discussion in the
   media. In the run-up to the 1999 Academy Awards, Spacey gave an
   interview to Lesley Stahl for 60 Minutes on CBS in which he
   categorically refused to discuss his sexual orientation. He repeatedly
   asked, "What difference does it make?" Soon after winning the Academy
   Award for American Beauty, the tabloid The Star printed a collection of
   photos that allegedly proved Spacey's homosexuality. In January 2006
   The Daily Mirror, a British tabloid newspaper, reported that a high
   school program dedicated to fighting homophobia listed Spacey among a
   list of famous homosexuals. The program's leader, Paul Patrick,
   apologized and called the listing a "mistake" and announced that
   Spacey's name would be edited out.

   In an interview by Playboy in the October 1999 issue, in response to a
   1997 Esquire article to the contrary, Spacey stated openly and
   repeatedly that he is heterosexual.

   In August of 2004, while living in London, Spacey reported to local
   police that he had been mugged by a young man in a park at
   approximately 4:30 A.M. Several hours later, he withdrew the statement
   and apologized to the police, explaining that he had been conned into
   giving his mobile phone to a youth who had then run away with it, and
   that his bruises were the result of tripping over his dog while giving
   chase. The police accepted Spacey's new version of events and did not
   press charges.

   Spacey is a personal friend of former President Bill Clinton, having
   met Clinton before his presidency began. Spacey has described Clinton
   as "one of the shining lights" of the political process. According to
   Federal Election Commission data, Spacey has contributed $42,000 to
   Democratic candidates and committees.

   In September 2006, Spacey announced that he intends to stay on at the
   Old Vic for at least another nine years, and that due to his continuing
   UK residency he intends take up dual British citizenship when it
   becomes available to him.

Selected filmography

   Year Title Role Other notes
   2006 Edison Force Wallace direct-to-video
   Superman Returns Lex Luthor
   2004 Beyond the Sea Bobby Darin also director/writer/producer
   The United States of Leland Albert T. Fitzgerald also producer
   2003 The Life of David Gale David Gale
   Ordinary Decent Criminal Michael Lynch also producer / direct-to-video
   release
   2002 Austin Powers in Goldmember Himself (playing Doctor Evil in a
   film)
   2001 The Shipping News Quoyle
   K-PAX Prot/Robert Porter
   Shackleton's Antarctic Adventure Narrator (voice)
   2000 Pay It Forward Eugene Simonet
   The Big Kahuna Larry Mann also producer
   1999 American Beauty Lester Burnham Academy Award for Best Actor
   1998 Hurlyburly Mickey
   The Negotiator Lt. Chris Sabian
   A Bug's Life Hopper (voice)
   1997 Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil James 'Jim' Williams
   L.A. Confidential Det. Sgt. Jack Vincennes
   Albino Alligator director only
   1996 Looking for Richard Himself
   A Time to Kill D.A. Rufus Buckley
   1995 Se7en John Doe
   The Usual Suspects Roger 'Verbal' Kint Academy Award for Best
   Supporting Actor
   Swimming with Sharks Buddy Ackerman co-producer
   Outbreak Maj. Casey Schuler
   1994 The Ref Lloyd Chasseur
   Iron Will Kermit Kingsley
   1992 Consenting Adults Eddy Otis
   Glengarry Glen Ross John Williamson
   1991 Henry & June Richard Osborn
   A Show of Force Frank Curtin
   1989 Dad Mario
   See No Evil, Hear No Evil Kirgo
   1988 Working Girl Bob Speck
   Rocket Gibraltar Dwayne Hanson
   Wiseguy Mel Profitt television series
   1986 Heartburn Subway Thief First Motion Picture

Discography

Albums

   Year     Title                       Other notes
   2004 Beyond the Sea accompanying the release of film of same name

Singles

   Year        Title                         Other notes
   1997 That Old Black Magic from the Midnight in the Garden of Good and
                             Evil soundtrack

Live performances

     * Mind Games - " Come Together: A Night For John Lennon's Words &
       Music" - 02.Oct.2001 - Radio City Music Hall

   Preceded by:
   Michael Rosenbaum
   for Smallville (TV series) Actors portraying Lex Luthor
   2006
   for Superman Returns Succeeded by:
   ???
   Awards
   Preceded by:
   Martin Landau
   for Ed Wood Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
   1995
   for The Usual Suspects Succeeded by:
   Cuba Gooding, Jr.
   for Jerry Maguire
   Preceded by:
   Roberto Benigni
   for Life Is Beautiful Academy Award for Best Actor
   1999
   for American Beauty Succeeded by:
   Russell Crowe
   for Gladiator
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kevin_Spacey"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
