   #copyright

Khartoum

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography

   SOS Children works in Sudan. For more information see SOS Children in
   Sudan, Africa
   Map of Sudan with Khartoum
   Enlarge
   Map of Sudan with Khartoum

   Khartoum (الخرطوم al-Ḫarṭūm "Elephant Trunk") is the capital of Sudan
   and of Khartoum State. It is located at the point where the White Nile,
   flowing north from Uganda, meets the Blue Nile, flowing west from
   Ethiopia. The merger of the two niles is known as "the Mogran". The
   merged Nile flows north towards Egypt and the Mediterranean Sea.

   The city proper has a population of well over a million inhabitants,
   making it the second largest city in the country, but forms with its
   neighbours, linked by bridges, Khartoum North (al-Khartūm Bahrī) and
   Omdurman (Umm Durmān) a metropolis with a population totaling over four
   million.

History

Early history

   The Mosque of Khartoum.
   Enlarge
   The Mosque of Khartoum.
   Image:Khartoum - Sudan - 1926 - Building.jpg
   The British Embassy in Khartoum in 1926.

   Khartoum was founded in 1821 by Muhammad Ali , the ruler of Egypt, as
   an outpost for the Egyptian army, but grew as a regional centre of
   trade, including the slave trade. Troops loyal to the Mahdi Muhammad
   Ahmad laid siege to Khartoum starting on March 13, 1884 against the
   defenders led by British General Charles George Gordon, resulting in
   the massacre of the Anglo-Egyptian garrison.

   The heavily damaged city fell to the Mahdists on January 26, 1885.
   Omdurman was the scene of the bloody battle ( September 2, 1898) in
   which British forces under Sirdar Horatio Kitchener defeated the
   Mahdist forces defending the city.

   In 1899 Khartoum became capital of Anglo-Egyptian Sudan and, with the
   independence of Sudan in 1956, the capital of the new country.

Recent history

   In 1973, the city was the site of a hostage crisis in which members of
   Black September held ten hostages at the Saudi embassy, five of whom
   were diplomats. The US ambassador, the US deputy ambassador, and the
   Belgian Chargé d'affaires were murdered. The remaining hostages were
   released (see Khartoum diplomatic assassinations).

   The first oil pipeline between Khartoum and Port Sudan was completed in
   1977.

   Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, Khartoum was the destination for
   hundreds of thousands of refugees fleeing conflicts in neighboring
   nations such as Chad, Eritrea, Ethiopia and Uganda. The refugees
   settled in large slums at the outskirts of the city. From the mid-1980s
   onward, large numbers of internally displaced from the violence of the
   Second Sudanese Civil War and Darfur conflict have settled around
   Khartoum.

   Following the 1998 U.S. embassy bombings, the United States accused
   Osama bin Laden's al-Qaeda group of responsibility and launched cruise
   missile attacks ( August 20) on the al-Shifa pharmaceutical factory in
   Khartoum. The factory, whose destruction had devastating effects on the
   Sudanese economy, may have been wrongly targeted as strong evidence
   against any ties to bin Laden has surfaced.

   The Arab League summit of March 28-29, 2006 was held in Khartoum,
   during which the Arab League awarded Sudan the Arab League presidency.

Development

   After the signing of the historic Comprehensive Peace Agreement between
   the government of Sudan and the Sudanese Peoples Liberation Movement
   (SPLA), the Government of Sudan has begun a massive development
   project. The biggest project taking place right now in Khartoum is
   "Al-Mogran" Development Project, led by Al-Sunut Development Company.
   This integrated development is a joint venture developed by the DAL
   Group Company Ltd, Khartoum State and the National Social Insurance
   Fund. The project is divided into two main phases:
   View of the traffic in the city of Khartoum.
   Enlarge
   View of the traffic in the city of Khartoum.
   Khartoum International Airport Departure Terminal.
   Enlarge
   Khartoum International Airport Departure Terminal.

   Phase I : Almogran Central Business District A brand new 160-acre
   Central Business District (CBD). This state-of-the-art, prime
   commercial real estate will act as a hub for Eastern Africa’s modern
   business market. Almogran is located on the junction between The White
   and the Blue Nile. The CBD has been carefully master planned to create
   a dynamic and livable business environment, with pedestrian-friendly
   tree-lined streets, a river walk, and a mix of business, commercial,
   and residential properties.

   Phase II : Almogran Residential Estate To the south of Almogran CBD,
   along the banks of the White Nile, lies a 1500-acre residential
   development featuring a variety of carefully planned neighborhoods of
   luxurious villas, townhouses, and apartments, complete with supporting
   neighbourhood shops, schools, and recreational and leisure facilities.
   The development includes an 18-hole signature golf course and resort,
   public parks and gardens, with preservation of the Sunuut Forest
   Reserve.

Economy

   Among the city's industries are printing, glass manufacturing, food
   processing and textiles. However, the economy is still progressing.
   Petroleum products are now produced in the far north of Khartoum state,
   providing fuel and jobs for the city. One of Sudan's largest refineries
   is located in northern Khartoum.

Education

   Khartoum is the main location for most of Sudan's top universities,
   including but not limited to:
     * University of Khartoum. Originally founded as Gordon Memorial
       College in 1902, it was later renamed to share the name of the city
       in the 1930s.
     * The Academy of Medical Sciences and Technology.Better known as
       AMST,it was founded in 1996 by Prof. Mamoun Humaida in the heart of
       Khartoum City the capital of Sudan.Its considered to be one of the
       best eduacational establishments in the country and viewed by most
       to be the pioneer Private University in Sudan
     * University of Sudan for Science and Technology
     * Computer Man College
     * Juba University. It was relocated from Juba during the civil war.
       Currently plans exist to relocate the university back to its
       original location.
     * Bayan Science and Technology University

Transportation

Air

   Khartoum is home to the largest airport in Sudan, Khartoum
   International Airport. It is the main hub for Sudan Airways, Sudan's
   main carrier. It was built in the southern edge of the city, but the
   rapid growth of the city and through the major urbanization, it has
   become the heart of the city. A new international airport is currently
   being built in the city of Omdurman. It will replace the current
   airport in Khartoum as Sudan's main airport followed by Juba Airport
   and Port Sudan Airport.

Twin cities

     * Turkey - Istanbul, Turkey
     * People's Republic of China - Wuhan, China
     * Egypt - Cairo, Egypt

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khartoum"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
