   #copyright

Klinefelter's syndrome

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Health and medicine

   Klinefelter syndrome is a term used to describe males who have an extra
   X chromosome in most of their cells. Instead of having the usual XY
   chromosome pattern that most males have, these men have an XXY or XXXY
   pattern. Klinefelter syndrome is named after Dr. Henry Klinefelter, who
   first described a group of symptoms found in some men with the extra X
   chromosome. Even though all men with Klinefelter syndrome have the
   extra X chromosome, not every XXY male has all of those symptoms.

   Because not every male with an XXY pattern has all the symptoms of
   Klinefelter syndrome, it is common to use the term XXY male to describe
   these men, or XXY condition to describe the symptoms.

   Scientists believe the XXY condition is one of the most common
   chromosome abnormalities in humans. About one of every 500 males has an
   extra X chromosome, but many don’t have any symptoms.

Symptoms

   Not all males with the condition have the same symptoms or to the same
   degree. Symptoms depend on how many XXY cells a man has, how much
   testosterone is in his body, and his age when the condition is
   diagnosed. The XXY condition can affect three main areas of
   development.

Physical development

   As babies, many XXY males have weak muscles and reduced strength. They
   may sit up, crawl, and walk later than other infants. After about age
   four, XXY males tend to be taller and may have less muscle control and
   coordination than other boys their age.

   As XXY males enter puberty, they often don’t make as much testosterone
   as other boys. This can lead to a taller, less muscular body, less
   facial and body hair, and broader hips than other boys. As teens, XXY
   males may have larger breasts, weaker bones, and a lower energy level
   than other boys.

   By adulthood, XXY males look similar to males without the condition,
   although they are often taller. They are also more likely than other
   men to have certain health problems, such as autoimmune disorders,
   breast cancer, vein diseases, osteoporosis, and tooth decay.

   XXY males can have normal sex lives, but they usually make little or no
   sperm. Between 95 percent and 99 percent of XXY males are infertile
   because their bodies don’t make enough sperm.

Language development

   As boys, between 25 percent and 85 percent of XXY males have some kind
   of language problem, such as learning to talk late, trouble using
   language to express thoughts and needs, problems reading, and trouble
   processing what they hear.

   As adults, XXY males may have a harder time doing work that involves
   reading and writing, but most hold jobs and have successful careers.

Social development

   As babies, XXY males tend to be quiet and undemanding. As they get
   older, they are usually quieter, less self-confident, less active, and
   more helpful and obedient than other boys.

   As teens, XXY males tend to be quiet and shy. They may struggle in
   school and sports, meaning they may have more trouble “fitting in” with
   other kids.

   However, as adults, XXY males live lives similar to men without the
   condition; they have friends, families, and normal social
   relationships.

Treatment

   The XXY chromosome pattern cannot be changed. But, there are a variety
   of ways to treat the symptoms of the XXY condition.
     * Educational treatments – As children, many XXY males qualify for
       special services to help them in school. Teachers can also help by
       using certain methods in the classroom, such as breaking bigger
       tasks into small steps.
     * Therapeutic options – A variety of therapists, such as physical,
       speech, occupational, behavioural, mental health, and family
       therapists, can often help reduce or eliminate some of the symptoms
       of the XXY condition, such as poor muscle tone, speech or language
       problems, or low self-confidence.
     * Medical treatments – Testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) can
       greatly help XXY males get their testosterone levels into normal
       range. Having a more normal testosterone level can help develop
       bigger muscles, deepen the voice, and grow facial and body hair.
       TRT often starts when a boy reaches puberty. Some XXY males can
       also benefit from fertility treatment to help them father children.

   One of the most important factors for all types of treatment is
   starting it as early in life as possible.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Klinefelter%27s_syndrome"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
