   #copyright

Kochi (India)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Asia

   Coordinates: 9°58′0″N, 76°13′60″E
   Kochi
   Kochi
   State
    -  District(s)           Kerala
                              -  Ernakulam
   Coordinates               9.977° N 76.27° E
   Area
    -  Elevation             36.6 sq mi / 94.88  km²
                              - 0 m
   Time zone                 IST ( UTC+5:30)
   Population ( 2001)
    -  Density
    -  Sex ratio
    -  Agglomeration ( 2005) 596,473
                              - 6,250/km²
                              - 1.017
                              - 1,463,000
   Mayor                     Mercy Williams
   Codes
    -  Postal
    - Telephone
    -  Vehicle
                              - 682 0xx
                              - +0484
                              - KL-7
         Website: www.corporationofcochin.org

   Kochi ( pronunciation ; Malayalam: കൊച്ചി [koˈʧːi]); formerly known as
   Cochin) is a city in the Indian state of Kerala. The city is one of the
   principal seaports of the country and is located in the district of
   Ernakulam, about 220  kilometres (140  mi) north of the state capital,
   Thiruvananthapuram. It has an estimated population of 600,000, with an
   extended metropolitan population of about 1.5 million, making it the
   largest urban agglomeration and the second largest city in Kerala after
   the capital.

   Since [1102 CE], Kochi was the seat of the Kingdom of Cochin, a
   princely state which traces its lineage to the Kulasekhara empire.
   Heralded as the Queen of the Arabian Sea, Kochi was an important spice
   trading centre on the Arabian Sea coast from the 14th century onwards.
   Ancient travellers and tradesmen referred to Kochi in their writings,
   variously alluding to it as Cocym, Cochym, Cochin, and Cochi. Occupied
   by the Portuguese in 1503, Kochi was the site of the first European
   colonial settlement in India. It remained the capital of Portuguese
   India until 1530, when Goa became the capital. The city was later
   occupied by the Dutch, the Mysore and the British. Kochi was the first
   princely state to willingly join the Indian Union, when India gained
   independence in 1947.

   Kochi experienced decades of economic stagnation from independence
   until 2003, when it entered a period of economic growth, leading to a
   spurt in the city's development. A growing centre of information
   technology, tourism and international trade, Kochi is the commercial
   hub of Kerala, and one of the fastest growing second-tier metros in
   India. Like other large cities in the developing world, Kochi continues
   to struggle with urbanisation problems like substandard sanitation and
   traffic congestion.

   Successive waves of migration over the course of several millennia have
   made Kochi a cultural melting pot. Despite the risk of overdevelopment,
   the city retains its distinct colonial heritage and a blend of
   tradition and modernity.

Name

   Cheena vala (Chinese fishing nets); Kochi is the only place outside of
   China where these fishing structures are used.
   Enlarge
   Cheena vala (Chinese fishing nets); Kochi is the only place outside of
   China where these fishing structures are used.

   Theories regarding the etymology of the name "Kochi" are disputed. One
   suggests that the city's modern name is derived from the Malayalam word
   koch azhi, meaning 'small lagoon'. Another version mentions the name as
   derivative of the Sanskrit word Go shree which means 'prosperous with
   cows'. Certain ancient texts refer to the city Balapuri (Sanskrit for
   'small town'), which became Cochin in course of time. According to some
   accounts, traders from the court of the Chinese ruler Khubilai Khan
   gave Cochin the name of their homeland. Yet another theory is that
   Kochi is derived from the word Kaci meaning 'harbour'. Certain scholars
   claim that Cochin is derived from the term Cocha, which is a
   transfiguration of the Biblical term Cohen. Accounts by Italian
   explorers Nicolo Conti (15th century), and Fra Paoline in the 17th
   century say that it was called Kochchi, named after the river
   connecting the backwaters to the sea.

   After the arrival of the Portuguese, and later the British, the name
   Cochin stuck as the official appellation. The city reverted to a closer
   anglicisation of its original Malayalam name, Kochi, in 1996. However,
   it is still widely referred to as Cochin.

History

   The old Dutch cemetery in Kochi
   Enlarge
   The old Dutch cemetery in Kochi

   Kochi was the centre of Indian spice trade for many centuries, and was
   known to the Yavanas (Greeks) as well as Romans, Jews, Arabs, and
   Chinese since ancient times. Kochi rose to significance as a trading
   centre after the port at Kodungallur (Cranganore) was destroyed by
   massive flooding of the river Periyar in 1341. The earliest documented
   references to Kochi occur in books written by Chinese voyager Ma Huan
   during his visit to Kochi in the 15th century as part of Admiral Zheng
   He's treasure fleet. There are also references to Kochi in accounts
   written by Italian traveller Niccolò Da Conti, who visited Kochi in
   1440.

   The Kingdom of Kochi came into existence in 1102, after the fall of the
   Kulasekhara empire. The King of Kochi had authority over the region
   encompassing the present city of Kochi and adjoining areas. The reign
   was hereditary, and the family that ruled over Kochi was known as the
   Cochin Royal Family (Perumpadappu Swaroopam in the local vernacular).
   The mainland Kochi remained the capital of the princely state since the
   18th century. However, during much of this time, the kingdom was under
   foreign rule, and the King often only had titular privileges.
   Hebrew inscription at the Paradesi Synagogue
   Enlarge
   Hebrew inscription at the Paradesi Synagogue

   Kochi was also the scene of the first European colonial settlement in
   India. From 1503 to 1663, Kochi was ruled by Portugal. This Portuguese
   period was difficult for the Jews installed in the region, since the
   Inquisition was active in Portuguese India. Kochi hosted the grave of
   Vasco da Gama, the first European explorer to set sail for India, who
   was buried at St. Francis Church until his remains were returned to
   Portugal in 1539. The Portuguese rule was followed by that of the
   Dutch, who had allied with the Zamorins in order to conquer Kochi. By
   1773, the Mysore King Hyder Ali extended his conquest in the Malabar
   region to Kochi forcing it to become a tributary of Mysore. The
   hereditary Prime Ministership of Kochi held by the Paliath Achans came
   to an end during this period.

   Meanwhile, the Dutch, fearing an outbreak of war on the United
   Provinces signed a treaty with the United Kingdom, under which Kochi
   was ceded to the United Kingdom in exchange for the island of Bangka.
   However, there are evidences of English habitation in the region even
   prior to the signing of the treaty. In 1866, Fort Kochi was made a
   municipality, and its first Municipal Council election was conducted in
   1883. The Maharaja of Cochin, who ruled under the British, in 1896
   initiated local administration by forming town councils in Mattancherry
   and Ernakulam. In 1925, Kochi legislative assembly was constituted due
   to public pressure on the state.
   The temple adjoining the Mattancherry Palace
   Enlarge
   The temple adjoining the Mattancherry Palace

   Towards the early 20th century, trade at the port had increased
   substantially, and the need to develop the port was greatly felt.
   Harbour engineer Robert Bristow was brought to Kochi in 1920 under the
   direction of Lord Willingdon, then the Governor of Madras. In a span of
   21 years, he transformed Kochi as one of the safest harbours in the
   peninsula, where ships berthed alongside the newly reclaimed inner
   harbour equipped with a long array of steam cranes.

   In 1947, India gained independence from the British colonial rule.
   Cochin was the first princely state to join the Indian Union willingly.
   In 1949, Travancore-Cochin state came into being with the merger of
   Cochin and Travancore. The King of Travancore was the Rajpramukh of the
   Travancore-Cochin Union from 1949 to 1956. Travancore-Cochin, was in
   turn merged with the Malabar district of the Madras State. Finally, the
   Government of India's States Reorganisation Act (1956) inaugurated a
   new state — Kerala — incorporating Travancore-Cochin (excluding the
   four southern Taluks which were merged with Tamil Nadu), Malabar
   District, and the taluk of Kasargod, South Kanara. On 9 July 1960, the
   Mattancherry council passed a resolution—which was forwarded to the
   government—requesting the formation of a municipal corporation by
   combining the existing municipalities of Fort Kochi, Mattancherry, and
   Ernakulam. The government appointed a commission to study the
   feasibility of the suggested merger. Based on its report, the Kerala
   Legislative Assembly approved the corporation's formation. On 1
   November 1967, exactly eleven years since the establishment of the
   state of Kerala, the corporation of Cochin came into existence. The
   merger leading to the establishment of the corporation, was between the
   municipalities of Ernakulam, Mattancherry and Fort Kochi, along with
   that of the Willingdon Island, four panchayats ( Palluruthy, Vennala,
   Vyttila and Edappally), and the small islands of Gundu and
   Ramanthuruth.

   Kochi witnessed economic stagnation in the years following India's
   independence. The city's economic recovery gathered momentum after
   economic reforms in India introduced by the central government in the
   mid-1990s. Since 2000, the service sector has revitalised the city’s
   stagnant economy. Over the years, the city has witnessed rapid
   commercialisation, and has today grown into the commercial capital of
   Kerala.

Geography and climate

   A view of the Kochi harbour mouth from Willingdon Island
   Enlarge
   A view of the Kochi harbour mouth from Willingdon Island

   Kochi is located on the southwest coast of India at 9°58′N 76°13′E,
   spanning an area of 94.88 ; square kilometres (36.63  sq mi). The city
   is situated at the northern end of a peninsula, about 19 kilometres
   (12  mi) long and less than one mile (1.6 km) wide. To the west lies
   the Arabian Sea, and to the east are estuaries drained by perennial
   rivers originating in the Western Ghats. Much of Kochi lies at sea
   level, with a coastline of 48 km.

   The current metropolitan limits of Kochi include the mainland
   Ernakulam, old Kochi, the suburbs of Edapally, Kalamassery and Kakkanad
   to the northeast; Tripunithura to the south east; and a group of
   islands closely scattered in the Vembanad Lake. Most of these islands
   are very small, varying in extent from six square kilometre to less
   than a square kilometre (1,500 to less than 250  acres).

   Soil consists of sediments such as alluvium, teri's, brown sands etc.
   Hydromorphic saline soils are also found in the areas surrounding the
   backwaters. Predominant rock types found here are Archaean-basic dykes,
   Charnockites and Gneisses. An ecologically sensitive area, the
   Mangalavanam Bird Sanctuary is located in the central part of the city.
   It has a wide range of mangrove species and is nesting ground for a
   vast variety of migratory birds. Certain species of dolphins are also
   present in the backwaters.

   Kochi's proximity to the equator along with its coastal location
   results in little seasonal temperature variation, with moderate to high
   levels of humidity. Annual temperatures range between 20 to 35 ° C
   (68–95 ° F) with the record high being 38 °C (100.4°F), and record low
   17 °C (62.6°F). From June through September, the south-west monsoon
   brings in heavy rains as Kochi lies on the windward side of the Western
   Ghats. From October to December, Kochi receives light rain from the
   north-West monsoon, as it lies on the leeward side. Average annual
   rainfall is 350  centimetres (138  in), with an annual average of 132
   rainy days.

Civic administration

                                     Kochi City officials


         Mayor

                                                         Mercy Williams

         Deputy Mayor

                                                           C.K.Mani Sankar

         Police Commissioner

                                                            P Vijayan

   The city is administered by the Cochin Corporation, headed by a mayor.
   For administrative purposes, the city is divided into 70 wards, from
   which the members of the corporation council are elected for a period
   of five years. The Corporation has its headquarters in Ernakulam, and
   zonal offices at Fort Kochi, Mattancherry, Palluruthy, Edappally,
   Vaduthala and Vyttila. The general administration of the city is
   handled by the Personnel Department and the Council Section. Other
   departments include that of town planning, health, engineering, revenue
   and accounts. The corporation is also responsible for waste disposal,
   sewage management and the supply of potable water, sourced from the
   Periyar River. Electricity is provided by the Kerala State Electricity
   Board.

   The Greater Cochin Development Authority (GCDA) is the government
   agency overseeing the development of Kochi. The Kochi City Police is
   headed by a Police Commissioner, an Indian Police Service (IPS)
   officer. It comprises of the traffic police, Narcotics Cell, Armed
   Reserve Camps, District Crime Records Bureau, Senior citizen's Cell,
   and a Women's Cell. It operates 19 police stations functioning under
   the Home Ministry of State Government. An anti-corruption branch of the
   Central Bureau of Investigation also operates out of the city. Kochi is
   the seat of the High Court of Kerala, the highest judicial body in the
   state. The High Court also has jurisdicition over the Union Territory
   of Lakshadweep.

   Kochi contributes five seats to the State Assembly, and a seat to the
   Lok Sabha, the Lower House of the Indian Parliament.

Economy

   The Vismaya building at InfoPark, Kochi Enlarge
   The Vismaya building at InfoPark, Kochi

   Kochi is the economic capital of Kerala by volume of trade; though,
   unlike other South Indian cities, Kochi has been slow to industrialise.
   In recent years the city has rejuvenated from its economic stagnation
   and has witnessed heavy investment, thus making it one of the
   fastest-growing second-tier metro cities in India. The economy of the
   city can be classified as a business economy with emphasis on the
   service sector. Major business sectors include gold and textile
   retailing, seafood and spices exports, information technology (IT),
   tourism, health services, banking, shipbuilding, and the fishing
   industry. The economy is mostly dependent on trade and retail
   activities. As in most of Kerala, remittances from non-resident Indians
   (NRI)s is a major source of income. The city also houses Kerala's only
   bourse—the Cochin Stock Exchange.

   Kochi is a major destination for IT and ITES companies, ranked by
   NASSCOM as the second-most attractive city in India for IT-based
   services. Availability of cheap bandwidth through undersea cables and
   lower operational costs compared to other major cities in India, has
   been to its advantage. Various technology and industrial campuses
   including the government promoted InfoPark, Cochin Special Economic
   Zone and KINFRA Export Promotion Industrial Park operate in the
   outskirts of the city. The establishment of a larger hi-tech business
   campus, the Smart City which encompasses the present InfoPark, is in
   final stages of discussion. Eloor, situated 17 kilometres (10.5 mi)
   north of the city, is the largest industrial belt in Kerala, with more
   than 250 industries manufacturing a range of products including
   chemical and petrochemical products, pesticides, rare earth elements,
   rubber processing chemicals, fertilisers, zinc and chrome compounds,
   and leather products. A biotechnology campus is also under construction
   at Kalamassery.
   The Chinese fishing net bridge in Kochi
   Enlarge
   The Chinese fishing net bridge in Kochi

   Kochi is the headquarters of the Southern Naval Command, the primary
   training centre of the Indian Navy. The Cochin Shipyard in Kochi is the
   largest shipbuilding facility in India. The Cochin fishing harbour,
   located at Thoppumpady is a major fishing port in the state and
   supplies fish to local and export markets. To further tap the potential
   of the all-season deep-water harbour at Kochi, a marina and an
   International container transshipment terminal are being constructed.

   Exports and allied activities are also important contributors to the
   city's economy. Kochi's historical reliance on trade continues into
   modern times, as the city is a major exporter of spices and is home to
   the International Pepper Exchange, where black pepper is globally
   traded. The Spices Board of India is also headquartered in Kochi.

   Kochi also has an oil refinery—the Kochi Refineries Limited (KRL) at
   Ambalamugal. Central Government establishments like the Coconut
   Development Board, the Coir Board and the Marine Products Export
   Development Authority (MPEDA) have head offices located in the city.

Transport

   A private bus speeding through the streets of Kochi
   Enlarge
   A private bus speeding through the streets of Kochi

   Public transport in the city is largely dependent on private buses.
   Taxis and autorickshaws (called autos) are available for hire
   throughout the day. Narrow roads and the mix of vastly differing types
   of vehicles have made traffic congestion a major problem in the city. A
   metro service, intended to considerably ease congestion, is planned for
   the city.

   Because it is one of the safest harbours in the Indian Ocean, Kochi
   ranks among India's major seaports. The port, administered by a
   statutory autonomous body known as the Cochin Port Trust, offers
   facilities for bunkering, handling cargo and passenger ships and
   storage accommodation. It also operates passenger ships to Colombo and
   Lakshadweep. Boat services operated by Kerala Shipping and Inland
   Navigation Corporation, the State Water Transport Department, and of
   private ownership are available from various boat jetties in the city.
   The junkar ferry for the transshipment of vehicles and passengers
   between the islands are operated between Ernakulam and Vypin, and
   between Vypin and Fort Kochi. However, with the construction of the
   Goshree bridges (which links Kochi's islands), ferry transport has
   become less essential.

   The Cochin International Airport, which is about 25 kilometres (15 mi)
   north of the city, handles both domestic and international flights. It
   is the largest airport of Kerala, and one of the busiest in India. It
   is the first international airport in India to be built without Central
   Government funds. A second airport run by the Navy also operates in the
   city.

   There is no intra-city rail transport system in Kochi. The inter-city
   rail transport system in the city is administered by the Southern
   Railway division of the Indian Railways. There are two main railway
   stations—the Ernakulam Junction and the Ernakulam Town (locally known
   as the 'South' and 'North' railway stations respectively). The railway
   line connecting these two stations cuts the city longitudinally in two,
   with two narrow bridges connecting the two halves.

Demographics

   An antique shop showcasing Jewish remnants of Kochi
   Enlarge
   An antique shop showcasing Jewish remnants of Kochi

   As of 2001, Kochi had a population of 596,473, with a density of 6850.7
   persons per square kilometre. Scheduled castes and tribes comprise
   14.3% of the city's population. The female-to-male ratio is
   1,024:1,000, significantly higher than the all-India average of
   933:1,000. Kochi's literacy rate is 94.3%. The female literacy rate
   lags that of males by 1.1%, amongst the lowest such gaps in India.

   Kochi's major religions are Hinduism, Christianity, and Islam; Jainism,
   Judaism, Sikhism, and Buddhism have smaller followings. Though 47%
   practise Hinduism, Christianity's large following (35%) makes Kochi a
   city with one of the largest Christian populations in India. The
   majority of residents are Malayalis; however, there are significant
   ethnic minority communities including Tamils, Gujaratis, Jews,
   Sikkimese, Anglo-Indians, Konkanis, and Tulus. Malayalam is the main
   language of communication and medium of instruction, although English
   is more commonly used in business circles. Hindi and Tamil are widely
   understood—albeit rarely spoken.

   Like other fast-growing cities in the developing world, Kochi suffers
   from major urbanisation problems, poor sanitation, and unemployment.
   The city registered an increase of 9.7% in its unemployment rate from
   14.8% in 1998 to 24.5% in 2003. Shortage of potable water is a major
   concern in the city. The situation is aggravated by the threat posed by
   pollution in industrial areas. The city also has a growing
   slum-dwelling population. Kochi has a high suicide rate with 32
   suicides per lakh, which is three times higher than the national
   average of 11.2 per lakh. According to the National Crime Records
   Bureau, Kochi has one of highest rates of crime in India—498.6, against
   the national average of 287.3. However, a survey conducted by The Week,
   found Kochi to be the safest city in India for women.

Culture

   Pedestrians can stroll along the Marine Drive, a waterfront promenade
   of Kochi.
   Enlarge
   Pedestrians can stroll along the Marine Drive, a waterfront promenade
   of Kochi.

   As a result of successive waves of migration over the course of several
   centuries, the population of the city is a mix of people from all parts
   of Kerala and most of India. The pan-Indian nature is highlighted by
   the substantial presence of various ethnic communities from different
   parts of the country. Kochi has a diverse, multicultural, and secular
   community consisting of Hindus, Christians, Muslims, Jains, Sikhs, and
   Buddhists among other denominations, all living in peaceful
   co-existence. The city once had a large Jewish community, known as the
   Malabar Yehuden—and now increasingly as Cochin Jews—that figured
   prominently in Kochi's business and economic strata. Appropriate to its
   multi-ethnic composition, Kochi celebrates traditional Kerala festivals
   like Onam and Vishu along with North Indian Hindu festivals like Holi
   and Diwali with great fervour. Christian and Islamic festivals like
   Christmas, Easter, Eid ul-Fitr and Milad-e-sherif are also celebrated.
   A merry making fest called the Cochin Carnival is celebrated at Fort
   Kochi during the last ten days of December.

   Residents of Kochi are known as Kochiites; they are an important part
   of the South Indian weltanschauung. However, the city's culture is
   rapidly evolving, with Kochiites generally becoming more cosmopolitan
   in their outlook. The people are also increasingly fashion-conscious,
   often deviating from the traditional Kerala wear to western clothing.
   The old Jewish synagogue in Kochi
   Enlarge
   The old Jewish synagogue in Kochi

   Kochiites generally partake of Keralite cuisine, which is generally
   characterised by an abundance of coconut and spices. Other South Indian
   cuisines, as well as Chinese and North Indian cuisines are popular.
   Fast food culture is also very prominent.

   Kochi was home to some of the most influential figures in Malayalam
   literature, including Changampuzha Krishna Pillai, Kesari Balakrishna
   Pillai, G. Sankara Kurup, and Vyloppilli Sreedhara Menon. Prominent
   social reformers such as Sahodaran Ayyappan and Pandit Karuppan also
   are from Kochi.

   Kochiites are known for their enthusiasm in sports, especially cricket
   and football. The Jawaharlal Nehru International Stadium in Kochi is
   one of the largest multi-use stadiums in India. The Regional Sports
   Centre is an important centre of sporting activity in the city.

Education

   Schools and colleges in the city are either run by the government or by
   private trusts and individuals. The schools are each affiliated with
   either the Indian Certificate of Secondary Education (ICSE), the
   Central Board for Secondary Education (CBSE), or the Kerala State
   Education Board. English is the medium of instruction in most private
   schools; though government run schools offer both English and
   Malayalam. After completing their secondary education, which involves
   ten years of schooling, students typically enrol at Higher Secondary
   School in one of the three streams— Arts, Commerce or Science. Upon
   completing the required coursework, the student can enroll in general
   or professional degree programmes.

   The Cochin University is situated in the city. Most of the colleges
   offering tertiary education are affiliated either with the Mahatma
   Gandhi University or the Cochin University. Other national educational
   institutes include the Central Institute of Fisheries Nautical and
   Engineering Training, the National University of Advanced Legal
   Studies, the National Institute of Oceanography and the Central Marine
   Fisheries Research Institute.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kochi_%28India%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
