   #copyright

Koryaksky

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Asia

                   Koryaksky
   Koryaksky volcano towers over Avacha Bay
   Elevation     3,456 metres (11,340 feet)
   Location      Kamchatka, Russia
   Coordinates   53°19′N 158°41′W
   Type          Stratovolcano
   Last eruption 1957
   Easiest route basic rock/snow climb

   Koryaksky is a volcano on the Kamchatka Peninsula in the far east of
   Russia. It lies within sight of the capital of Kamchatka Oblast,
   Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky. Together with neighbouring Avacha Volcano, it
   has been designated a Decade Volcano, worthy of particular study in
   light of its history of explosive eruptions and proximity to populated
   areas.

Geological history

   Koryaksky lies on the Pacific Ring of Fire, at a point where the
   Pacific Plate is sliding underneath the Eurasian Plate at a rate of
   about 80 mm/year. A wedge of mantle material lies between the
   subducting Pacific Plate and the overlying Eurasian Plate is the source
   of dynamic volcanism over the whole Kamchatka Peninsula.

   The volcano has probably been active for at tens of thousands of years.
   Geological records indicate that there have been three major eruptions
   in the last 10,000 years, at 5500 BC, 1950 BC and 1550 BC. These three
   eruptions seem to have been mainly effusive, generating extensive lava
   flows.

Recent activity

   Clouds forming over Koryakasky
   Enlarge
   Clouds forming over Koryakasky

   Koryaksky erupted for the first time in recorded history in 1890, in an
   eruption characterised by the emission of lava from fissures which
   opened up on the south western flank of the volcano, and phreatic
   explosions. It was thought to have erupted again five years later, but
   it was later shown that no eruption had occurred; what was thought to
   be an eruption column was simply steam generated by strong fumarolic
   activity.

   Another brief, moderately explosive eruption occurred in 1926, after
   which the volcano was dormant until 1956. The 1956 eruption was more
   explosive than the previous known eruptions, with VEI=3, and generated
   pyroclastic flows and lahars. The eruption continued until June 1957.

   Since then, the volcano has seen no further eruptions, but occasional
   seismic activity and ongoing fumarolic activity has indicated that the
   volcano is still active. In light of its proximity to
   Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, Koryaksky was designated a Decade Volcano in
   1996 as part of the United Nations' International Decade for Natural
   Disaster Reduction, together with the nearby Avachinsky volcano.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Koryaksky"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
