   #copyright

Kuala Lumpur

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Asia

   Kuala Lumpur
   Skyline of Kuala Lumpur

   Official flag of Kuala Lumpur
               Flag

                                Official seal of Kuala Lumpur
                                            Seal

   Nickname: "KL"
   Motto: 'Maju dan makmur ( Malay: Peace and progress)'
   Location in Malaysia
   Location in Malaysia
   Coordinates: 3°8′00″N, 101°42′00″E
   Country Malaysia
   State Federal Territory
   Establishment 1857
   Granted city status 1974
   Mayor Ruslin Hasan
   Area
    - City 243.65 km²  (95.18  sq mi)
   Elevation 21.95 m  (72 ft)
   Population
    - City (2004) 1,479,388
    - Density 6074/km² (15,543/sq mi)
    - Metro 6,527,057 (2006) ^
   Time zone MST ( UTC+8)
    - Summer ( DST) MST ( UTC+8)
   Mean solar time UTC+06:46:48
   Website: http://www.dbkl.gov.my/

   Kuala Lumpur is the capital and the largest city of Malaysia. Kuala
   Lumpur is one of the three Malaysian Federal Territories. It is an
   enclave within the state of Selangor, on the central west coast of
   Peninsular Malaysia. Within Malaysia, the city is commonly referred to
   as KL.

   The city previously hosted the Malaysian judiciary and executive arms.
   With the completion of Putrajaya in the late 1990s, both arms have
   since migrated to Putrajaya, though sections of the judicial branch
   still remain in Kuala Lumpur. The Malaysian Parliament still operates
   in the city, and thus the city remains the legislative capital of the
   country.

History

   Kuala Lumpur had its origins in the 1850s, when the Malay Chief of
   Klang sent Chinese upriver from China to open new and larger tin mines
   where Kuala Lumpur previously is rich in tins. They landed at the
   confluence of Sungai Gombak (previously Sg. Lumpur, which means Muddy
   River) and Sungai Klang (Klang River) and established mines at Ampang.
   Later, tin mines were opened at Pudu and Batu.

   This trading post was a wild frontier town plagued by floods, fires,
   disease and the Selangor Civil War (1870-73). During this time, Kapitan
   Cina Yap Ah Loy emerged as a leader, responsible for the survival and
   growth of the town. In 1880 in view of its strategic location, the
   Selangor state capital was moved from Klang to Kuala Lumpur. Nothing of
   this earlier period remains as all structures were of wood and atap
   (thatch) which were destroyed in the fire and subsequent flood of 1881.

   Thereafter, Frank Swettenham, the British Resident of Selangor who was
   instrumental in the development of the town, required that buildings be
   constructed of brick and tile. The advent of the railway increased
   accessibility. The development of buildings intensified in the 1890s so
   that it warranted the establishment of a Sanitary Board. In 1896, Kuala
   Lumpur was chosen as the capital of the newly formed Federated Malay
   States.

   The multiracial community of this period settled in various sections of
   town. Market Square, east of Sungai Klang, became the commercial centre
   for the whole town. The Chinese congregated around this Square and
   south into Chinatown. To the north, across Java Street (now Jalan Tun
   Perak). were the Malays. Nearby, a number of Indian Chettiars
   (money-lenders), and in later years Indian Muslim traders, set up
   business. West of the river, the Padang (now Merdeka Square) was the
   focal point of the British administration.

   Kuala Lumpur continued to grow despite two World Wars, the rubber and
   tin commodity crash and the State of Emergency (1948-60) during which
   Malaya was preoccupied with the Communist insurgency. In 1957, the
   Federation of Malaya gained its independence from British rule. Kuala
   Lumpur remained the capital through the formation of Malaysia,
   achieving city status in 1972, and was established as the Federal
   Territory in 1974.

Geography

   Kuala Lumpur is located at the confluence of Klang and Gombak River.
   Mostly surrounded by forests and hills, it is the only city in the
   world to have a million-year-old primary forest within the heart of the
   city. There is no sea surrounding Kuala Lumpur.

Climate

   Kuala Lumpur enjoys year round equatorial climate which is warm and
   sunny, along with plentiful rainfall, especially during the southwest
   monsoon from April to September. Due to the close proximity of Kuala
   Lumpur to the Sumatra Island, dust particles are carried by wind from
   frequent forest fires, creating a phenomenon known as the haze. This
   usually lasts for 1 to 2 weeks.
   Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
   Average min (°C) 22.1 22.3 22.8 23.4 23.1 22.1 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.9 22.9
   22.5
   Average max (°C) 31.9 32.8 33.1 33.0 32.8 32.5 32.1 32.2 31.9 31.8 31.4
   31.5
   Lowest recorded (°C) 19 21 20 21 22 20 19 19 20 21 21 19
   Highest recorded (°C) 35 36 37 36 35 36 36 36 35 36 35 34
   Average rainfall (millimeters) 163 145 218 285 184 127 129 146 192 272
   275 230
   Ave no of days with 1 mm 10 11 14 16 13 9 10 11 13 17 18 15

   National Enviroment Agency,Singapore

Mayors of Kuala Lumpur

   Since Kuala Lumpur became a Federal Territory of Malaysia on February
   1, 1972, the city has been led by seven mayors. They are:
    1. Tan Sri Dato' Lokman Yusof (1972)
    2. Tan Sri Yaakob Latiff (1973 - 1983)
    3. Tan Sri Dato' Elyas Omar (1983 - 1992)
    4. Dato' Dr. Mazlan Ahmad (1992 - 1995)
    5. Tan Sri Dato’ Kamaruzzaman Shariff (1995 - 2001)
    6. Datuk Mohmad Shaid Mohd Taufek (2001 - 2004)
    7. Datuk Ruslin Hasan (2004 - current)

   As local government elections in Malaysia have been suspended since
   1970, mayors are appointed by the Federal Territories Minister.

Arts

   Frieze depicting Malaysian history at the National Museum
   Enlarge
   Frieze depicting Malaysian history at the National Museum

   Kuala Lumpur is a hub for cultural activities and events. Among the
   centres is the National Museum which is situated along the Mahameru
   Highway. It offers various types of collection such as artefacts and
   paintings collected throughout the country.

   Another arts venue is the Kuala Lumpur Philharmonic Hall. It is
   headquartered to the Malaysian Philharmonic Orchestra (MPO), comprising
   an cast of international musicians and features regular concerts,
   chamber concerts and traditional cultural performances.

   The Petronas Art Gallery, a centre for fine art is situated in Kuala
   Lumpur City Centre (KLCC). The Kuala Lumpur Performing Arts Centre
   (KLPac) in Sentul West is also a noted centre for the performing arts,
   notably theatre and music (it can also host film screening). It has
   housed many local productions and has been a supporter of local and
   regional independent performance artists. Amongst the highlights of the
   year so far was the KL Sing Song 2006 music fest which featured
   Malaysian singer-songwriters of various cultural backgrounds, from both
   West and East Malaysia, through two days of performances and workshops.

   Kuala Lumpur holds an annual festival called Malaysia International
   Gourmet Festival. It is primarily held in the city centre. Another
   event in Kuala Lumpur is Kuala Lumpur Fashion week, which includes
   international brands as well as local designers.

Transportation

Land

   The Federal Highway, connecting Kuala Lumpur and Klang, Selangor.
   Enlarge
   The Federal Highway, connecting Kuala Lumpur and Klang, Selangor.

   Kuala Lumpur has a road network leading to the rest of Peninsular
   Malaysia. Motorists may have a choice of paying cash, using stored
   value card Touch 'n Go or SmartTag to pay at the toll booths while
   using the highways/expressways. A near-complete project, SMART Tunnel
   will allow motorists to enter the city, avoiding congestion by using an
   underground tunnel.

   However, despite all this, Kuala Lumpur often has traffic problems, and
   peak hour traffic is generally from 7:30am to 8:45am, and from 5:45pm
   to 8:30pm.
   The busy Jalan Ampang at night leading straight to the Petronas Towers.
   Enlarge
   The busy Jalan Ampang at night leading straight to the Petronas Towers.

Air

   Kuala Lumpur is directly connected to the Kuala Lumpur International
   Airport (KLIA) in Sepang via the KLIA Ekspres high-speed train service
   which takes only 28 minutes, while travelling by car via highway will
   take about an hour. The former international airport, Sultan Abdul Aziz
   Shah Airport in Subang is now used for chartered flights.

   Malaysia Airlines and all major international airlines to Malaysia land
   at KLIA. AirAsia makes use of the newly built Low Cost Carrier Terminal
   (LCC-T) in Sepang. LCC-T is accessible to/from KL through a bus service
   from KL Sentral (transport hub).

Public transportation

   Public transport in Kuala Lumpur and the rest of the Klang Valley
   covers a variety of transport modes such as bus, rail and taxi. Unlike
   most other major Asian cities, utilisation rates are low as only 16
   percent of the population uses public transportation.

   In addition, there is the metro system consisting of 3 separate lines,
   which meet in the city and extend to the Western Suburbs of the state
   of Selangor. The metro system consists of a Monorail, an Elevated
   Metro, and an Automated Metro with underground stations in the city
   centre. Food, pets, drinks are strictly prohibited among trains and
   heavy penalties are charged upon violation. Commuter trains also exists
   to link commuters to the city. The main hub is KL Sentral facilitating
   as an interchange station for the main lines.

Places of interest

   Kuala Lumpur's landmark, the Petronas Twin Towers
   Enlarge
   Kuala Lumpur's landmark, the Petronas Twin Towers
   The vibrant and colourful Central Market
   Enlarge
   The vibrant and colourful Central Market
   Dataran Merdeka and the tall building at the center is the Royal
   Malaysian Police headquarters on Bukit Aman.
   Enlarge
   Dataran Merdeka and the tall building at the centre is the Royal
   Malaysian Police headquarters on Bukit Aman.

   There are popular tourist locations in and around Kuala Lumpur.

Within Kuala Lumpur

     * The Golden Triangle, the commercial hub of the city, contains the
       Petronas Twin Towers and has a distinctive nightlife.
     * The Petronas Twin Towers were the world's tallest twin towers and
       second and third-tallest singular towers, standing adjacent to one
       of the busiest shopping malls in Malaysia, Suria KLCC.
     * The Menara Kuala Lumpur, currently the world's fifth tallest
       telecommunication tower, is located on the Bukit Nanas hill beside
       Convent Bukit Nanas.
     * Putra World Trade Centre (PWTC) is the first convention and
       exhibition centre in Malaysia.
     * Kuala Lumpur Convention Centre (also known as KLCC) is another
       convention and exhibition centre in Kuala Lumpur. It is situated in
       the Petronas Twin Towers and Suria KLCC area. Aquaria KLCC is also
       situated in this building.
     * Dayabumi a major landmark located near Masjid Negara. It is an
       office building.
     * Kuala Lumpur General Post Office is located next to Dayabumi.
     * Lake Gardens, a 920,000 square metre manicured garden near the
       Malaysian Parliament building, was once home to a British colonial
       official. They include a Butterfly Park, Deer Park, Orchid Garden,
       Hibiscus Garden and South-East Asia's largest Bird Park. ( Bird
       park pics)
     * Stadium Merdeka (Independence Stadium), was initially erected for
       the country's declaration of independence on August 31, 1957.
     * Dataran Merdeka (Independence Square/Merdeka Square), was the site
       of the lowering of the Union Jack flag and hoisting of the Malayan
       flag on the start of August 31, 1957. The square itself has
       historic association with its surroundings, namely the Royal
       Selangor Club, National History Museum and the architecturally
       Victorian-Moorish or 'Raj' influenced Sultan Abdul Samad Building.
     * Kuala Lumpur Railway Station, a Victorian-Moorish railway station,
       was completed in 1911, and superseded by KL Sentral in 2001; it
       currently serves commuter trains only.
     * The Muzium Negara (National Museum) incorporates neo traditionalism
       into its architectural design.
     * The Masjid Negara (National Mosque), a post modernist mosque, was
       completed in 1965 and Makam Pahlawan (Heroes Mausoleum) the
       mausoleum of Malaysian leaders.
     * The Parliament House, a Malaysian federal government legislative
       building, was completed on 1963.
     * The Tugu Negara (National Monument) commemorates those who died in
       Malaysia's struggles for freedom (principally against the Japanese
       occupation and during the Malayan Emergency of 1946-60).
     * The Istana Negara, official residence of Their Majesties the King
       and Queen.
     * The National Science Centre, located in Bukit Damansara.
     * The Federal Territory Mosque located along Jalan Duta.
     * Bukit Nanas Forest Reserve, a gazetted small tropical forest
       located on the centre of Kuala Lumpur City.
     * Many of the largest celebrations of Chinese cultural festivals are
       held at the Thean Hou Temple on Robson Hill.
     * The Chinese Night Market area ( Chinatown), Petaling Street, has
       recently undergone a makeover; the most notable feature is the new
       covered walkway.
     * Mid Valley Megamall, one of the largest shopping malls(situated in
       Bangsar).
     * Bukit Bintang, the ultimate shopping and entertainment experience
       in the Golden Triangle.
     * Berjaya Times Square, the largest shopping mall in Kuala Lumpur.
     * The Mall is the main shopping complex near Putra World Trade
       Centre.
     * Kuala Lumpur's Central Market, which was once the city's wet
       market, offers an assortment of arts and craft merchandise, varying
       from antiques and paintings to souvenirs and clothing. It is also
       known as Pasar Seni in Malay.
     * Trendy nightclubs, bars and lounges, such as Hard Rock Cafe, Zouk
       and Thai Club are located within and around Jalan P.Ramlee, Jalan
       Sultan Ismail and Jalan Ampang.
     * For those seeking to tantalize their tastebuds or just want to have
       a great night out, Heritage Row in Jalan Doraisamy provides the
       perfect balance of chic restaurants, nightclubs and bars.
     * Brickfields, Jalan Masjid India and Lebuh Ampang are 'Little
       India's spread around KL showing Indian presence in KL. You can
       come here for great Indian food and shopping.
     * Hindu temples such as Sri Mahamariamman temple near Central Market
       and Sri Kandaswamy Kovil in Brickfields

Around the Kuala Lumpur area

   The Batu Caves, a Hindu shrine and a tourist attraction near Kuala
   Lumpur
   Enlarge
   The Batu Caves, a Hindu shrine and a tourist attraction near Kuala
   Lumpur
     * Batu Caves is located 13 kilometres north of Kuala Lumpur. It is a
       sacred place for Hindus in Malaysia and is home to a Hindu temple
       dedicated to Lord Murugan. Batu Caves consists of three main caves
       and a number of smaller ones. The caves are made of limestone and
       400 meters long and 100 meter high. There are 272 steps, which will
       lead you to the caves. Temple Cave or Cathedral Cave is the best
       known and biggest of the caves. Once a year, millions of Hindu
       devotees and other visitors throng the caves to celebrate the
       Thaipusam festival. On the other side of Batu Caves, there are also
       few spots for rock climbing .
     * The national zoo of Malaysia, Zoo Negara, is located beside Taman
       Melawati, 5 kilometres north-east of Kuala Lumpur. It is home to
       over 4000 animals from more than 400 different species.
     * About 25 kilometres west of Kuala Lumpur is the city of Shah Alam,
       site of the famous Sultan Salahuddin Abdul Aziz Mosque, and 10
       kilometres away from Shah Alam is the town of Klang famous for its
       seafood and Bah Kut Teh.
     * Genting Highlands is a hill top resort near Kuala Lumpur, famous
       for its casino, and Theme Parks. This is visible from Kuala Lumpur
       downtown on a clear day and as well on most nights.
     * Putrajaya, new federal administration centre. This is a modern
       futuristic looking township that houses all government ministries.
       The administrative buildings have been built on either side of a
       long road - in a manner stated to be modelled after the National
       Mall in Washington DC. At one end of this driveway is the Prime
       Minister's office and at the other end is a convention centre.
     * Sepang International Circuit is a racing circuit located in the
       outskirts of the city, near the Kuala Lumpur International Airport
       (KLIA). It has been hosting Formula One's Malaysian Grand Prix
       since 1999.
     * National Sports Complex, Bukit Jalil was the venue for the 1998
       Commonwealth Games.

Sister cities

     * Turkey Ankara, Turkey
     * Iran Isfahan, Iran
     * Iran Mashhad, Iran - declared sister cities on October 2006.

Gallery

   Pre-war shoplots refurbished into restaurants and bars along Tengkat
   Tong Shin.

   A shot of the park behind the Petronas Towers

   One of the many KL Monorail trains.

   Handcraft and souvenir shops within Central Market.

   A pedestrian mall adjacent to Central Market.

   Petronas Twin Towers at dusk.

   Interior of Luna Bar, located on the 34th floor of the Pacific Regency
   Hotel.

   The Ampang-Kuala Lumpur Elevated Highway at the eastern fringes of the
   city.

   Berjaya Times Square.

   KLCC Park in the foreground with the city's skyline as the backdrop.

   A view from outside Sungai Wang showing the Bukit Bintang monorail
   station and Lot 10.

   The Railway Station is the bright colored building while the darker
   structure is the Malayan Railway headquarters.

   Traffic jam leading to Kuala Lumpur's Chinatown on Petaling Street.

   Looking down Petaling Street market.

   A view of the city and surrounding landscape from Bangsar.

   Brickfields, KL's ' Little India'

   Sultan Abdul Samad building and the white Dayabumi building.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kuala_Lumpur"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
