   #copyright

Ladysmith Black Mambazo

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Performers and composers

              Ladysmith Black Mambazo
   Ladysmith Black Mambazo, 2006
   Ladysmith Black Mambazo, 2006
               Background information
   Origin       Ladysmith, KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa
   Genre(s)     Isicathamiya, mbube
   Years active 1960–1964 (original group)
                1964–present (current incarnation)
   Label(s)     Gallo Record Company (1973–present)
                Wrasse Records (1998–present)
                Heads Up International (2004–present)
   Website      www.mambazo.com
                      Members
   Joseph Shabalala
   (founder, lead singer and musical director)
   Sibongiseni Shabalala
   Thamsanqa Shabalala
   Thulani Shabalala
   Msizi Shabalala
   Albert Mazibuko
   Abednego Mazibuko
   Russel Mthembu
   Muzi Sikhondze
   Mfanufikile Zungu
                   Former members
   Jockey Shabalala
   Jabulani Dubazana
   Inos Phungula
   Ben Shabalala
   Geophrey Mdletshe
   Headman Shabalala
   Milton Mazibuko
   Funokwakhe Mazibuko
   Joseph Mazibuko
   Walter Malinga
   Matovoti Msimanga

   Ladysmith Black Mambazo is a chorus from South Africa that is noted for
   singing a cappella isicathamiya and mbube music. They rose to worldwide
   prominence as a result of singing with Paul Simon on his album,
   Graceland. They were formed by Joseph Shabalala in 1960 and became one
   of South Africa's prolific recording artists, with their releases
   receiving gold and platinum disc honours. The group has now become a
   mobile academy, teaching people about South Africa and its culture.

History

   Joseph Shabalala formed Ladysmith Black Mambazo because of a series of
   dreams he had in 1964, in which he heard certain isicathamiya
   harmonies, isicathamiya being the traditional music of the Zulu people.
   Following their local success at wedding ceremonies, Shabalala entered
   them into isicathamiya competitions. The group were described as 'so
   good' that they were eventually forbidden to enter the competitions but
   were welcomed to entertain at them. Although they had been recognised
   as an isicathamiya group in 1964, they had been singing together since
   the early 1950s. They released their first album, Amabutho, in 1973.
   The album, along with many other releases by the group, received gold
   disc certification. Ladysmith Black Mambazo's collaboration with Paul
   Simon in 1986 paved the way for international releases, making them
   widely known across the world.

1960-1986

   The first incarnation of Ladysmith Black Mambazo was Ezimnyama Ngenkani
   (The Black Ones), formed by Shabalala in December of 1960. The members
   of the group were relatives (mostly brothers and cousins) of Shabalala,
   with many having sung with him whilst he was growing up on the farm
   where he was born. Although the group did sing well together and
   captured the sound of cothoza mfana (tip toe boys, a 1960s slang term
   for isicathamiya) and mbube groups of the time, they were unknown
   outside of the Ladysmith district.

   In late 1964, Shabalala had a series of dreams over a period of six
   months, featuring a choir, singing in perfect harmony. Whilst his
   current group had not achieved this sound, Joseph reformed the group as
   Ladysmith Black Mambazo and taught them the harmonies from his dream.
   Shabalala invented the name from the hometown of his family, Ladysmith,
   KwaZulu-Natal, the black ox, considered to be the strongest farm
   animal, and mambazo, which means axe in the Zulu language, and is
   symbolic of the choir's ability to "chop down" the competition.

   Shabalala entered the group into isicathamiya competitions, held on
   Saturday nights in areas of Durban and Johannesburg. The group won
   nearly every competition that was held; eventually in 1973, they were
   forbidden to compete with the other choirs. They were, however, welcome
   to perform only.

   In 1967, the group began to make recordings for Radio Zulu, and then
   signed with West Nkosi in 1972; Nkosi was a member of the Makgona
   Tsohle Band and a music producer at Gallo Record Company. Ladysmith
   Black Mambazo released their first album the following year, Amabutho,
   which received gold status, and was the first album by a black musician
   in South Africa to do so. Their subsequent albums also received gold or
   platinum certification. With the release of their second album, they
   had become professional singers.

   In 1975, Shabalala converted to Christianity and the group released
   their first religious album, Ukukhanya Kwelanga. It earned a double
   platinum disc award, and the group's repertoire came to be dominated by
   hymns, mostly Methodist. Their 1976 Ukusindiswa became one of their
   most popular religious albums. By 1981, the group was well-known
   throughout South Africa, and was allowed to travel to Cologne, Germany.
   The group toured the country and appeared on television, and learned
   some of the German language; the 1981 Phansi Emgodini ( 1981) included
   the group singing in German on the track "Wir Grüssen Euch Alle". The
   following year, the group traveled back to Germany to appear on
   television during a quiz event, bringing about requests for live
   appearances.

1986-1994

   In 1985, Paul Simon travelled to South Africa in the hope of
   collaborating with black musicians for his Graceland album. Simon asked
   Ladysmith Black Mambazo to work with him, and they travelled to London
   to record. The first recording was "Homeless", composed by Shabalala
   with English lyrics by Simon. The group's 1986 Ezulwini Siyakhona
   refers to the encounter with Paul Simon in the liner notes. Graceland
   was released in May of that year, and although both Joseph Shabalala
   and Paul Simon were accused of breaking the cultural boycott of South
   Africa, the album was a success and introduced Ladysmith Black Mambazo
   into the international arena. This also paved the way for other African
   acts like Stimela and Mahlathini and the Mahotella Queens to gain
   popularity amongst Western audiences.

   After Graceland, Simon acted as producer on three records for the group
   aimed at the American market, Shaka Zulu (1987), Journey of Dreams
   (1988) and Two Worlds, One Heart (1990). On the latter album, the group
   recorded with The Winans, Julia Fordham and George Clinton, among
   others.

   On December 10 1991, Shabalala's brother and one of the bass members in
   the group, Headman Shabalala, was shot and killed by Sean Nicholas, a
   white off-duty security guard. His death was considered a racial
   killing by Paul Simon, who led the court proceedings against Nicholas.
   Shabalala stopped singing. Eventually, helped by his Christian beliefs,
   he returned to singing. Following the retirement of three more members
   in 1993, Shabalala recruited four of his sons into the group.

1994-2002

   The Apartheid system was abolished in 1991. Many changes occurred
   within Ladysmith Black Mambazo following this; most notably the
   reformation of its members (see above). The release of Nelson Mandela
   after 27 years imprisonment brought about the group's first release in
   the post-Apartheid era, 1993's Liph' Iqiniso. The album's last track,
   "Isikifil' Inkululeko" ("Freedom Has Arrived"), was a celebration of
   the end of Apartheid.

   According to Shabalala, Nelson Mandela (shortly after his release from
   prison) publicly stated that "the members of Ladysmith Black Mambazo
   are South Africa's cultural ambassadors". In 1993, at the request of
   Nelson Mandela, Ladysmith Black Mambazo accompanied the future
   President of South Africa to the Nobel Peace Prize ceremony in Oslo,
   Norway. Mambazo sang again at President Mandela's inauguration in May
   1994.

   In 1998, the group recorded a special version of "Inkanyezi Nezazi"
   (The Star and the Wiseman) for a series of advertisements in Britain
   for Heinz. The adverts proved so popular that the group released the
   original 1992 version as a single; this was followed up by The Best of
   Ladysmith Black Mambazo: The Star and the Wiseman, a compilation
   release which was certified triple platinum, selling 1 million copies
   in Britain alone. The single reached #2 in the UK Pop Charts. They have
   since traveled the world and have recorded with performers such as
   Stevie Wonder, Dolly Parton, The Winans, Julia Fordham, George Clinton,
   B*Witched, The Corrs, Ben Harper and many more and performing for
   Nelson Mandela, Pope John Paul II and the British royal family among
   many others.

2002-2006

   Shabalala's wife Nellie was murdered in May 2002; Shabalala's hand was
   injured trying to protect her. The killing occurred during the
   recording of Wenyukela, the group's first album of new material since
   Lihl' Ixhiba Likagogo in 2000. Songs such as "Wenza Ngani?" ("How Did
   You Do That?") had a moral theme, such as racism. Others included "Fak'
   Ibhande" ("Don't Drink and Drive"), which warned of the dangers of
   alcohol and driving, "Wenyukela", which spoke of the resurrection of
   Jesus and how South Africans were nearly misled into killing each other
   during the 1994 elections, and "Selingelethu Sonke", a song asking for
   fair trade in Africa. The group had originally spoken of the issue of
   fair trade in the Oxfam campaign Make Trade Fair. They appeared as
   guests in "The Big Noise", a worldwide petition for fair trade.

   The success of Wenyukela in South Africa prompted its release in
   Britain in March 2003 on Wrasse Records. Following the repeated success
   of the album, the American-based Headsup International released the
   album in January 2004. In addition to the standard version, Headsup
   released the album in the Hybrid SACD format. The US release reportedly
   sold 6 million copies and that garnered the group their second Grammy
   Award. They also embarked on a three month tour of the United States.

   The group returned to Headsup with their 2005 release, No Boundaries, a
   collaboration with the English Chamber Orchestra which featured many
   classical standards (Jesu, Joy of Man's Desiring, Ave Verum Corpus) and
   Mambazo tunes (Homeless, Awu, Wemadoda, Ngingenwe Emoyeni). Despite
   initial worry about European traditions and Zulu folklore, the album
   sold very well and was nominated for a Grammy Award.

2006-present

   Long Walk to Freedom, a celebration of 45 years together, was released
   by Ladysmith Black Mambazo on January 24, 2006. On the album (which
   also celebrated 20 years since Graceland), the group recorded with a
   multitude of artists including Zap Mama, Sarah McLachlan, Melissa
   Etheridge, Joe McBride, Natalie Merchant, Emmylou Harris, and Taj Mahal
   as well as South African musicians Lucky Dube, Phuzekhemisi, Bhekumuzi
   Luthuli, Nokukhanya, Thandiswa, Vusi Mahlasela and Hugh Masekela.
   Ladysmith Black Mambazo wishes to work with Paul Simon once more,
   twenty years on since Graceland.

   To support the promotion of the album and tour, Mambazo appeared on
   various television and radio programmes throughout January and February
   2006. The group has also started a street team; this is currently
   exclusive to fans in the US and Canada .

   In April 2006, Mambazo collaborated with Josh Groban for his third
   studio album, Awake. The song, "Weeping", featured a clear South
   African influence; lines from a Mambazo song, "Wangibambezela"
   ("Message from his Heart") were added to the backing track of
   "Weeping". Following this, in August 2006, Mambazo began working with
   Mavis Staples in a collaboration for Staples's new album. Whilst
   Mambazo toured the United States, the television program Saturday Night
   Live parodied the group in a TV Funhouse sketch about failed Saturday
   morning cartoons starring black cartoon characters, one of which was a
   cartoon featuring the group called, Ladysmith Black Mambazo in Outer
   Space. Members of the group added commentary to the short for a special
   DVD release.

   On October 17, 2006, Ladysmith Black Mambazo performed a special
   concert, Long Walk to Freedom: An Evening with Ladysmith Black Mambazo.
   The night included special guest appearances by Sarah McLachlan,
   Natalie Merchant, The Mahotella Queens, Vusi Mahlasela, and Pete
   Seeger. In preparation for the show, The Mahotella Queens performed a
   concert the previous night (October 16) in New York.

The Ladysmith Black Mambazo Foundation

   In January 1999, Joseph Shabalala founded The Ladysmith Black Mambazo
   Foundation. The aim of the organisation is to teach young Zulu South
   African children about their traditional culture and music;
   isicathamiya. Today, the Mambazo Academy is currently being built, with
   plans for a rehearsal hall, teaching areas and a professional recording
   studio. The main aim, of course, is to promote and teach the history of
   isicathamiya music to youngsters.

Awards and nominations

   Ladysmith Black Mambazo, like many other artists, have been
   acknowledged in award ceremonies such as the Grammy Awards and Academy
   Awards. In 1988, the group received their first Grammy Award for the
   album Shaka Zulu, which was their first release recorded for the
   American market. Since then, they have won one more, and have been
   nominated eight additional times.
   Awards
   1981 S.A.R.I.E. Award Best Choral Group on Disc
   1988 Grammy Award Best Traditional Folk Recording Shaka Zulu
   1993 Drama Desk Award Best Original Music Score The Song of Jacob Zulu
   (stage)
   1996 Drama Desk Award Best Original Music Score Nomathemba (stage)
   1997 S.A.M.A. Award Best Zulu Music Album Ukuzala-Ukuzelula
   1997 S.A.M.A. Award Best Duo or Group Award Ukuzala-Ukuzelula
   2001 S.A.M.A. Award Best Zulu Music Album Lihl' Ixhiba Likagogo
   2005 Grammy Award Best Traditional World Music Album Raise Your Spirit
   Higher
   Nominations
   1991 Grammy Award Best Traditional World Music Album Classic Tracks
   1993 Grammy Award Best Traditional World Music Album Best of - Vol. 1
   1995 Grammy Award Best Traditional World Music Album Liph' Iqiniso
   1995 Grammy Award Best Traditional World Music Album Gift of the
   Tortoise
   1996 Grammy Award Best Traditional World Music Album Thuthukani Ngoxolo
   1998 Grammy Award Best Contemporary World Music Album Heavenly
   1999 Grammy Award Best Traditional World Music Album Live at the Royal
   Albert Hall
   2001 Academy Award Best Short Documentary Film On Tiptoe: Gentle Steps
   to Freedom
   2002 Emmy Award Best Cultural Documentary On Tiptoe: Gentle Steps to
   Freedom
   2006 Grammy Award Best Contemporary World Music Album No Boundaries

Touring

The competitions and the first Mambazo concerts

   After the release of the group's first album in 1973, they were banned
   from competing in the isicathamiya competitions because of their
   ability to win many of the competition. They were, however, welcome to
   perform for the audience. Following this, the group started performing
   for their own audiences in shows that were specially made - and soon
   afterwards, the group began touring around South Africa in their own
   concerts, but due to the Apartheid system in use, they were often
   stopped by police guards; on some of these occasions they were even
   made to lie down on the ground whilst being searched. Shortly
   afterwards, they were allowed to tour without permits.

The Graceland success

   By 1986, the group had a very small number of white fans in South
   Africa; the majority of their fanbase was comprised of black people
   (the group mainly toured in townships). After Paul Simon included the
   group on his " Graceland Tour of 1987", the group began touring by
   themselves and became very widely known. They have visited Europe, USA,
   and Asia, amongst others. The group is quite possibly more well-known
   in the USA (due to the Graceland success and various advert campaigns
   for 7-Up and LifeSavers candy) and the UK (again, because of the
   Graceland success, and several successful advertisements for Heinz).

Today

   The group usually tours for three months before returning to South
   Africa (usually during the Christmas holiday). Altogether, the tours
   span nine to ten months each year. The group finished a four-month tour
   of the US in April 2006, and a follow-up 30-date tour of the UK (from
   May 5 through to June 10), with the Mbaqanga trio Mahotella Queens as
   their support act. Mambazo started a summer tour on 9 July 2006 with
   concerts in the US, Australia and New Zealand, ending in October 2006.
   The same month, the group performed a special concert entitled Long
   Walk to Freedom: An Evening with Ladysmith Black Mambazo at New York's
   Carnegie Hall (see 2006-present for more details). In January 2007, the
   group will commence a three-month tour of the US and will follow with
   concerts in Australia, New Zealand and Europe. The group will also
   complete an October-November 2007 tour of the UK.

Membership

   Initially, the group was formed of Joseph Shabalala, his brothers
   Headman and Enoch, cousins Albert, Milton, Funokwakhe, Abednego and
   Joseph Mazibuko as well as close friends Matovoti Msimanga and Walter
   Malinga. Altogether, the group has had 30 different members at one
   point or another over the past forty-five years. However, founder
   Joseph Shabalala continues to lead the group in the recording studio
   and on stage.

   Even though the early line-ups of the group contained a large amount of
   relatives from Shabalala's family (and, from 1969, his cousins from the
   Mazibuko family), most of the members that arrived in the group after
   the mid-1970s were recruited for their professional qualities. After
   alto voice Milton Mazibuko was murdered in 1980, the group spent quite
   a few months 'off', until returning the following year with two new
   members, Inos Phungula and Geophrey Mdletshe. After Shabalala's younger
   brother Headman was also murdered on December 10, 1991 (and the
   departure of Phungula, Mdletshe and Ben Shabalala - who was also killed
   in 2004), the group stopped singing for a while before Joseph recruited
   four of his six sons. In the 1970s, the group's original six members
   had been joined by many other men (most of whom only stayed with them
   for the recording sessions). Joseph Shabalala's sons joined the group
   in 1993, moving up from Ladysmith Black Mambazo's junior choir, Mshengu
   White Mambazo.

   The members of the group currently reside in Kloof, just outside of the
   coastal city of Durban in KwaZulu-Natal - though due to their heavy
   work schedule and appearances, the group only spend a few weeks at
   home. The chorus' members are Joseph Shabalala; his sons Msizi,
   Thulani, Thamsanqa, and Sibongiseni; cousins Albert and Abednego
   Mazibuko; and close friend Russel Mthembu. Jabulani Dubazana, a member
   of the group since 1975, retired from international touring in
   September 2004. Long-time member Jockey Shabalala died at his home in
   Ladysmith, South Africa on February 11, 2006 from various ailments. He
   was 62, and was a member of the group for almost forty years.

Discography

   Ladysmith Black Mambazo first recorded in 1973 on the Gallo label in
   South Africa. Since then, they have cut over fifty albums. Many of them
   have received gold and/or platinum disc certification.

In popular culture

     * Ladysmith Black Mambazo is referenced to in the movie Mean Girls (
       2004), when Cady Heron ( Lindsay Lohan) chooses to stay home for
       the weekend instead of going to see a concert with her parents. Her
       mother's confused response is, "But you love Ladysmith Black
       Mambazo!"
     * Priyan Weerappuli, the leader of the Sri Lankan group Pahan Silu,
       refers to Ladysmith Black Mambazo as among his greatest musical
       influences.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ladysmith_Black_Mambazo"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
