   #copyright

Lagos

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography

   Lagos, Nigeria
   Lagos as seen from Ikoyi Harbor.
   Lagos as seen from Ikoyi Harbour.
   Map of Nigeria showing the location of Lagos in the lower southwest
   corner of Nigeria.
   Map of Nigeria showing the location of Lagos in the lower southwest
   corner of Nigeria.
   Coordinates: 6°27′11″N, 3°23′45″E
   Province Lagos State
   Governor Bola Tinubu
   Area
    - City 787 km²
    - Land 614 km²
    - Water 173.14 km²
   Population
    - City (2005) Between 10.5-15 million
    - Density 1,380/km²
    - Urban 11,700,000
    - Metro 11,700,000
     estimated
   Time zone CET ( UTC+1)
    - Summer ( DST) CEST ( UTC+1)
   Website: http://www.lagosstate.gov.ng/

   Lagos is the largest city in Nigeria. As only two censuses (in 1972 and
   1991) have been taken since independence, estimates of its population
   vary considerably, but generally range from 10 to 15.5 million people,
   making it one of the most populous cities in Africa.

   Lagos has grown from a small Yoruba settlement, and undergone periods
   of domination by two European powers, to become the commercial and
   population centre of Nigeria.

   It is also the former capital city of Nigeria; it has since been
   replaced by Abuja. Abuja city officially gained its status as the
   capital city of Nigeria on 12 December 1991; although Lagos was
   stripped of this title much earlier, it acted as de facto capital until
   around 1991.

History

   Lagos today continues to be a commercial center, as it has been for
   much of its history
   Enlarge
   Lagos today continues to be a commercial centre, as it has been for
   much of its history

   Lagos was once a big head Yoruba settlement of Awori people called Eko,
   whose name stemmed from either Eko (Cassava farm) a result of the
   conquest of that region by the Benin Empire or Edo Empire (1470-1897).
   The present day Lagos state has a higher percent of this sub-group who
   actually migrated to the area from Isheri along the Ogun river.
   Throughout history, it was home to a number of warring tribes who had
   all settled in the area. During its early history, it also saw periods
   of rule by the Kingdom of Benin. Portuguese explorer Sequeira visited
   the area in 1472 , naming the area around the city Lagos, meaning
   lakes. From 1704-1851 it served as a major centre of the slave trade.
   In 1841 Oba Akitoye ascended on to the throne of Lagos and tried to
   bring an end to slave trading by placing a ban on the act. Lagos
   merchants, most notably Madam Tinubu, resisted the ban, deposed the
   king and installed his brother Oba Kosoko. Oba Akitoye while on exile
   met with the British who had banned slave trading in 1807, and got
   their backing to regain his throne. In 1851 he was reinstalled as the
   Oba of Lagos.

   Lagos was formally annexed as a British colony in 1861. This had the
   dual effect of crushing the slave trade and establishing British
   superiority over palm and other trades. The remainder of modern-day
   Nigeria was seized in 1886, and when the Colony and Protectorate of
   Nigeria was established in 1914 Lagos was declared its capital. It
   continued to be its capital when Nigeria gained its independence from
   Britain in 1960. Lagos experienced rapid growth throughout the 1960s
   and 1970s as a result of Nigeria's economic boom prior to the Biafran
   War. Lagos was the capital of Nigeria from 1914 - 1991; it was stripped
   of this title when the Federal Capital Territory was established at the
   purpose-built city of Abuja. However, most government functions
   (especially the head of state) stayed in Lagos for a time since Abuja
   was still under construction. In 1991, the head of state and other
   government functions finally moved to the newly built capital in a mass
   exodus. The change resulted in Lagos losing some prestige and economic
   leverage.

Past Oba (of Kings) of Lagos

     * King Ado
     * King Gabaro ( 1720- 1730)
     * Eletu Kekere ( 1730- 1734)
     * King Akinsemoyin ( 1734- 1779)
     * Erelu Kuti(female)
     * King Ologun Kutere
     * King Adele ( 1806- 1813), ( 1834- 1836)
     * King Eshinlokun ( 1836- 1841)
     * Oba Idewu Ojulari
     * King Oluwole
     * King Akintoye
     * Oba Kosoko
     * Oba Adeyinka Oyekan

   Oba Rilwan Akiolu

Climate

   The climate in Lagos is similar to that of the rest of southern
   Nigeria. There are two rainy seasons, with the heaviest rains falling
   from April to July and a weaker rainy season in October and November.
   There is a brief relatively dry spell in August and September and a
   longer dry season from December to March. Monthly rainfall between May
   and July averages over 300 mm (12 in), whilst in August and September
   it is down to 75 mm (3 inches) and in January as low as 35 mm (1.5
   inches). The main dry season is accompanied by harmattan winds from the
   Sahara Desert, which between December and early February can be quite
   strong. According to BBC Weather, the average tempearature in January
   is 27 ºC (79 ºF) and for July it is 25 ºC (77 ºF). On average the
   hottest month is March; with a mean temperature of 29C (84F); whilst
   July is the coolest month .

Geography

   Lagos consists of a large lagoon (hence its namesake) and an
   archipelago of large islands in the lagoon. The three major islands are
   Lagos Island, Ikoyi, and Victoria. The commercial centre remains Lagos
   Island, which is connected to the mainland by three large bridges: Eko
   Bridge, Carter Bridge, and Third Mainland Bridge. Ikoyi and Victoria
   island are closely connected to Lagos Island. The main docks are in
   Apapa directly opposite Lagos Island. The rest of the city is built on
   the African mainland. Districts on the mainland include Ebute-Meta,
   Surulere, Yaba (Lagos) (site of the University of Lagos), Mushin,
   Maryland and Ikeja, site of Murtala Mohammed International Airport.

Law and Government

   Unlike many major first world cities, but like many African and
   developing country cities, Lagos does not have its own mayor or
   council, but is instead governed as part of a regular Nigerian state.
   Since 1967, Lagos is part of Lagos State. Lagos was the headquarters of
   Lagos State until 1976, when this was moved to Ikeja.

   Lagos State covers some of the area beyond the city's borders, such as
   Badagri, but its primary focus is on Lagos proper. The state of Lagos
   is split into 5 districts. The state is responsible for utilities
   including roads and transportation, power, water, health, and
   education.

   The city is also home to the High Court of the Lagos State Judiciary,
   housed in an old colonial building on Lagos Island.

Economy

   Lagos is Nigeria's leading port. The Port of Lagos, operated by the
   Nigerian Port Authority is split into three main sections: Lagos port,
   Apapa Port and Tin Can Port, all located on the Gulf of Guinea. The
   port features a railhead.

   The port handles imports of consumer goods, foodstuffs, motor vehicles,
   machinery, and industrial raw materials. Its export trade in timber and
   agricultural products such as cacao and groundnuts has declined since
   the early 1970s, although the port has seen growing amounts of crude
   oil exported, with export figures rising between 1997 and 2000. Oil and
   petroleum products provide 20% of GDP and 95% of foreign exchange
   earnings in Nigeria as a whole.

   Lagos is also Nigeria's commercial centre. Many of the country's
   largest banks and financial institutions are located here. Many of the
   country's well known " Nigerian Scams" are conducted here as well.

   More than half of Nigeria's industrial capacity is located in Lagos's
   mainland suburbs, particularly in the Ikeja industrial estate. A wide
   range of manufactured goods are produced in the city, including
   machinery, motor vehicles, electronic equipment, chemicals, beer,
   processed food, and textiles.

Transport

   Third Mainland Bridge
   Enlarge
   Third Mainland Bridge
   A highway on Lagos Island
   Enlarge
   A highway on Lagos Island

   Ferries and highways link the parts of the city together. However,
   transport links within Lagos are congested, due in part to the
   geography of the city, as well as its explosive population growth.

   The city is filled with poor quality buses and motorcycles that are a
   vital part of Lagos' Transport Network. They are notorious for crashes
   and robberies and it is recommended that tourists do not travel on
   them.

   An agency called Lagos Metropolitan Transport Authority (LAMATA) has
   been created to solve the transportation problems in Lagos. A chain of
   salt-water lagoons runs west to Badagry and also east toward Ogun
   State. The Bus Rapid Transit scheme is set to be launched on the 4th of
   June 2006.The Lagos - Ibadan expressway and the Lagos - Abeokuta
   expressway are the major arterial routes in the city and serve as an
   inter-state highway to Ibadan, Oyo state and Abeokuta, Ogun State
   respectively. The Lagos - Ibadan expressway also serves as a Christian
   highway because every first friday of every month, the highway links
   over 500,000 Lagosians with the kilometer 42 Redeemed Christian Church
   camp.

   Murtala Mohammed International Airport serves the city.

Demographics

   As no census has been completed in Lagos since 1991, definitive
   demographic information is hard to come by. There is clear evidence of
   startling population growth in Lagos. A census is being taken and
   compiled (as of March 2006) for the whole of Nigeria, even imposing
   curfews to ensure accurate counts. This will provide the most accurate
   numbers to date for Lagos. This census will not include religious or
   tribal affilitaion, as these are controversial issues with two major
   religions (Islam and Christianity) and three major ethnicities.

   Lagos is, by most estimates, one of the fastest-growing cities in the
   world. The United Nations predicts that the city's metropolitan area,
   which had only about 290,000 inhabitants in 1950, will exceed 20
   million by 2010. This will make Lagos one of the world's five largest
   cities.

   In Nigeria as a whole, there are more than 250 ethnic groups.

Neighborhoods

   The Lagos Mainland is the center of most of the population that commute
   to work on Lagos Island which in some respects is the economic nerve
   centre of Nigeria. The area is also particularly famous for its music
   and nightlife, notably in areas around Yaba and Surulere, as well as
   the National Stadium Complex. Other areas of the mainland include the
   middle class, slums, and suburbs of Ebute-Meta, Surulere, Yaba (site of
   the University of Lagos), Mushin, and Ikeja.

   Lagos Island is the nerve centre of the city and contains many of the
   largest markets in Lagos, its central business district, the central
   mosque, and the oba's palace. Though largely derelict, Tinubu Square on
   Lagos Island is a site of historical importance; it was here that the
   Amalgamation ceremony that unified the North and South took place in
   1914.

   Business District Victoria Island
   Enlarge
   Business District Victoria Island

   Ikoyi island, situated to the east of Lagos Island houses the
   headquarters of the state government and all other government
   buildings. It also has many hotels, and one of Africa's largest golf
   courses. Originally a middle class neighbourhood, in recent years, it
   has become a fashionable enclave for the upper middle class to the
   upper class.
   A neighborhood in Victoria Island
   Enlarge
   A neighbourhood in Victoria Island

   Victoria Island, situated to the south of Lagos Island, is a wealthy
   enclave that is one of the homes to Nigeria's ruling elite and the
   country's wealthiest. It also boasts a sizable commercial district
   including Nigeria's largest malls and movie theatres. 90% of Nigeria's
   foreign expatriate community lives there.

Culture

Music & Film industry

   Lagos is famous throughout West Africa for its music scene. Lagos has
   given birth to a variety of styles such as highlife, juju, fuji, and
   Afrobeat. In recent years Lagos has been the fore runner with African
   styled hip-hop branded Afrohip-hop.

   Lagos is the centre of the famous Nigerian film industry, often
   referred to as ' Nollywood.' Many of the large film producers have
   offices in Surulere, Lagos, though there aren't any film studios in
   Nollywood, in the Hollywood sense. Idumota market on Lagos Island is
   the primary distribution centre. Also many films are shot in the Festac
   area of Lagos.

   The cinemas are gradually losing their supporters to the movie
   industry. Yoruba films happen to be the most watched in the cinemas,
   followed by Indian films. Films are not premiered for a long period of
   time in the western sense, especially with Yoruba films. The English
   spoken films move directly from the studios to the market. The theatres
   on the other hand seem to be having their advent supporters, but little
   is heard about them maybe due to the level of publicity given.

   The National Arts Theatre Iganmu is a National heritage.

Sport & Tourism

   As in the rest of Nigeria, football is the most popular sport. The
   Nigeria Football Association (NFA) and the Lagos State Football
   Association (LAFA) are both based in Lagos. A prominent Lagos soccer
   club Julius Berger FC, members of the Nigerian Premier League; the
   team, owned by the Julius Berger Construction Company, is set to close
   in 2008, potentially leaving Lagos without a Premier League team.

   The Nigerian national football team, also known as the Super Eagles,
   used to play almost all of their home games in Lagos; however, games
   are now split between the Surelere Stadium in Lagos and the larger,
   newer Abuja Stadium in Abuja, which may soon become the default home of
   the Super Eagles.

   The Lagos State government features the Ministry of Youth, Sports &
   Social Development.

   Lagos is not a common tourist destination, as it is primarily
   business-oriented and has a reputation for danger and squalor amongst
   many foreigners. However, some tourist attractions do exist, such as
   Oba's Palace. There are also several shopping malls, including the
   Falomo Shopping Centre. Visitors are also drawn to the musical heritage
   of Lagos, such as fuji music (see Music section).

Poverty

   Many residents of Lagos are poor, and live in slums such as Ajegunle,
   whilst there are districts of considerable wealth. Lagos, like many
   cities in developing countries has attracted many young entrepreneurs
   and families seeking a better life from throughout Nigeria and beyond.

Education

   The Lagos State Government operates state schools .

   The education system is the 6-3-3-4 system; the system is run
   throughout the country. The levels are Primary, Junior Secondary School
   (JSS), Senior Secondary School (SSS), and university. Every child has
   right to basic education, especially for the first 6 years. The level
   of poverty may determine how far the child will go after this.

Colleges and Universities

   Lagos is home to four universities:
     * University of Lagos
     * Pan-African University
     * Lagos State University
     * Cetep University

   The University of Lagos(UNILAG) is a large institution dating from
   1962, with over 35,000 students. It comprises 13 faculties, run by over
   4,000 staff.

   The Pan-African University is primarily a business school, offering two
   MBA programs. Founded in 1996 and awarded University status in 2002, it
   consists of the Lagos Business School and of Enterprise Development
   Services. The University also places some emphasis on the study of art.

   Yaba College of Technology (now Lagos City University) was the first
   higher institution in the country, and one of the first in Africa.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lagos"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
