   #copyright

Lake Albert

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography

   Lake Albert
   Lake Albert - Lake Albert on a 2002 NASA MODIS satellite picture. The
   dotted grey line is the border between Congo (DRC) (left) and Uganda
   (right).

     Lake Albert on a 2002 NASA MODIS satellite picture. The dotted grey
      line is the border between Congo (DRC) (left) and Uganda (right).

   Coordinates 1°0′N 30°5′E
   Primary sources Victoria Nile
   Primary outflows Albert Nile
   Catchment area
   Basin countries Democratic Republic of Congo
   Uganda
   Max-length 160 km
   Max-width 30 km
   Surface area 5,300 km²
   Average depth 25m
   Max-depth 58m
   Water volume 280 km³
   Shore length^1
   Surface elevation 615 m
   Islands
   Settlements Butiaba
   Pakwach
   ^1 Shore length is an imprecise measure which may not be standardized
   for this article.

   Lake Albert – also Albert Nyanza and formerly Lake Mobutu Sese Seko –
   is one of the Great Lakes of Africa. It is Africa's seventh largest
   lake.

   Lake Albert is located in the centre of the continent, on the border
   between Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo (formerly
   Zaire). Lake Albert is the northernmost of the chain of lakes in the
   Great Rift Valley; it is about 160 km (100 mi) long and 30 km (19 mi)
   wide, with a maximum depth of 51 m (168 ft), and a surface elevation of
   619 m (2,030 ft) above sea level.

   Lake Albert is part of the complicated system of the upper Nile. Its
   main sources are the Victoria Nile, ultimately coming from Lake
   Victoria to the southeast, and the Semliki River, which issues from
   Lake Edward to the southwest. Its outlet, at the northernmost tip of
   the lake, is the Albert Nile (which becomes known as the Mountain Nile
   when it enters Sudan).
   Rivers and lakes of Uganda. Click image to enlarge.
   Enlarge
   Rivers and lakes of Uganda. Click image to enlarge.

   At the southern end of the lake, where the Semliki comes in, there are
   swamps. Farther south loom the mighty Ruwenzori Range, while a range of
   hills called the Blue Mountains tower over the northwestern shore. The
   few settlements along the shore include Butiaba and Pakwach.

   In 1864, the explorer Samuel Baker became the first European to
   discover the lake; he named it after the recently deceased Prince
   Albert, consort of Queen Victoria.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lake_Albert"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
