   #copyright

Lake Edward

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography

   Lake Edward
   Lake Edward - NASA Landsat photo of Lake Edward and Lake George

              NASA Landsat photo of Lake Edward and Lake George

   Coordinates 0°0′S 29°4′E
   Primary sources Nyamugasani
   Ishasha
   Rutshuru
   Rwindi
   Primary outflows Semliki River
   Kazinga Channel
   Catchment area 12,096 km²
   Basin countries Democratic Republic of Congo
   Uganda
   Max-length 77 km
   Max-width 40 km
   Surface area 2,325 km²
   Average depth 17m
   Max-depth 112m
   Water volume 39.5km³
   Surface elevation 912 m

   Lake Edward is one of the Great Lakes of Africa. It is located in the
   Great Rift Valley, on the border between the Democratic Republic of the
   Congo and Uganda, its northern banks a few kilometers south of the
   Equator. The lake was visited by Henry Morton Stanley in 1888 and was
   named by him in honour of Albert Edward, the Prince of Wales. The lake
   was later named Lake Idi Amin or Lake Idi Amin Dada after Ugandan
   dictator Idi Amin, today it is again known as Lake Edward.
   Lake Edward from Mweya in Queen Elizabeth National Park
   Enlarge
   Lake Edward from Mweya in Queen Elizabeth National Park

   Lake Edward is fed by the Nyamugasani, the Ishasha, the Rutshuru, and
   the Rwindi rivers. It empties to the north via the Semliki River into
   Lake Albert. It is also connected, by means of the Kazinga Channel, to
   Lake George to the northeast. It stands at an elevation of 920 metres,
   is 77 km long by 40 km wide at its maximum points, and covers a total
   surface area of 2,325 km² (the 15th largest on the continent).

Ecology

   Lake Edward is home to many species of fish, including populations of
   Bagrus docmac, Sarotherodon niloticus, Sarotherodon leucostictus, and
   over 50 species of Haplochromis and Haplochromis related species, of
   which only 8 are formally described. Fishing is an important activity
   among local residents. Fauna living on the banks of the lake –
   including chimpanzees, elephants, crocodiles, and lions – are protected
   by the Virunga National Park (Congo) and the Queen Elizabeth National
   Park (Uganda). The area is also home to many perennial and migratory
   bird species.
   Rivers and lakes of Uganda.Click image to enlarge.
   Enlarge
   Rivers and lakes of Uganda.
   Click image to enlarge.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lake_Edward"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
