   #copyright

Lance Armstrong

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Sports and games people

   CAPTION: Lance Armstrong

             Armstrong speaking at the NIH

                 Personal information
   Full name     Lance Edward Armstrong
   Date of birth September 18, 1971
   Country       Flag of United States  United States
                   Team information
   Current team  none (retired)
                 Professional team(s)
   1992-1996
   1997
   1998-2004
   2005          Motorola
                 Cofidis
                 US Postal
                 Discovery Channel
                      Major wins
   22 stages Tour de France
     * 7x Tour de France
     * 1x Clásica de San Sebastián
     * 1x La Flèche Wallonne
     * 1x World Cycling Champion

   Lance Armstrong (born Lance Edward Gunderson on September 18, 1971 in
   Plano, Texas) is a retired American professional road racing cyclist.
   He won the Tour de France, professional cycling's most prestigious
   race, a record seven consecutive times from 1999 to 2005. In doing so,
   he beat the previous record of five consecutive wins, held by Miguel
   Indurain and five non consecutive wins shared by Bernard Hinault, Eddy
   Merckx and Jacques Anquetil. This feat was accomplished several years
   after brain and testicular surgery, and extensive chemotherapy in 1996,
   to treat testicular cancer that had metastasized to his brain and
   lungs.

   In 2002, Sports Illustrated magazine named him Sportsman of the Year.
   He was also named Associated Press Male Athlete of the Year for 2002,
   2003, 2004 and 2005, received ESPN's ESPY Award for Best Male Athlete
   in 2003, 2004, 2005, and 2006, and won the BBC Sports Personality of
   the Year Overseas Personality Award in 2003. Armstrong retired from
   racing on July 24, 2005, at the end of the 2005 Tour de France.

   His athletic success and his dramatic recovery from cancer inspired
   Armstrong to commemorate his accomplishments in conjunction with Nike
   through the Lance Armstrong Foundation, a charity founded in 1997. The
   now ubiquitous " Livestrong" yellow rubber wristbands first launched in
   2004 netted the Foundation tens of millions of dollars in the fight
   against cancer and helped Armstrong become a major player in the
   nonprofit sector.

Career

Early career

   Armstrong began his sporting career as a triathlete, competing and
   winning in adult competitions from the age of 15. In the 1987-1988
   Tri-Fed/Texas ("Tri-Fed" was the former name of USA Triathlon),
   Armstrong was the number 1 ranked triathlete in the 19 & under age
   group; second place was Chann McRae, who later became a US Postal
   Service Cycling teammate and the 2002 USPRO National Champion.
   Armstrong's point total for the 1987 season was better than the five
   professionals ranked that year. At 16 years old, Armstrong became a
   professional triathlete and became the national sprint-course triathlon
   champion in 1989 and 1990 at age 18 and 19, respectively.

   It soon became clear that his greatest talent was as a bicycle racer.
   After competing as a cycling amateur, winning the US amateur
   championship in 1991 and finishing 14th in the 1992 Olympics road race,
   Armstrong turned professional in 1992 .

Cancer

   On October 2, 1996, Armstrong was diagnosed with stage three
   nonseminomas testicular cancer that had metastasized, spreading to his
   lungs, abdomen, and brain. His doctors told him that he had less than a
   50 percent chance of survival. After his recovery, one of his doctors
   told him that his actual odds of survival had been considerably smaller
   (one even went as far as to say three percent){{{author}}},
   {{{title}}}, [[{{{publisher}}}]], [[{{{date}}}]]., and that he had been
   given the estimate primarily to give him hope. Three years later; after
   much recuperation, and the loss of his right testicle, he won the Tour
   de France.

Tour de France success

   Before his illness, Armstrong had already had a number of Tour de
   France stage wins to his name. In 1993, he won the 8th stage of the
   Tour, and in 1995, he took stage 18.

   In addition to his 7 Tour de France wins, Armstrong has won 22
   individual stages, 11 time trials and his team has won the team time
   trial on 3 occasions.

   After being named the 2005 Sportsman of the Year, he said "Cancer and
   what all can be done there, not just in the world of health care, but
   if it's education or political, this is a very real issue," Armstrong
   said. "We're at an interesting time in medical research. That would be
   a serious rush for me if I could affect a change in time."

Reasons for success

   Many have discussed the reasons for Armstrong's success in winning
   seven Tours in a row. No single factor seems to be responsible, but
   rather a combination of the following:

Training methodology and preparation

   Armstrong has clearly triumphed at least partly because he learned to
   apply the obsessive focus he developed fighting cancer to making a
   career of winning the Tour de France, training in Spain for months
   leading up to the Tour de France and making frequent trips to France to
   fully analyze and ride key parts of the upcoming Tour de France course.

   That he focuses solely on the Tour De France and seldom competes in
   other major races allows him to train 342 days a year for the 23 days
   of the Tour, a significantly greater training time than riders who
   compete in other races.

Chris Carmichael

   Armstrong met former elite cyclist Chris Carmichael in 1990 and worked
   with him as his coach through all of his years at the Tour De France.

Johan Bruyneel

   The team's sports director, Belgian ex-cyclist Johan Bruyneel, was
   involved in all of Armstrong's victories. A master tactician who shared
   Armstrong's obsession for detailed preparation, Bruyneel's symbiotic
   relationship with Armstrong makes it difficult for even them to
   ascertain which one influenced the other how much. Starting with
   Armstrong talking Bruyneel into becoming their sports director, and
   Bruyneel convincing Armstrong that he could win the Tour, to their
   almost constant radio communications during each race, the amount of
   support these men provided for each other through the seven victories
   was immeasurable.

Riding style

   He has an extremely high aerobic threshold and therefore can maintain a
   higher cadence (often 120 rpm) in a lower gear than his competitors,
   most noticeably in the time trials. This style is in direct contrast to
   previous champions (e.g. Jan Ullrich and Miguel Indurain) who used a
   high gear and brute strength to win time trials. It is believed that a
   high cadence results in less fatigue in the leg muscles than a lower
   cadence requiring more severe leg muscle contractions. Ultimately the
   cardiovascular system is worked to a greater extent with a high cadence
   than with a lower, more muscular cadence. Because the leg muscles are
   taxed less with a high cadence pedaling style, they recover faster and
   the efforts can be sustained for longer periods of time. Armstrong
   dedicated a significant portion of his training to developing and
   maintaining a very efficient high cadence style.

Rare athletic physical attributes

   All top cyclists have excellent physical attributes. Armstrong is no
   exception, although in one way, he may be unusual even for an elite
   athlete. He is near but not at the top aerobically, having a VO[2] Max
   of 83.8 mL/kg/min — much higher than the average person (40-50) but not
   as high as that of some other elite cyclists, such as Miguel Indurain
   (88.0, although reports exist that Indurain tested at 92-94) or Greg
   LeMond (92.5). His heart is 30 percent larger than average; however, an
   enlarged heart is a common trait for many other athletes. He has a
   resting heart rate of 32-34 beats per minute with a max heart rate at
   201 bpm. Armstrong's most unusual attribute may be his low lactate
   levels. During intense training, the levels of most racers range from
   12 μL/kg to as much as 20 μL/kg; Armstrong doesn't go above 6 μL/kg.
   The result is that less lactic acid accumulates in Armstrong's system,
   therefore it is possible that he feels less fatigue from severe efforts
   and this may contribute to his ability to sustain the same level of
   physical effort as other elite racers with less fatigue and faster
   recovery times. Some theorize that his high pedaling cadence is
   designed to take advantage of this low lactate level. In contrast,
   other cyclists — like Jan Ullrich — rely on their anaerobic capacity,
   pushing a larger gear at a lower rate. Further improvements in
   Armstrong's physical attributes and performance have been attributed to
   training induced increases in his muscular efficiency indicating
   changes in muscle myosin type.

Strength of his team

   Some have attributed Armstrong's success in recent years in part to his
   US Postal Service cycling team (in 2005 the Discovery Channel Team).
   Throughout his wins in the Tour de France, Lance has slowly built up
   the strength of his team. In his first few Tour victories, his team was
   not considered exceptionally strong. Yet it is evident by the wins of
   his team in the Team Time Trial in his last three Tour de France
   victories that they are now one of the most dominating teams in the Pro
   Tour Circuit. While the U.S. Postal Team competes in races worldwide,
   the riders selected to join Armstrong in the Tour de France are there
   specifically to help Armstrong win the yellow jersey. However, the
   decisive moves in which he gains very large leads over the competition
   almost always involve Armstrong racing far ahead of his team, and
   Armstrong has often fended off multiple attacks even when his team
   falters and he is isolated unexpectedly.

Support of broader team

   Armstrong also revolutionized the support behind his well-funded teams,
   asking his sponsors and equipment suppliers to contribute and act as
   one cohesive part of the team. For example, rather than having the bike
   frame, handlebars, and tires of a bicycle designed and developed by
   separate companies miles away from each other, his teams adopted a
   Formula 1-style relationship with sponsors and suppliers, taking full
   advantage of the combined resources of several organizations working in
   close communication. The team comprised of Trek, Nike, AMD, Bontrager
   (a Trek-owned company), Shimano, and Oakley collaborate for a
   well-coordinated and technologically cutting edge array of products
   that produce the fastest Lance Armstrong possible. This is now the
   standard in the professional cycling industry.

Allegations of drug use

   The sport of professional cycling has a particular problem with use of
   performance enhancing drugs, with prominent individuals and in some
   cases entire teams being disqualified at one time or another. This has
   resulted in cycling having a reputation for doping. Against this
   background, Armstrong has continually denied having used
   performance-enhancing drugs, and has described himself as "the most
   tested athlete in the world". Throughout his career only one test
   showed indications of the presence of doping products: in 1999, a urine
   sample showed traces of corticosteroids, but the amount was not in the
   positive test range. He later produced a medical certificate showing he
   used an approved cream for saddle sores which contained the substance.

Specific allegations

     * In 2004, sports reporters Pierre Ballester and David Walsh jointly
       published a book alleging Armstrong had used performance-enhancing
       drugs ( L. A. Confidentiel - Les secrets de Lance Armstrong). It
       contains allegations by Armstrong's former masseuse Emma O'Reilly
       who claimed that Armstrong once asked her to dispose of used
       syringes and give him makeup to conceal needle marks on his arms.
       Another key figure in the book, Steve Swart, claims that he and
       other riders, including Armstrong, began using drugs in 1995 while
       they were members of the Motorola team, a claim since denied by
       other team members. Allegations in the book were reprinted in the
       UK newspaper The Sunday Times in a story by deputy sports editor
       Alan English in June 2004. Armstrong subsequently sued the
       newspaper for libel, which settled out of court after a High Court
       judge in a pretrial ruling stated that the article "meant
       accusation of guilt and not simply reasonable grounds to suspect."
       The newspaper's lawyers issued the following statement: "The Sunday
       Times has confirmed to Mr Armstrong that it never intended to
       accuse him of being guilty of taking any performance-enhancing
       drugs and sincerely apologised for any such impression." (See also
       in The Guardian). Armstrong later dropped similar lawsuits in
       France.

     * On March 31, 2005, Mike Anderson filed a brief in Travis County
       District Court in Texas, as part of a legal battle following his
       termination in November 2004 as an employee of Armstrong. Anderson
       worked for Armstrong for two years as a personal assistant. In this
       brief Anderson claims that he discovered a box of Androstenine
       while cleaning a bathroom in Armstrong's apartment in Girona,
       Spain. While Androstenine is not on the list of banned drugs, the
       substances androstenedione and androstenediol are listed. However,
       Anderson stated in a subsequent deposition that he had no direct
       knowledge of Armstrong using a banned substance. Armstrong denied
       the claim and issued a counter-suit. The two men reached an
       out-of-court settlement in November 2005, the terms of the
       agreement undisclosed.

     * On August 23, 2005, L'Équipe, a major French daily sports
       newspaper, reported on its front page under the headline "The
       Armstrong Lie" that the cyclist had taken EPO during the prologue
       and five stages of the 1999 Tour de France. This claim was based on
       an investigation in which they claimed to be able to match samples
       from the 1999 Tour that were used to hone the EPO test to
       Armstrong. The world governing body of cycling, Union Cycliste
       Internationale (UCI), did not begin using a urine test for EPO
       until two years later, in 2001. Armstrong immediately replied on
       his website, saying, "Unfortunately, the witch hunt continues and
       tomorrow’s article is nothing short of tabloid journalism. The
       paper even admits in its own article that the science in question
       here is faulty and that I have no way to defend myself. They state:
       'There will therefore be no counter-exam nor regulatory
       prosecutions, in a strict sense, since defendant’s rights cannot be
       respected.' I will simply restate what I have said many times: I
       have never taken performance enhancing drugs."

     * In June 2006, French newspaper Le Monde reported claims made by
       Betsy and Frankie Andreu during a deposition that Armstrong had
       admitted using performance-enhancing drugs to his physician just
       after brain surgery in 1996. The Andreus' testimony was related to
       litigation between Armstrong and SCA Promotions, a Texas-based
       company that was attempting to withhold a $5-million bonus; this
       was eventually settled out of court with SCA paying Armstrong and
       Tailwind Sports $7.5 million, to cover the $5-million bonus plus
       interest and lawyers' fees. Armstrong later issued a statement
       suggesting that Betsy Andreu may have been confused by possible
       mention of his post-operative treatment which included steroids and
       EPO that are routinely taken to counteract wasting and
       red-blood-cell destroying effects of intensive chemotherapy. The
       Andreu's allegation was not supported by any of the eight other
       people present, including Armstrong's doctor Craig Nichols, or his
       medical history, although according to Greg LeMond (who has been
       embroiled with his own disputes with Armstrong, see LeMond
       article), there exists a recorded conversation in which Stephanie
       McIlvain, Armstrong's contact at Oakley Inc., said to Greg LeMond,
       "You know, I was in that room. I heard it." .

     * In July 2006, the Los Angeles Times published an in-depth story on
       the allegations raised in the SCA case. The report cited evidence
       presented at the trial including the results of the LNDD test and
       an analysis of these results by an expert witness. From the LA
       Times article: "The results, Australian researcher Michael Ashenden
       testified in Dallas, show Armstrong's levels rising and falling,
       consistent with a series of injections during the Tour. Ashenden, a
       paid expert retained by SCA Promotions, told arbitrators the
       results painted a "compelling picture" that the world's most famous
       cyclist "used EPO in the '99 Tour." Ashenden's finding were
       disputed by the Vrijman report, which pointed to procedural and
       privacy issues in dismissing the LNDD test results. The LA Times
       article also provided in-depth information on the testimony given
       by Armstrong's former teammate Steven Swart, Frankie Andreu and his
       wife Betsy, and Instant messaging conversation between Andreu and
       Jonathan Vaughters regarding blood-doping techniques in the
       peloton. Vaughters later signed a statement disavowing the comments
       and stating he had: "no personal knowledge that any team in the
       Tour de France, including Armstrong's Discovery team in 2005,
       engaged in any prohibited conduct whatsoever." Andreu signed a
       statement affirming the conversation took place as indicated on the
       Instant messaging logs submitted to the court. . The SCA trial was
       decided in favour of Armstrong, and the LA Times reported: "Though
       no verdict or finding of facts was rendered, Armstrong called the
       outcome proof that the doping allegations were baseless." The LA
       Times article provides a comprehensive review of the disputed
       positive EPO test, allegations and sworn testimony against
       Armstrong, but notes that: "They are filled with conflicting
       testimony, hearsay and circumstantial evidence admissible in
       arbitration hearings but questionable in more formal legal
       proceedings."
     * In September 2006, Frankie Andreu and another, unnamed teammate
       were reported to have made recent statements that they used EPO
       during the 1999 Tour de France. This was the same tour, and the
       same drug, at issue in the controversy with WADA (see below). While
       both teammates are reported as saying they never saw Armstrong use
       EPO, Armstrong at once attacked the article, describing it as a
       "hatchet job."

Investigation

   In October 2005 UCI appointed Dutch lawyer Emile Vrijman to investigate
   the handling of urine tests by the French national anti-doping
   laboratory, LNDD. Vrijman was the head of the Dutch anti-doping agency
   for ten years, since then he has worked as a defense attorney defending
   high-profile athletes against doping charges. Vrijman's report
   "cleared" Armstrong due to improper handling and testing and said that
   the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) and the LNDD may have "behaved in
   ways that are completely inconsistent with the rules and regulations of
   international anti-doping control testing," and may also have been
   against the law. The report said that tests on urine samples were
   conducted improperly and fell so short of scientific standards that it
   was "completely irresponsible" to suggest they "constitute evidence of
   anything." The recommendation of the commission's report was that no
   disciplinary action whatsoever should be taken against any rider on the
   basis of the LNDD research. It also called upon the WADA and LNDD to
   submit themselves to an investigation by an outside independent
   authority. The World Anti Doping Agency (WADA) rejected these
   conclusions and is considering legal action

Family and personal life

   Armstrong is the son of Linda Armstrong Kelly. He met his first wife,
   Kristin Richard (Kik), in June 1997. They were married on May 8, 1998
   and had three children: Luke, born in October 1999, and twins Isabelle
   and Grace, born in November 2001. The couple filed for divorce in
   September 2003. Kristin Armstrong cited several reasons for the
   dissolution of their marriage, including her husband's rapid rise to
   celebrity, his comeback from cancer, and their constant movement
   between multiple homes in different countries.

   Armstrong began dating singer Sheryl Crow some time in the autumn of
   2003 and publicly revealed their relationship in January 2004. The
   couple announced their engagement in September 2005 and their split in
   February 2006. According to Men's Journal's July 2006 cover story,
   Armstrong had struggled to grapple with Crow's breast cancer diagnosis
   on February 20, 2006, but, after talking almost daily for a while, they
   have again gone separate ways. "I still think about her every day.
   Primarily now because of her health and hoping that everything works
   out. And I'm fully confident that it will," he said.

   In the November 2006 issue of Details magazine, Armstrong addressed
   growing rumors that he and actor Matthew McConaughey were involved in a
   gay relationship. "We all have buds, we all take guy trips, but you
   take something very normal and put it in a magazine and people start
   talking," he stated. "It's like, either you sleep with everything that
   moves or you're gay."

   Armstrong owns a house in Austin, Texas as well as a ranch in the Texas
   Hill Country. Neighbors of his ranch property claim that Armstrong
   inadvertently polluted a local swimming hole when he was creating a dam
   on his ranch. One neighboring family says the problem has existed for
   two years and that "you only have so much patience". Armstrong says he
   is investigating the best way to fix the problem.

NYC Marathon of 2006

   After his retirement he continued to stay fit and decided he would try
   his luck at a marathon. He decided on running the New York marathon.
   Together with Nike he assembled a pace team consisting of well known
   runners Alberto Salazar and Joan Benoit Samuelson to help him reach his
   goal time of 3 hours. He struggled with shin splints and was on pace
   for a little above 3 hours but pushed through the last 5 miles to come
   through at 2:59:36, finishing 856th. He commented that the race was
   extremely difficult, even when compared to competing in the Tour De
   France. "For the level of condition that I have now, that was without a
   doubt the hardest physical thing I have ever done. I never felt a point
   where I hit the wall. It was really a gradual progression of fatigue
   and soreness." He also helped raise $600,000 for his LiveStrong
   campaign during this run.

Political possibilities

   George W. Bush and Armstrong mountain biking at Prairie Chapel Ranch
   Enlarge
   George W. Bush and Armstrong mountain biking at Prairie Chapel Ranch

   In an interview with the New York Times, teammate George Hincapie
   hinted at Armstrong possibly running for Governor of Texas after
   retiring from cycling. In the July 2005 issue of Outside magazine ,
   Armstrong himself hinted at possibly running for Governor, although
   "not in '06." By Texas political standards, he would almost certainly
   run as a Democrat, as he has described himself in the past as being
   "middle to left," "against mixing up State and Church," "not keen on
   guns," opposed to the Iraq War, and pro-choice. U.S. Senator John
   Kerry, interviewed on OLN at the 2005 Tour de France, stated Armstrong
   has the potential to be successful in politics. "I think he'd be
   awesome, he'd be a force. I just hope it's for the right party," Kerry
   said on OLN. Armstrong and President George W. Bush, a Republican and
   fellow Texan, count each other friends. President Bush called Armstrong
   in France after his 2005 victory to congratulate him and in August 2005
   The Times ( Can this bike ride be Bush's tour de force?) reported the
   President had invited Armstrong to his Prairie Chapel Ranch to go
   mountain biking.

   Armstrong was quoted by The Times in 2004 about his views on Iraq: "I
   don't like what the war has done to our country, to our economy. My
   kids will be paying for this war for some time to come. George Bush is
   a friend of mine and just as I say it to you, I'd say to him, 'Mr
   President, I'm not sure this war was such a good idea', and the good
   thing about him is he could take that."

   Most recently however, beginning in August 2005, Armstrong has hinted
   that he has changed his mind about possibly entering politics. In an
   interview with Charlie Rose, that aired on PBS on August 1st, 2005,
   Armstrong pointed out that running for Governor would require the type
   of time commitments that caused him to decide to retire from cycling.
   Again on August 16, 2005, Armstrong told a local Austin CBS affiliate
   that he is no longer considering politics. "The biggest problem with
   politics or running for the governor -- the governor's race here in
   Austin or in Texas is that it would mimic exactly what I've done: a ton
   of stress and a ton of time away from my kids. Why would I want to go
   from pro cycling, which is stressful and a lot of time away, straight
   into politics?"

   Even more recently, Armstrong has begun to clarify that he intends to
   be involved in politics as an activist for change in cancer policies.
   In a May 2006 interview with Sports Illustrated, Armstrong is quoted as
   saying "I need to run for one office, the presidency of the Cancer
   Fighters' Union of the World." Sports Illustrated also quotes Armstrong
   as saying that he fears halving his influence with legislators if he
   chooses one side in American partisan politics. His Foundation is
   becoming more involved in lobbying on behalf of cancer patients before
   Congress, and Armstrong himself has said that he hopes to model his
   efforts in the area of cancer in much the same manner as U2's Bono has
   done on behalf of poverty, AIDS, and hunger.

Teams and victories

Palmarès

   1984
          IronKids Triathlon National Champion

   1987
          Hillcrest Tulsa Triathlon

   1988
          Athens YMCA Triathlon (Athens, TX) (course record)
          River Cities Triathlon (Shreveport, LA) (course record)

   1989
          Flag of United States  United States National Sprint Triathlon
          Champion
          Waco Triathlon (Waco, TX)

   1990
          Flag of United States  United States National Sprint Triathlon
          Champion
          Stonebridge Ranch Triathlon (McKinney, TX)

   1991
          Flag of United States  United States National Amateur Cycling
          Champion
          Settimana Bergamasca (overall and youth classifications)

   1992
          First Union Grand Prix
          GP Sanson
          Fitchburg Longsjo Classic (overall, 1 stage win)
          Thrift Drug Classic
          Vuelta La Ribera (overall, 3 stage wins)
          Trittico Premondiale (1 stage win)

   1993
          World Cycling Championship - World Cycling Champion
          USPRO National Road Championships - Flag of United States
          United States National Cycling Champion
          Tour de France (Stage 8)
          Tour of America (overall)
          Vuelta Ciclista a Galega
          Trophee Laigueglia
          Tour duPont (1 stage win)
          Tour of Sweden (1 stage win)
          Kmart West Virginia Classic (overall, 2 stage wins)
          Thrift Drug Classic*

   *The Thrift Drug Classic included 3 separate 1-day races. One in rural
   Pennsylvania, the next day in New Jersey and the last day in
   Philadelphia to determine the U.S. Pro Champion, also known as the
   CoreStates Cycling Race. Thrift Drug said it would award $1 million to
   a rider, if he won all 3 races. It had never been done before, until
   Lance Armstrong came around. He won all 3 races. At the USPro
   Championship race, on the final lap circuit, he sat up on his bicycle,
   took out a comb, combed his hair and smiled for the cameras.

   1994
          Thrift Drug Classic
          Tour duPont (1 stage win)

   1995
          Tour de France (Stage 18)
          Clásica de San Sebastián
          Paris-Nice (Stage 5)
          Tour duPont (overall, 3 stage wins)
          Kmart West Virginia Classic (overall, 1 stage win)
          Tour of America (overall)

   1996
          Tour duPont (overall, 5 stage wins)
          La Flèche Wallonne

   1998
          Rheinland-Pfalz Rundfahrt (overall)
          Tour de Luxembourg (overall, 1 stage win)
          Cascade Classic
          Vuelta d'Espana (4th overall)

   1999
          Tour de France (overall, 4 stage wins)
          Critérium du Dauphiné Libéré (ITT) (Prologue)
          Route du Sud (Stage 4)
          Circuit de la Sarthe (ITT) (Stage 4)

   2000
          Tour de France (overall, 1 stage win)
          GP des Nations
          GP Eddy Merckx
          Critérium du Dauphiné Libéré (ITT) (Stage 3)
          Bronze medal in the 2000 Summer Olympics Individual Time Trial,
          Men

   2001
          Tour de France (overall, 4 stage wins)
          Tour de Suisse (overall, 2 stage wins)

   2002
          Tour de France (overall, 4 stage wins)
          Critérium du Dauphiné Libéré (Stage 6)
          GP du Midi-Libre
          Profronde van Stiphout (post-Tour criterium)

   2003
          Tour de France (overall, 1 stage win, Team Time Trial)
          Critérium du Dauphiné Libéré (overall, Stage 3 ITT)

   2004
          Tour de France (overall, 5 stage wins, Team Time Trial)
          Tour de Georgia (overall, 2 stage wins)
          Tour du Languedoc-Roussillon (Stage 5)
          Volta ao Algarve (ITT) (Stage 4)
          Profronde van Stiphout (post-Tour criterium)

   2005
          Tour de France (overall, 2 stage wins, Team Time Trial,
          Individual Time Trial)
          Critérium du Dauphiné Libéré (points classification)

Personal Statistics

     * Height: 5'-9.75" (177 cm)
     * Weight: 165 lb (75 kg) in 1993, 79 kg in 1999

Quotes

     * On the Champs-Élysées podium for the last time, after winning his
       seventh tour: "Finally the last thing I’ll say to the people who
       don’t believe in cycling, the cynics and the sceptics. I'm sorry
       for you. I’m sorry that you can’t dream big. I'm sorry you don't
       believe in miracles. But this is one hell of a race. This is a
       great sporting event and you should stand around and believe it.
       You should believe in these athletes, and you should believe in
       these people. I'll be a fan of the Tour de France for as long as I
       live. And there are no secrets - this is a hard sporting event and
       hard work wins it. So Vive le Tour. Forever."
     * About the French 2006 FIFA World Cup team during his speech of
       gratitude at the ESPY Awards: "All their players tested positive...
       for being assholes."
     * "Pain is temporary, it may last a minute, or an hour, or a day, or
       a year, but eventually it will subside and something else will take
       its place."
     * "Anything is possible. You can be told that you have a 100-percent
       chance or a 50-percent chance or a 1-percent chance, but you have
       to believe, and you have to fight."
     * "A boo is a lot louder than a cheer, if you have 10 people cheering
       and one person booing all you hear is the booing."

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lance_Armstrong"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
