   #copyright

Landscape

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geology and geophysics

   Photograph of a landscape
   Enlarge
   Photograph of a landscape

   A landscape comprises the visible features of an area of land,
   including physical elements such as landforms, living elements of flora
   and fauna, abstract elements such as lighting and weather conditions,
   and human elements, for instance human activity or the built
   environment. Landscape can also mean the objects around you in a
   building. Example; "I went to the mall, because I heard that the
   landscape there is wonderful" or "I love the landscape of this house".

Etymology

   The word landscape is from the Dutch word landschap, from land (land,
   patch, area) and the suffix -schap, corresponding to the English suffix
   "-ship". Landscape, first recorded in 1598, was borrowed as a painters'
   term from Dutch during the 16th century, when Dutch artists were on the
   verge of becoming masters of the landscape genre. The Dutch word
   landschap had earlier meant simply “region, tract of land” but had
   acquired the artistic sense, which it brought over into English, of “a
   picture depicting scenery on land.” 34 years pass after the first
   recorded use of landscape in English before the word is used of a view
   or vista of natural scenery. This delay suggests that people were first
   introduced to landscapes in paintings and then saw landscapes in real
   life. A landscape is wide space in the world that show what is around
   in the world.

Uses

   Specific uses of landscape include:
   Mount Ecclesia landscape, with its 24 human-made structures, ornate
   rose gardens and luxuriant preserved vegetation — in the middle of one
   of the world's most expensive and intensive real estate development
   areas near downtown Oceanside in Southern California — is a paradigm of
   landscape equilibrium between the development of a built environment
   and the conservation of the natural environment, since the early 20th
   century and into the 21st century.
   Enlarge
   Mount Ecclesia landscape, with its 24 human-made structures, ornate
   rose gardens and luxuriant preserved vegetation — in the middle of one
   of the world's most expensive and intensive real estate development
   areas near downtown Oceanside in Southern California — is a paradigm of
   landscape equilibrium between the development of a built environment
   and the conservation of the natural environment, since the early 20th
   century and into the 21st century.
     * Landscape art is the depiction of scenery in landscape painting,
       landscape photography or other media.
     * Landscape architecture is the art of planning, designing, and
       managing public and private landscapes and gardens. Related terms
       include:
          + Landscape design is the design of open space urban or rural
            areas
          + Landscape engineering is the technical aspect of landscape
            architecture
          + Landscape planning is the planning of large scale and/or long
            term landscape development projects
          + Landscape management is the care of human-made or natural
            landscapes
          + Landscape gardening is the practice of designing large scale
            estate gardens, and is usually applied to the 18th and 19th
            centuries, and seen as a precursor to landscape architecture.
     * Landscape ecology is a subdiscipline of ecology that investigates
       the ecological causes and consequences of spatial pattern, process
       and change in landscapes.
     * In anthropological terms, landscape refers to the material
       manifestation of the relations between humans and their
       environments. It is a product of the dialectic of biophysical
       environments and culture.
     * Landscape orientation of a rectangular page, painting or other
       graphic means that the longer axis is horizontal. (So named because
       landscape paintings usually have this orientation.) When the long
       axis is vertical, it is called portrait orientation.
     * Landscape is a play by Harold Pinter
     * Landscape was a British jazz-funk-synthpop band, active in the
       1970s and 80s.
     * Anthropic landscape is a concept in string theory.
     * Cultural landscapes are "combined works of nature and of man." They
       are illustrative of the evolution of human society and settlement
       over time, under the influence of the physical constraints and/or
       opportunities presented by their natural environment and of
       successive social, economic and cultural forces, both external and
       internal .

   In some nordic countries a landskap, translated as landscape, is or was
   an administrative unit:
     * Landscapes of Norway
     * Landscapes of Sweden (provinces)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Landscape"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
