   #copyright

Laos

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Asian Countries;
Countries

   SOS Children works in Laos. For more information see SOS Children in
   Laos
   ສາທາລະນະລັດ ປະຊາທິປະໄຕ ປະຊາຊົນລາວ
   Laos People's Democratic Republic
   Flag of Laos Emblem of Laos
   Flag         Emblem
   Motto: Peace, Independence, Democracy, Unity and Prosperity
   Anthem: Pheng Xat Lao
   Location of Laos
   Capital
   (and largest city) Vientiane
   17°58′N 102°36′E
   Official languages Lao
   Government Socialist Republic
    - President Choummaly Sayasone
    - Prime Minister Bouasone Bouphavanh
   Independence From France
    - Date 19 July 1949
   Area
    - Total 236,800 km² ( 83rd)
   91,429 sq mi
    - Water (%) 2%
   Population
    - 2005 estimate 5,924,000 ( 103rd)
    - 1995 census 4,574,848
    - Density 25/km² ( 177th)
   65/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total $12.547 billion ( 129th)
    - Per capita $2,124 ( 138th)
   HDI  (2005) 0.545 (medium) ( 133th)
   Currency Kip ( LAK)
   Time zone ( UTC+7)
    - Summer ( DST) ( UTC+7)
   Internet TLD .la
   Calling code +856

   Laos, officially the Lao People's Democratic Republic, is a landlocked
   socialist republic communist state in southeast Asia, bordered by
   Myanmar (Burma) and the People's Republic of China to the northwest,
   Vietnam to the east, Cambodia to the south, and Thailand to the west.
   Laos traces its history to the Kingdom of Lan Xang or Land of a Million
   Elephants, which existed from the 14th to the 18th century. After a
   period as a French colony, it gained independence in 1949. A long civil
   war ended when the communist Pathet Lao came to power in 1975.

   Private enterprise has increased since the mid-1980s, but development
   has been hampered by poor communications in the heavily forested and
   mountainous landscape. 80% of those employed practice subsistence
   agriculture; this is coupled with widespread starvation due to the many
   failures of communism and the state's command economy. The country's
   ethnic make-up is extremely diverse, with only around 60% belonging to
   the largest ethnic group, the Lao.

Terminology

   The country's name in the Lao language is 'Muang Lao'. The French, who
   made the country part of French Indochina in 1893, spelled it with the
   s which is usually retained in the spelling and pronunciation of the
   English name (pronounced as one syllable). The usual adjectival form is
   "Lao" (as in 'the Lao economy'), not 'Laotian', although the latter is
   commonly used to describe the people of Laos (to avoid confusion with
   the Lao ethnic group).

History

   Laos traces its history to the kingdom of Lan Xang, founded in the 14th
   century, which lasted until the 18th century, when Siam invaded and
   assumed control of the separate principalities that remained. To avoid
   a costly war with the French, the Siamese king ceded lands now known as
   Laos to them, and these were incorporated into French Indochina in
   1893. The French saw Laos as a useful buffer state between the two
   expanding empires of France and Britain. Under the French, the capital
   (Vieng Chan) was changed to Vientiane. Following a brief Japanese
   occupation during World War II, the country declared its independence
   in 1945, but the French re-asserted their control and only in 1950 was
   Laos granted semi-autonomy as an "associated state" within the French
   Union. Moreover, the French remained in de facto control until 1954,
   when Laos gained full independence as a constitutional monarchy. Under
   a special exemption to the Geneva Convention, a French military
   training mission continued to support the Royal Laos Army. In 1955, the
   U.S. Department of Defense created a special Programs Evaluation Office
   to supplant French support of the Royal Laos Army against the communist
   Pathet Lao as part of the U.S. containment policy.

   Political unrest in neighbouring Vietnam dragged Laos into the Second
   Indochina War (see also Secret War and Vietnam War), a destabilising
   factor that contributed to civil war and several coups d'état. The
   North Vietnamese Army invaded and occupied portions of eastern Laos.
   The North Vietnamese army, with its heavy weapons including heavy
   artillery and tanks was the real power behind the Pathet Lao
   insurgency. Significant aerial bombardment by the United States
   occurred by that country's attempt to eliminate North Vietnamese bases
   in Laos and disrupt supply lines on the Trường Sơn Trail (known to
   Americans as the Hồ Chí Minh Trail).

   In 1968 the North Vietnamese Army launched a multi-division attack
   against the Royal Lao Army. The attack resulted in the army largely
   demobilizing and leaving the conflict to irregular forces raised by the
   United States and Thailand. In 1975 the communist Pathet Lao, backed by
   the Soviet Union and the North Vietnamese Army (justified by the
   Communist ideology of "proletarian internationalism"), overthrew the
   royalist government, forcing King Savang Vatthana to abdicate on
   December 2, 1975 (he later died in captivity). After taking control of
   the country, they renamed it the Lao People's Democratic Republic. The
   Pathet Lao government afterward signed agreements giving Vietnam the
   right to station military forces and to appoint advisors to assist in
   overseeing the country. Laos was ordered in the late 1970s by Vietnam
   to end relations with the People's Republic of China which cut the
   country off from trade with any country but Vietnam . Control by
   Vietnam and socialisation were slowly replaced by a relaxation of
   economic restrictions in the 1980s and admission into ASEAN in 1997.
   Vietnam still wields political and economic influence in Laos.
   Pha That Luang in Vientiane - The national symbol of Laos
   Enlarge
   Pha That Luang in Vientiane - The national symbol of Laos

   The 20-year embargo by the United States was lifted in 1995. The United
   States established Normal Trade Relations (previously known as Most
   Favored Nation status) with Laos in November 2004.

Politics

   The only legal political party is the Lao People's Revolutionary Party
   (LPRP). The head of state is the President, elected by parliament for a
   5 year term. The head of government is the prime minister, appointed by
   the president with parliamentary approval. Government policies are
   determined by the party through the all-powerful nine-member Politburo
   and the 49-member Central Committee. Important government decisions are
   vetted by the Council of Ministers.

   Laos adopted a new constitution in 1991. The following year, elections
   were held for a new 85-seat National Assembly with members elected by
   secret ballot to 5-year terms. This unicameral parliament, expanded in
   the 1997 elections to 99 members, approves all new laws, although the
   executive branch retains authority to issue binding decrees. The most
   recent elections took place on 30th April 2006 when 175 candidates in
   16 electoral areas competed for 115 seats.

   Remnants of a Hmong group allied with the United States during the
   Vietnam War have been in armed conflict with the communist regime since
   1975. With recent surrenders reported in the international media, this
   conflict appears to be on the wane. Most Hmong are integrated into or
   at least at peace with society, with some occupying high-ranking
   positions in the state system.

   Attacks continue to take place sporadically throughout the country, but
   are difficult to attribute to a specific political movement. All
   dissent in Laos is suppressed, so information is difficult to obtain.

Administrative Divisions

   Provinces of Laos

   Laos is divided into 16 provinces (Kang), 1 municipality* (Kumpang
   nakon), and 1 special zone** (ketpisade):
    1. Attapu
    2. Bokeo
    3. Bolikhamxai
    4. Champasak
    5. Houaphan
    6. Khammouan
    7. Loung Namtha
    8. Louangphabang
    9. Oudomxai
   10. Phongsali
   11. Salavan
   12. Savannakhet
   13. Vientiane, Municipality of *
   14. Vientiane
   15. Xaignabouli
   16. Xaisomboun, Special Zone of **
   17. Xekong
   18. Xiangkhoang

   Laos is further subdivided into districts (muang).

Geography

   Map of Laos
   Enlarge
   Map of Laos

   Laos is a landlocked country in Southeast Asia and the thickly forested
   landscape consists mostly of rugged mountains, the highest of which is
   Phou Bia at 9,242 feet (2,817 m), with some plains and plateaus. The
   Mekong River forms a large part of the western boundary with Thailand,
   whereas the mountains of the Annamite Chain form most of the eastern
   border with Vietnam.

   The climate is tropical and characterised by monsoons. There is a
   distinct rainy season from May to November, followed by a dry season
   from December to April. The capital and largest city of Laos is
   Vientiane, and other major cities include Luang Prabang, Savannakhet
   and Pakse.

   In 1993, the government set aside 21% of the nation's land area as
   National Biodiversity Conservation Areas (NBCA), which may be developed
   into a national park system. If completed, it is expected to be the
   most comprehensive and one of the finest national park systems in
   Southeast Asia.

   A number of animal species have been discovered or re-discovered in
   Laos in recent years. These include the striped or Annamite rabbit, the
   saola, and most recently the Laotian rock rat or kha-nyou.

Economy

   Buses connect the major cities.
   Enlarge
   Buses connect the major cities.
   Songthaews are pick-up trucks with benches. They are used for
   long-distance and local public transport.
   Enlarge
   Songthaews are pick-up trucks with benches. They are used for
   long-distance and local public transport.

   The government of Laos - one of the few remaining official socialist
   states - began decentralising control and encouraging private
   enterprise in 1986. The results, starting from an extremely low base,
   were striking - growth averaged 6% in 1988- 2004 except during the
   short-lived drop caused by the Asian financial crisis beginning in
   1997. As in many developing countries, the major urban centers have
   experienced the most growth. The economies of Vientiane, Luang Prabang
   and Savannakhet in particular have experienced significant booms in
   recent years. Laos' economy is heavily dependent on investment and
   trade with its larger and richer cousin, Thailand. Pakxe has also
   experienced growth.

   Much of the country, however, lacks adequate infrastructure. Laos has
   no railways, although a short link is planned to connect Vientiane with
   Thailand over the Thai-Lao Friendship Bridge. The major roads
   connecting the major urban centres, mainly forming Route 13, have been
   significantly upgraded in recent years, but villages that are far from
   major roads are accessible only through unpaved roads that may not be
   accessible year-round. There is limited external and internal
   telecommunication, particularly of the wire line sort, but mobile
   cellular phone usage has become widespread in urban centres. In many
   rural areas electricity is either not available or offered only during
   scheduled periods.
   The rivers are very important for transportation: A ferryboat on the
   Nam Ou river.
   Enlarge
   The rivers are very important for transportation: A ferryboat on the
   Nam Ou river.

   Subsistence agriculture still accounts for half of GDP and provides 80%
   of total employment. Laos has the lowest percentage of arable land and
   permanent crop land in the Greater Mekong Subregion . Only 4.01% of
   Laos is arable land, and only 0.34% of the country is planted with
   permanent crops . Rice dominates agriculture, with about 80% of the
   arable land area used for rice production . Approximately 77% of Lao
   farm households are self-sufficient in rice. Through the development,
   release and widespread adoption of improved rice varieties; and through
   economic reforms, Lao PDR achieved a net balance of rice imports and
   exports for the first time in 1999 . Between 1990 and 2005, rice
   production increased from 1.5 million tons to 2.5 million tons — an
   average annual growth rate of more than 5% . This increase in
   production has been valued at $8 million to $19 million per year. Lao
   PDR has the greatest number of rice varieties in the Greater Mekong
   Subregion. Since 1995 the Lao government has been working with the
   International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) to collect seed samples of
   each of the thousands of rice varieties found in Laos .

   The economy receives aid from the IMF and other international sources
   and from new foreign investment in food-processing and mining, most
   notably of copper and gold. Tourism is the fastest growing industry in
   the country. However, economic development in general is hampered by a
   serious case of brain drain. A 2005 World Bank study reported that 37%
   of educated Laotians lived abroad, putting the country in 5th place for
   worst brain drain.

   In late 2004, Laos gained Normal Trade Relations status with the US,
   allowing Laos-based producers to face lower tariffs on their exports;
   this may help spur growth.

Demographics

   A street market in Luang Prabang
   Enlarge
   A street market in Luang Prabang

   60% of the country's people are ethnic Lao, the principal lowland
   inhabitants and the politically and culturally dominant group. The Lao
   belong to the Tai linguistic group who began migrating southward from
   China in the first millennium AD. A further 8% belong to other
   "lowland" groups, which together with the Lao people make up the Lao
   Loum. Hill people and minority cultures of Laos such as the Lua (Lua),
   Hmong (Miao), Yao (Mien), Black Thai, Dao, Shan, and several
   Tibeto-Burman speaking peoples have lived in isolated regions of Laos
   for many years. Mountain tribes of mixed ethno/cultural-linguistic
   heritage are found in northern Laos. Collectively, they are known as
   Lao Soung or highland Laotians. In the central and southern mountains,
   Mon- Khmer tribes, known as Lao Theung or mid-slope Laotians,
   predominate. Some Vietnamese and Chinese minorities remain,
   particularly in the towns, but many left in two waves; after
   independence in the late 1940s and again after 1975.

   The term Laotian does not necessarily refer to the ethnic Lao language,
   ethnic Lao people, language or customs, but is a political term that
   also includes the non-ethnic Lao groups within Laos and identifies them
   as "Laotian" because of their political citizenship. In a similar vein
   the word "Lao" can also describe the people, cuisine, language and
   culture of the people of Northeast Thailand (Isan), Northern Thailand (
   Chiangmai) and ( Chiangrai) who are ethnic Lao.

   The predominant religion is Theravada Buddhism which, along with the
   common Animism practiced among the mountain tribes, coexists peacefully
   with spirit worship. There also are a small number of Christians,
   mostly restricted to the Vientiane area, and Muslims, mostly restricted
   to the Myanmar border region. Christian missionary work is regulated by
   the government.

   The official and dominant language is Lao, a tonal language of the Tai
   linguistic group. Midslope and highland Lao speak an assortment of
   tribal languages. French, once common in government and commerce, has
   declined in usage, while knowledge of English, the language of the
   Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), has increased in recent
   years.

Culture

   Theravada Buddhism is a dominant influence in Lao culture. It is
   reflected throughout the country from language to the temple and in
   art, literature, performing arts, etc. Many elements of Lao culture
   predate Buddhism, however. For example, Laotian music is dominated by
   its national instrument, the khaen, a type of bamboo pipe that has
   prehistoric origins. The khaen traditionally accompanied the singer in
   lam, the dominant style of folk music; there are several different
   styles of lam, some, such as lam saravane, being more popular than
   others.
   Wat Ho Pra Keo, Vientiane
   Enlarge
   Wat Ho Pra Keo, Vientiane

   The country has two World Heritage sites — Luang Prabang and Wat Phou —
   while the government is seeking the same status for the Plain of Jars.

   The People's Republic of China has recently allowed its citizens to
   travel more freely to Laos. As such, Chinese tourists are expected to
   account for 25% of the total number of visitors to Laos (up from only a
   few percent) in 2006. Pressures to modernize tourist infrastructure,
   particularly to cater to package tourism, are expected to significantly
   impact Luang Prabang and other culturally important Laotian cities.

   Rice is the staple food and has cultural and religious significance.
   There are many traditions and rituals associated with rice production
   in different environments, and among many ethnic groups. For example,
   Khamu farmers in Luang Prabang plant the rice variety Khao Kam in small
   quantities near the hut in memory of dead parents, or at the edge of
   the rice field to indicate that parents are still alive.

Ethnic Minority Nationalist Leaders

     * Pa Chay Vue
     * Ong Keo
     * Ong Kommandam

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laos"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
