   #copyright

Lavender

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Plants

                 iLavender
   Lavender flowers
   Lavender flowers
         Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Plantae
   Division: Magnoliophyta
   Class:    Magnoliopsida
   Order:    Lamiales
   Family:   Lamiaceae
   Genus:    Lavandula
             L.

                                   Species

   About 25-30, including:
   Lavandula angustifolia
   Lavandula canariensis
   Lavandula dentata
   Lavandula lanata
   Lavandula latifolia
   Lavandula multifida
   Lavandula pinnata
   Lavandula stoechas
   Lavandula viridis
   Lavandula x intermedia

   The lavenders Lavandula are a genus of about 25-30 species of flowering
   plants in the mint family, Lamiaceae, native from the Mediterranean
   region south to tropical Africa and east to India. The genus includes
   annuals, herbaceous plants, subshrubs, and small shrubs. The native
   range extends across the Canary Islands, North and East Africa, south
   Europe and the Mediterranean, Arabia, and India. Because the cultivated
   forms are planted in gardens world-wide, they are occasionally found
   growing wild, as garden escapees, well beyond their natural range.
   Lavender flower
   Enlarge
   Lavender flower
   Lavender flowers
   Enlarge
   Lavender flowers
   Lavandula stoechas
   Enlarge
   Lavandula stoechas
   A lavender farm in Hokkaido
   Enlarge
   A lavender farm in Hokkaido

Cultivation and uses

   The most common species in cultivation is the Common Lavender Lavandula
   angustifolia (formerly L. officinalis). A wide range of cultivars can
   be found. Other commonly grown ornamental species are L. stoechas, L.
   dentata, and L. multifida.

   Lavenders are widely grown in gardens. Flower spikes are used for dried
   flower arrangements. The fragrant, pale purple flowers and flower buds
   are used in potpourris. Dried and sealed in pouches, they are placed
   among stored items of clothing to give a fresh fragrance and as a
   deterrent to moths. The plant is also grown commercially for extraction
   of lavender oil from the flowers. This oil is used as an antiseptic and
   for aromatherapy.

   Lavender flowers yield abundant nectar which yields a high quality
   honey for beekeepers. Lavender monofloral honey is produced primarily
   in the nations around the Mediterranean, and marketed worldwide as a
   premium product. Lavender flowers can be candied and are used as cake
   decoration. Lavender is also used as a herb, either alone or as an
   ingredient of herbes de Provence. Lavender is also used to flavour
   sugar, the product being called "lavender sugar".

Medicinal use

   Flower of cultivated lavender; Lavandula stoechas or Spanish lavender
   Enlarge
   Flower of cultivated lavender; Lavandula stoechas or Spanish lavender

   Lavender has been extensively used in herbalism. An infusion of
   lavender is claimed to soothe and heal insect bites. Bunches of
   lavender are also said to ward off insects. If applied to the temples,
   lavender oil is said to soothe headaches. Lavender is frequently used
   as an aid to sleep: Seeds and flowers of the plant are added to
   pillows, and an infusion of three flowerheads added to a cup of boiling
   water are recommended as a soothing and relaxing bedtime drink.
   Lavender oil (or extract of Lavender) is claimed to heal acne when used
   diluted 1:10 with water, rosewater, or witch hazel; it is also used in
   the treatment of skin burns and inflammatory conditions (it is a
   traditional treatment for these in Iran). There is scientific evidence
   to support the effectiveness of some of these remedies, especially the
   anti-inflammatory effects, but they should be used with caution since
   lavender oil can also be a powerful allergen.

   According to a 4 July 2006 article in the Washington Post , "A
   preliminary finding presented at the Endocrine Society's conference
   last month ... suggests that shampoos, soaps and body lotions
   containing ... lavender may cause hormonal imbalances and breast growth
   in young boys".

History

   The ancient Greeks called the lavender herb nardus, after the Syrian
   city of Naarda. It was also commonly called nard.

   During Roman times, flowers were sold for 100 denarii per pound, which
   was about the same as a month's wages for a farm labourer, or fifty
   haircuts from the local barber. Lavender was commonly used in Roman
   baths to scent the water, and it was thought to restore the skin. When
   the Roman Empire conquered southern Britain, the Romans introduced
   lavender.

   During the height of the Plague, glove makers at Grasse would scent
   their leathers with lavender oil, and this was claimed to ward off the
   Plague. This story could have some validity as the Plague was
   transmitted by fleas, which lavender is known to repel.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lavender"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
