   #copyright

Lebanon

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; Middle Eastern
Countries

   SOS Children works in Lebanon. For more information see SOS Children in
   Lebanon
   الجمهورية اللبنانية
   Al-Jumhūriyyah al-Lubnāniyyah
   Lebanese Republic

   Flag of Lebanon Coat of arms of Lebanon
   Flag            Coat of arms
   Motto: Kūllūnā li-l-waṭan, li-l-'ula wa-l-'allam  ( Arabic)
   "We are all for our Nation, for our Emblem and Glory!"
   Anthem: Kulluna lil-watan lil 'ula lil-'alam
   Location of Lebanon
   Capital
   (and largest city) Beirut
   33°54′N 35°32′E
   Official languages Arabic (formerly French)
   Government Republic
    - President Émile Lahoud
    - Prime Minister Fouad Siniora
   Independence
    - Declared November 26, 1941
    - Recognised November 22, 1943
   Area
    - Total 10,452 km² ( 166th)
   4,035 sq mi
    - Water (%) 1.6
   Population
    - 2006 estimate 3,874,050 ( 113th)
    - 2006 census 3,874,050
    - Density 358/km² ( 26th)
   948/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total $24.42 billion ( 103rd)
    - Per capita 6,681 ( 90th)
   HDI  (2006) 0.774 (medium) ( 78th)
   Currency lira ( LL) ( LBP)
   Time zone EET ( UTC+2)
    - Summer ( DST) EEST ( UTC+3)
   Internet TLD .lb
   Calling code +961

   Lebanon ( Arabic: لبنان ), officially the Lebanese Republic ( Arabic:
   الجمهورية اللبنانية ), is a small, largely mountainous country in the
   Middle East, located at the eastern edge of the Mediterranean Sea.
   Lebanon is bordered by Syria to the north and east, and Israel to the
   south. The flag of Lebanon features the Lebanon Cedar in green against
   a white backdrop, with two horizontal red stripes on the top and
   bottom.

   Until the Lebanese Civil War ( 1975- 1990), the country enjoyed
   remarkable prosperity. It was considered the banking capital of the
   Arab world and was widely known as the "Switzerland of the Middle East"
   due to its financial power. Lebanon also attracted large numbers of
   tourists, to the point that the capital Beirut became widely referred
   to as the "Paris of the Middle East."

   Immediately following the end of the war, there were widespread efforts
   to revive the economy and rebuild national infrastructure, with the
   first positive results becoming evident in recent years. By early 2006,
   a considerable degree of stability had been achieved throughout much of
   the country, Beirut's reconstruction was almost complete, and an
   increasing number of foreign tourists were pouring into Lebanon's
   resorts. However, the commencement of the 2006 Israel-Lebanon conflict
   on July 12, 2006 brought mounting civilian and military casualties,
   great damage to civilian infrastructure, and massive population
   displacement. As of September 2006, the Lebanese government has been
   acting out an early recovery plan aimed at reconstructing property
   destroyed by Israeli attacks in Beirut, Tyre, and other villages in
   southern Lebanon.

Etymology

   The name Lebanon ("Lubnan" in standard Arabic; "Lebnan" or "Lebnèn" in
   local dialect) is derived from the Semitic root "LBN", which is linked
   to several closely-related meanings in various languages, such as white
   and milk. This is regarded as reference to the snow-capped Mount
   Lebanon. Occurrences of the name have been found in three of the twelve
   tablets of the Epic of Gilgamesh (2900 BC), the texts of the library of
   Elba (2400 BC), and the Bible.

   In British English, the country is sometimes referred to with the
   definite article as "the Lebanon", like the Sudan, the Ukraine, or The
   Gambia. Prepending a "the" to the name possibly results from the fact
   that when these names came into usage, they were merely geographical
   regions, rather than independent states.

Geography and climate

   A Middle Eastern country, Lebanon is bordered by the Mediterranean to
   the west with a 225  km coastline, by Syria to the east and north, and
   by Israel to the south. The Lebanon-Syria border stretches for 375 km,
   while the Lebanon-Israel border is 79 km in length. The border with the
   Israel-occupied Golan Heights in Syria is disputed by Lebanon in a
   small area called Shebaa Farms, but the border has been demarcated by
   the United Nations (see Blue Line).

   Lebanon has a total area of 10,452  km² (4,035  mi²), making it the
   178^th largest country in the world. Most of that area is mountainous
   terrain, except for the narrow coastline and the Beqaa Valley (an
   integral part of Lebanon's agriculture).

   Lebanon has a moderate Mediterranean climate. In coastal areas, winters
   are generally cool and rainy whilst summers are hot and humid. In more
   elevated areas, temperatures usually drop below 0°C during the winter
   with frequent (sometimes heavy) snow; summers, on the other hand, are
   warm and dry. Although most of Lebanon receives a relatively large
   amount of rainfall annually (compared to its arid surroundings),
   certain areas in north-eastern Lebanon receive little rainfall. This is
   due to the region's proximity to dry areas in Syria and to the fact
   that the high peaks of the western mountain front block much of the
   rain clouds that originate over the Mediterranean Sea.

Administrative divisions

   Enlarge

   Lebanon is divided into six governorates (mohafazat, singular
   mohafazah), which are further subdivided into twenty-five districts
   (aqdya, singular: qadaa). The districts themselves are also divided
   into several municipalities, each enclosing a group of cities or
   villages. The governorates and their respective districts are listed
   below:
   Beirut Governorate

   The Beirut Governorate is not divided into districts and is limited to
   the city of Beirut.
   Nabatiyeh Governorate (Jabal Amel) - 4 districts
     * Nabatyeh
     * Hasbyya
     * Marjeyoun
     * Bint Jbeil

   Beqaa Governorate - 5 districts
     * Hermel
     * Baalbek
     * Zahle
     * Western Beqaa (al-Beqaa al-Gharbi)
     * Rashaya

   North Governorate (al-Shamal) - 7 districts
     * Akkar
     * Tripoli
     * Zgharta
     * Bsharri
     * Batroun
     * Koura
     * Miniyeh-Danniyeh

   Mount Lebanon Governorate (Jabal Lubnan) - 6 districts
     * Jbeil
     * Keserwan
     * Matn
     * Baabda
     * Aley
     * Chouf

   South Governorate (al-Janoub) - 3 districts
     * Sidon
     * Tyre (Sur)
     * Jezzine

Demographics

   The population of Lebanon is composed of three predominant ethnic
   groups and religions: Muslims ( Shi'ites, Sunnis, and Alawites), Druze,
   and Christians (mostly Maronites, Greek Orthodox, Armenian Apostolic,
   Melkite Greek Catholics).

   No official census has been taken since 1932, reflecting the political
   sensitivity in Lebanon over confessional (religious) balance. It is
   estimated that about 40% are Christians, 35% are Shia Muslims, 20% are
   Sunni Muslims and 5% are Druze . A minority of Jews live in central
   Beirut, Byblos, and Bhamdoun. Also, a small community (less than 1%) of
   Kurds (also known as Mhallamis or Mardins) live in Lebanon.

   The number of those inhabiting Lebanon proper was estimated at
   3,874,050 in July 2006. There are approximately 16 million people of
   Lebanese descent, spread all over the world, Brazil being the country
   with the biggest Lebanese community abroad. Argentina, Australia,
   Canada, Colombia, France, Great Britain, Mexico, Venezuela and the US
   also have large Lebanese communities.

   394,532 Palestinian refugees have registered in Lebanon with the United
   Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) since 1948. Estimates of those
   remaining range between 180,000 and 250,000. The Palestinians have
   indeed become a vital part of the Lebanese society, with many of them
   reaching high posts, despite the notorious governmental bans on them.
   It is not only impossible for them to own property, but until 2005
   there were an estimated 46 jobs that they were not allowed to practice
   in Lebanon. In recent years the idea of granting Palestinians Lebanese
   citizenship has been discussed; however this notion has been rejected
   by most of the Lebanese and Palestinian communities.

   The urban population, concentrated mainly in Beirut and Mount Lebanon,
   is noted for its commercial enterprise. A century and a half of
   migration and return have produced Lebanese commercial networks around
   the globe from North and South America to Europe, the Persian Gulf, and
   Africa. Lebanon has a high proportion of skilled labour comparable to
   most European nations and the highest among Arab countries.

   One notable aspect of Lebanon's social system and laws is that when a
   child is born to one Lebanese parent, that Lebanese child receives
   Lebanese citizenship only if the father is Lebanese. Citizenship rights
   are denied to a child born to a Lebanese mother . Such gender
   discrimination in a country where mothers are predominantly the main
   care providers for children has disenfranchised children of Lebanese
   descent for many generations.

Economy

Sectors of the economy

Agriculture

   Although ideally suited for agricultural activities (in terms of water
   availability and soil fertility), Lebanon does not have a large
   agricultural sector. Attracting a mere 12% of the total workforce,
   agriculture is the least popular economic sector in Lebanon. It
   contributes approximately 11.7% of the country's GDP, also placing it
   in the lowest rank compared to other economic sectors.

Industry

   Lebanon's lack of industry raw material and complete dependency on Arab
   countries for oil has made it difficult for the Lebanese to engage in
   significant industrial activity. As such, industry in Lebanon is mostly
   limited to small businesses concerned with reassembling and packaging
   imported parts. In 2004, industry ranked second in workforce, with 26%
   of the Lebanese working population, and also second in GDP
   contribution, with 21% of Lebanon's GDP.

Services and commerce

   A combination of beautiful climate and many historic landmarks and
   World Heritage Sites has continually attracted large numbers of
   tourists to Lebanon annually, in spite of its political instability. In
   addition, Lebanon's strict financial secrecy and capitalist
   economy—unique in its area—have given it significant economic status
   among Arab countries. The thriving tourism and banking activities have
   naturally made the services sector the most important pillar of the
   Lebanese economy. The majority of the Lebanese workforce (nearly 65%)
   have preferred employment in the services sector, as a result of the
   abundant job opportunities and large paychecks. The GDP contribution,
   accordingly, is very large and amounts to roughly 67.3% of the annual
   Lebanese GDP.

   The economy's dependence on services has always been an issue of great
   criticism and concern, since this renders the country subject to the
   instability of this sector and the vagaries of international trade.

Historical development

   The 1975-1990 civil war seriously damaged Lebanon's economic
   infrastructure, cut national output by half, and all but ended
   Lebanon's position as a Middle Eastern entrepôt and banking hub. The
   subsequent period of relative peace enabled the central government to
   restore control in Beirut, begin collecting taxes, and regain access to
   key port and government facilities. Economic recovery has been helped
   by a financially sound banking system and resilient small- and
   medium-scale manufacturers, with family remittances, banking services,
   manufactured and farm exports, and international aid as the main
   sources of foreign exchange.

   Until the 2006 Israel-Lebanon conflict, Lebanon's economy witnessed
   excellent growth, with bank assets reaching over 75 billion dollars.
   Even though Lebanon was down 10% in the tourism sector in 2005, more
   than 1.2 million tourists visited Lebanon that year. Market
   capitalization was also at an all time high, amounting to over $7
   billion at the end of January 2006.

   The war severely damaged Lebanon's fragile economy, especially the
   tourism sector. According to a preliminary report published by the
   Lebanese Ministry of Finance on August 30, 2006, a major economic
   decline was expected as a result of the fighting.

   Beirut International airport re-opened in September 2006 and the
   efforts to revive the Lebanese economy have since been proceeding at a
   slow pace. Major contributors to the reconstruction of Lebanon include
   Saudi Arabia (with 1.5 billion US dollars pledged), the European Union
   (with about $1 billion) and a few other Gulf countries with
   contributions of up to $800 million.

Education

History of education in Lebanon

   The first two ministries to be established for education in Lebanon
   were the Ministry of Education and Higher Education, and the Ministry
   of Vocational and Technical Training, to enrich the Lebanese
   educational system. In 1946, after independence ( 22 November 1943) the
   Lebanese government replaced the old curriculum program, coming from
   the French mandate, by new ones and the Arabic language was imposed
   upon all schools as a primary language, mandatory in the different
   phases of education. The government also left students the freedom to
   choose a second or third language (French, English, etc).

   In 1968 and 1971, the curriculum was changed again. Each step of the
   educational phases was specified with a defined goal and the contents
   of the public examinations were also particularized. Before the war, in
   1975, Lebanon held one of the highest literacy rates in the Arab world.
   Over 80% of the Lebanese people could read and write. But ever since
   then, Lebanon has been in a state of chaos that has consumed its
   people, due to the civil war and foreign intervention that took place.
   When the war was declared ‘over’, the Lebanese took a start on
   rebuilding their cultural society in the educational domain and
   encouraging education through free and facilitated methods. Lebanon now
   sports a literacy rate of 88.3%, still among the highest in the Arab
   World.

Schools in Lebanon

   Lebanese schools are divided into three categories: private, public,
   and mid-private. Public schools are under government authority
   (Ministry of Education) and free, supported by tax money. The Ministry
   of Education provides all the public schools with the books needed for
   each educational level, for negligible prices and often for free.
   Mid-private schools, mainly parochial schools, such as the Ecoles des
   Saint Coeurs, are those that operate as private schools yet charge fees
   close to those of public schools. The rest of the tuition fee is
   subsidized by the government.

   All Lebanese schools are required by the government to follow a
   prescribed curriculum designed by the Ministry of Education. Private
   schools may also add more courses to their curriculum with approval
   from the Ministry of Education. Computer lessons, for example, are now
   very common in many schools although they are not a part of the
   traditional mandatory curriculum. For the schools without computer
   facilities, any student interested may take up computer courses at
   private institutions or centers available in almost all the Lebanese
   districts.

   Public schools altogether amount to a total of 192 high schools and
   1,125 elementary schools. Of the high schools, 16 are strictly for
   boys, 12 are girl schools, and 164 are mixed. In the elementary school,
   a total of 238,556 students are enrolled and taught by 24,463 teachers.
   In all the schools, pupils receive their instructions from the teachers
   of each subject taught and not one classroom teacher. The number of
   students per classroom ranges between 15 in selective private schools
   and 40 in some public schools due to the lack of teachers and
   facilities.

Curriculum in Lebanese schools

   The main subjects taught are Mathematics, Sciences, History, Civics,
   Geography, Arabic, and French/English/both. Other rotating teachers
   within the school teach Physical education, Art, and library use (not
   available in all). The subjects gradually increase in difficulty and in
   number. Students in Grade 11, for example, usually study eighteen
   different subjects. The government introduces a mild form of
   selectivity into the curriculum by giving 11^th graders choice between
   two "concentrations": Sciences or Humanities, and 12^th graders choice
   between four concentrations: Life Sciences (SV), General Sciences (SG),
   Sociology and Economics (SE), and Humanities and Literature (LH). The
   choices in concentration do not include major changes in the number of
   subjects taken (if at all). However, subjects that fall out of the
   concentration are given less weight in grading and are less rigorous,
   while subjects that fall within the concentration are more challenging
   and contribute significantly to the final grade.

   Students go through three academic phases:
     * Elementary: six years.
     * Intermediate: three years; students earn Intermediate Certification
       (Lebanese Brevet) at completion.
     * Secondary: three years, students who pass official exams earn a
       Baccalaureate Certificate (Baccalauréat Libanais) in one of the
       four concentrations they took in 12^th grade.

   These three phases are provided free to all students and are, by law,
   compulsory. Nevertheless, the compulsory part is currently not fully
   enforced. There are plans to change this in the near future.

Universities and colleges

   Following high school, Lebanese students may choose to study at a
   university, a college, an institute, or a "high technical school". The
   number of years to complete each program varies.

   Lebanon has twenty-one universities, several of which are
   internationally recognized. The American University of Beirut (AUB) was
   the first English university to open in Lebanon, while the first French
   university to open was the Université Saint-Joseph (USJ). The
   twenty-one universities, both public and private, largely operate in
   Arabic, French, or English as these are the most widely used languages
   in Lebanon. There are four French institutions, seven English, and one
   Armenian.

   At the English universities, students who have graduated from an
   American-style high school program enter at the freshman level to earn
   their baccalaureate equivalence from the Lebanese Ministry of Higher
   Education. This qualifies them to continue studying at the higher
   levels. Such students are required to have already taken the SAT I and
   the SAT II upon applying to college, in lieu of the official exams. On
   the other hand, students who have graduated from a school that follows
   the Lebanese educational system are directly admitted to the sophomore
   year. These students are still required to take the SAT I, but not the
   SAT II.

Culture

   Lebanon has been a major crossroads of civilizations for millennia, so
   it is not surprising that this small country possesses an
   extraordinarily rich and vibrant culture. Lebanon's wide array of
   ethnic and religious groups contributes to the country's rich cuisine,
   musical and literary traditions, and festivals. Beirut in particular
   has a very vibrant arts scene, with numerous performances, exhibits,
   fashion shows, and concerts held throughout the year in its galleries,
   museums, theatres, and public spaces. Lebanese society is modern,
   educated, and perhaps comparable to European societies of the
   Mediterranean. Most Lebanese are bilingual, speaking Arabic and French,
   this is why Lebanon is a member state of the Organisation
   Internationale de la Francophonie; however, English has become popular,
   especially among university students. The country is not only where
   Christianity intermingles with Islam, but Lebanon is also an Arab
   gateway to Europe and a European bridge to the Arab world.

   Lebanon also hosts several prestigious universities, including the
   Lebanese University, the American University of Beirut, the Université
   Saint-Joseph, the American University College of Science and Technology
   and the Lebanese American University.

   Several international festivals are held in Lebanon, featuring
   world-renowned artists and drawing crowds from Lebanon and abroad.
   Among the most famous are the summer festivals at Baalbek, Beiteddine,
   and Byblos.

People

   Lebanese people in Lebanon and all over the world have made substantial
   contributions to Lebanon and Humanity. A List of Lebanese people will
   sum up the contributions of the Lebanese and persons of Lebanese
   descent worldwide.

Politics

   Lebanon is a republic in which the three highest offices are reserved
   for members of specific religious groups:
     * the President must be a Maronite Christian
     * the Speaker of the Parliament must be a Shi'a Muslim
     * the Prime Minister must be a Sunni Muslim.

   This arrangement is part of the " National Pact" ( Arabic: الميثاق
   الوطني , al Mithaq al Watani), an unwritten agreement which was
   established in 1943 during meetings between Lebanon's first president
   (a Maronite) and its first prime minister (a Sunni), although it was
   not formalized in the Lebanese Constitution until 1990, following the
   Taif Agreement. The pact included a promise by the Christians not to
   seek French protection and to accept Lebanon's "Arab face", and a
   Muslim promise to recognize independence and legitimacy of the Lebanese
   state in its 1920 boundaries and to renounce aspirations for union with
   Syria. This pact was thought at the time to be an interim compromise,
   necessary until Lebanon formed its own sense of a national identity.
   The pact might have been a temporary solution as Muslims still
   continued to feel a strong sense of need to unite with their Arab
   counterparts. The Christians, on the other hand, rejected this and, in
   an attempt to gain support, they later suggested federalism, and formed
   an alliance with Israel. Lebanon's continued existence and the fallout
   from subsequent civil wars continue to dominate politics in Lebanon.

   The pact also stipulated that seats in the Parliament would be
   allocated by religion and region, in a ratio of six Christians to five
   Muslims, a ratio based on the 1932 census, which was taken at a time
   when Christians still had a slight majority. The Taif Agreement
   adjusted the ratio to grant equal representation to followers of the
   two religions. Today, Muslims are a majority, especially when taking
   the Palestinian presence to be a factor, but most sides in Lebanon are
   still satisfied with the equality.

   The Constitution grants the people the right to change their
   government. However, from the mid-1970s until the parliamentary
   elections in 1992, civil war precluded the exercise of political
   rights. According to the constitution, direct elections must be held
   for the parliament every four years. The last parliament election came
   after the assassination of PM Rafiq Hariri, and saw a stern shift in
   Lebanese powers as Syrian opposers won the majority of the seats.

   The parliament composition is based more on ethnic and religious
   identities as opposed to ideological features. The Taif Accord ending
   the civil war modified the distribution of parliament seats.

   CAPTION: Parliament of Lebanon Seat Allocation

      Confession     Before Taif After Taif
   Maronite          30          34
   Greek Orthodox    11          14
   Greek Catholic    6           8
   Armenian Orthodox 4           5
   Armenian Catholic 1           1
   Protestant        1           1
   Other Christians  1           1
   Total Christians      54          64
   Sunni             20          27
   Shi'a             19          27
   Druze             6           8
   Alawite           0           2
     Total Muslims       45          64
         Total           99         128

   The Parliament elects the President of the republic to a six-year term.
   Consecutive terms for the president are forbidden. This constitutional
   rule has been bypassed by ad-hoc amendment twice in recent history,
   however, at the urging of the Syrian government. Elias Hrawi's term,
   which was due to end in 1995, was extended for three years. This
   procedure was repeated in 2004 to allow Emile Lahoud to remain in
   office until 2007. Pro-democracy campaigners denounced the moves.

   The last presidential election was in 1998. The President appoints the
   Prime Minister on the nomination of the Parliament. Lebanon has
   numerous political parties, but their role is less important than in
   most parliamentary systems. Most represent, in practice if not in
   theory, sectarian interests; many are little more than ad-hoc lists of
   candidates endorsed by a well-known national or local figure. Electoral
   tickets are often formed on a constituency-by-constituency basis by
   negotiation among local leaders of clans, religious groups, and
   political parties; these loose coalitions generally exist only for the
   election and rarely form cohesive blocs in the Parliament subsequently.
   Currently, Lebanon's Parliament is split into roughly three alliances:
   the generally anti-Syrian March 14 Alliance, the pro-Syrian alliance
   consisting primarily of Hezbollah and Amal and the bloc of Maronite
   former General Michel Aoun, recently allied with Hezbollah.

   Lebanon's judicial system is based on the Napoleonic Code. Juries are
   not used in trials. The Lebanese court system consists of three levels:
   courts of first instance, courts of appeal, and the court of cassation.
   There also is a system of religious courts having jurisdiction over
   personal status matters within their own communities, with rules on
   matters such as marriage, divorce, and inheritance. Lebanese law does
   not provide for Civil marriage (although it recognizes such marriages
   contracted abroad); efforts by former President Elias Hrawi to legalize
   civil marriage in the late 1990s floundered on objections mostly from
   Muslim clerics. Additionally, Lebanon has a system of military courts
   that also has jurisdiction over civilians for crimes of espionage,
   treason, and other crimes that are considered to be security-related.
   These military courts have been criticized by human rights
   organizations such as Amnesty International for "seriously fall[ing]
   short of international standards for fair trial" and having "very wide
   jurisdiction over civilians".

History

   Inscription in Greek on one of the tombs found in the Roman-Byzantine
   necropolis in Tyre.
   Inscription in Greek on one of the tombs found in the Roman-Byzantine
   necropolis in Tyre.

Ancient history

   Lebanon was the homeland of the Phoenicians, a seafaring people that
   spread across the Mediterranean before the rise of Alexander the Great.
   Carthage, which threatened Rome, was a Phoenician colony. Alexander
   burned Tyre, the leading Phoenician city, ending the Phoenician
   independence. The country became part of numerous succeeding empires,
   among them Persian, Roman, Byzantine, Arab, Crusader, and Ottoman.

French mandate and independence

   Lebanon was part of the Ottoman Empire for over 400 years, but
   following World War I, the area became a part of the French Mandate of
   Syria. On September 1, 1920, France formed the State of Greater Lebanon
   as one of several ethnic enclaves within Syria. Lebanon was a largely
   Christian (mainly Maronite) enclave but also included areas containing
   many Muslims and Druzes. On September 1, 1926, France formed the
   Lebanese Republic. The Republic was afterward a separate entity from
   Syria but still administered under the French Mandate for Syria.

   Lebanon and Syria both gained independence in 1943, while France was
   occupied by Germany. General Henri Dentz, the Vichy High Commissioner
   for Syria and Lebanon, played a major role in the independence of both
   nations. The Vichy authorities in 1941 allowed Germany to move aircraft
   and supplies through Syria to Iraq where they were used against British
   forces. The United Kingdom, fearing that Nazi Germany would gain full
   control of Lebanon and Syria by pressure on the weak Vichy government,
   sent its army into Syria and Lebanon.
   The flag of Greater Lebanon (1920-1943).
   Enlarge
   The flag of Greater Lebanon (1920-1943).

   After the fighting ended in Lebanon, General Charles de Gaulle visited
   the area. Under various political pressures from both inside and
   outside Lebanon, de Gaulle decided to recognize the independence of
   Lebanon. On November 26, 1941, General Georges Catroux announced that
   Lebanon would become independent under the authority of the Free French
   government. Elections were held in 1943 and on November 8, 1943 the new
   Lebanese government unilaterally abolished the mandate. The French
   reacted by throwing the new government into prison. In the face of
   international pressure, the French released the government officials on
   November 22, 1943 and accepted the independence of Lebanon.

   The allies kept the region under control until the end of World War II.
   The last French troops withdrew in 1946. Lebanon's unwritten National
   Pact of 1943 required that its president be Christian and its prime
   minister be Muslim.

1948 Arab-Israeli war

   Lebanon's history since independence has been marked by alternating
   periods of political stability and turmoil (including a civil conflict
   in 1958) interspersed with prosperity built on Beirut's position as a
   regional centre for finance and trade.

   Five years after gaining independence, Lebanon entered into the 1948
   Arab-Israeli War. It took over logistical support of the Arab
   Liberation Army after it found itself cut off from its bases in Syria
   while attempting an attack on the newly-proclaimed Jewish State. After
   the defeat of the Arab Liberation Army in the Battle of Sasa, Lebanon
   accepted an armistice with Israel on March 23, 1949. Approximately
   100,000 Palestinian refugees were living in Lebanon in 1949 as a direct
   result of the creation of Israel and the subsequent war. The
   Lebanese-Israeli border remained closed, but quiet, until after the Six
   Day War in 1967.

Civil war and beyond

   Building damaged during the 1975-1990 civil war.
   Building damaged during the 1975-1990 civil war.

   In 1975, civil war broke out in Lebanon. The Lebanese Civil War lasted
   fifteen years, devastating the country's economy, and resulting in the
   massive loss of human life and property. It is estimated that over
   100,000 people were killed and another 100,000 maimed. The war ended in
   1990 with the signing of the Taif Agreement and Lebanon left in ruins.

   During the civil war, Lebanon was twice invaded and occupied by the
   Israel Defense Forces (IDF) in 1978 and 1982. Israel remained in
   control of Southern Lebanon until 2000, when there was a general
   decision, led by Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak, to withdraw due to
   continuous guerrilla attacks executed by Hezbollah militants and a
   belief that Hezbollah activity would diminish and dissolve without the
   Israeli presence. The UN determined that the withdrawal of Israeli
   troops beyond the blue line was in accordance with UN Security Council
   Resolution 425, but Lebanon claimed that Israel still occupied a
   disputed region called the " Shebaa Farms". Hezbollah declared that it
   would not stop its operations against Israel until this area and what
   they described as "all of occupied Palestine" were liberated.

   After the end of the civil war, Lebanon saw a period of relative calm
   until the 2006 Israel-Lebanon conflict.

Recent events

Cedar Revolution

   The international media coined the term "Cedar Revolution", but the
   Lebanese media also uses the term " Intifada (uprising) of
   Independence."

Assassinations

   Rafik Hariri (1944-2005)
   Enlarge
   Rafik Hariri (1944-2005)

   The event that triggered this outcry took place on February 14, 2005,
   when Lebanon was shaken by the assassination of former Prime Minister
   Rafik Hariri in a car bomb explosion. Certain political figures, who
   later became the leaders of the Forces of March 14, accused Syria for
   the attack, due to its extensive military and intelligence presence in
   Lebanon, and to the public rift between Hariri and Damascus over the
   Syrian-backed constitutional amendment extending pro-Syrian President
   Lahoud's term in office. Syria denies any involvement. Others, namely
   the Forces of March 8, considered that the assassination may have been
   executed by the American CIA or the Israeli Mossad in an attempt to
   destabilize the country.

   Sadly the Hariri assassination only marked the beginning of a series of
   assassination attempts that led to the loss of many prominent Lebanese
   figures. On June 2, 2005, the journalist and historian Samir Kassir,
   also a founding member of the Democratic Left Movement was assassinated
   by a car bomb. Less than one month later, on June 21, 2005, George
   Hawi, the former Secretary General of the Lebanese Communist Party was
   also assassinated by a car bomb in Beirut.

   On September 25, 2005, there was a failed assassination attempt on a
   Lebanese Broadcasting Corporation news anchor, in which May Chidiac
   lost her left leg below the knee and received severe injuries to her
   left arm, later resulting in the amputation of her left hand. Since
   then, May Chidiac won the UNESCO/Guillermo Cano World Press Freedom
   Prize 2006. Editor-in-chief and CEO of the An-Nahar newspaper,
   journalist Gebran Tueni, was assassinated by a car bomb in the suburbs
   of Beirut on December 12, 2005. On November 21, 2006, 34 year old
   industrial minister Pierre Gemayel was assasinated in Beirut by three
   men who intercepted his car and shot him to death.

Investigation

   Distrustful of the impartiality of local Lebanese officials the UN
   initiated its own investigation into the assassination of al-Hariri,
   the findings of which were officially published on 20 October, 2005 in
   the Mehlis report. This report suggested the assassination was carried
   out by a group with considerable resources, that it had been prepared
   many months in advance, and that the group had detailed knowledge of
   Rafik Hariri’s movements.

   International forensic teams identified the vehicle used for the
   explosion as a Mitsubishi Canter stolen on 12 October, 2004 in
   Sagamihara City, Japan, and that the explosion was most likely
   detonated by a suicide bomber. On the testimony of a witness of Syrian
   origin but a resident in Lebanon, who claims to have worked for the
   Syrian intelligence services in Lebanon the Mehlis report states that
   this vehicle was prepared at a military base in Syria and was driven
   across the border into Lebanon by a Syrian colonel from the Tenth Army
   Division.

   This investigation into the Hariri assassination is ongoing and has yet
   to be concluded. On 17 January, 2006 the UN appointed Serge Brammertz
   to continue the investigation; the report from this investigation has
   yet to be published.

Demonstrations

   On February 28, 2005, with over 70,000 people demonstrating in Martyrs'
   Square, Prime Minister Omar Karami and his Cabinet resigned.

   In response, Hezbollah organized a large counter-demonstration of
   nearly 1 million people, staged on March 8 in Beirut, supporting Syria
   and accusing Israel and the United States of meddling in internal
   Lebanese affairs.

   On March 14, 2005, one month after Hariri's assassination, throngs of
   people rallied in Martyrs' Square in Lebanon with around 1 million
   people,. Protestors marched demanding the truth about Hariri's murder
   and independence from Syrian presence in Lebanon. The march reiterated
   their desire for a sovereign, democratic, and unified country, free of
   Syria's hegemony.

   In the weeks following the demonstrations, bombs were detonated in
   Christian areas near Beirut. Although the damage was mostly material,
   these acts demonstrate the danger of Lebanon relapsing into sectarian
   strife.

   Eventually, and under pressure from the international community, Syria
   withdrew its 15,000-strong army troops from Lebanon. The last uniformed
   Syrian soldier left Lebanon on April 26, 2005. On April 27, 2005, the
   Lebanese celebrated their first free-from-Syria day. UN forces led by
   Senegalese Brig. Gen. Mouhamadou Kandji were sent to Lebanon to verify
   the military withdrawal which was mandated by UN Security Council
   Resolution 1559.

Elections

   During the first parliamentary elections held after Syria's withdrawal
   from Lebanon in May 2005, the anti-Syrian coalition of Sunni Muslim,
   Druze and Christian parties led by Saad Hariri, son of assassinated
   ex-Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, won a majority of seats in the new
   Parliament. The Free Patriotic Movement (FPM) however, did not ally
   with the Rafik Hariri Martyr List during these elections because they
   were seen by some as still attached to their sectarian identities. Thus
   the FPM won a minority of seats in the parliament.

   The political alliances were interesting in that in some areas the
   anti-Syrian coalition allied with Hezbollah and in others with Amal.
   They did not win the two-thirds majority required to force the
   resignation of Syrian-appointed President Lahoud voted for by Rafik
   Hariri parliamentary bloc, due to the unexpectedly strong showing of
   formerly exiled General Michel Aoun's Free Patriotic Movement party in
   Mount Lebanon. Despite being staunchly anti-Syrian during his 15-year
   exile, upon his return Aoun aligned himself with politicians who were
   friendly to the Syrians in the past decade: Soleiman Franjieh Jr and
   Michel Murr. Their alliance dominated the north and the Metn District
   of Mount Lebanon. Saad Hariri and Walid Jumblatt joined forces with the
   two staunchly pro-Syrian Shiite movements, Hezbollah and Amal, to
   secure major wins in the South, Beqaa, as well as the Baabda and Aley
   districts of Mount Lebanon. This alliance proved temporary. On February
   6, 2006, Hezbollah signed an understanding of disarmament with Michel
   Aoun, the leader of the Free Patriotic Movement.

   After the elections, Hariri's Future Movement party, now the country's
   dominant political force, nominated Fouad Siniora, a former Finance
   Minister, to be Prime Minister. His newly formed representative
   government has obtained the vote of confidence from the parliament.

   On July 18, 2005, Lebanon elected a new parliament dominated by an
   anti-Syrian coalition. This parliament approved a motion to free Samir
   Geagea, who had spent most of the past eleven years in solitary
   confinement in an underground cell with no access to news. The motion
   was endorsed by pro-Syrian Lebanese President Émile Lahoud the next
   day. The following months proved the government's inability to begin
   the economic and political reforms promised to the people.

2006 Israel-Lebanon conflict

   Areas in Lebanon targeted by Israeli bombing, 12 July to 13 August
   2006.
   Enlarge
   Areas in Lebanon targeted by Israeli bombing, 12 July to 13 August
   2006.

Major events

   On July 12, 2006 Hezbollah captured two Israeli soldiers in a
   cross-border operation, killing three others, and simultaneously
   launched a missile attack along the border. The operation was
   considered "an act of war" by Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert. That
   night, after a failed rescue attempt that resulted in the deaths of
   five more Israeli soldiers, Israel launched a massive military
   operation on Lebanon, with the stated goal of eliminating Hezbollah and
   retrieving the captured soldiers. The operation quickly developed into
   "open war" as Israel continued to bomb large areas in Lebanon and
   Hezbollah launched thousands of rockets into Northern Israel. One of
   the first targets of the Israeli bombings was the Rafic Hariri
   International Airport in southern Beirut.

   Diplomatic action eventually resulted in the release of UN Security
   Council Resolution 1701 which called for an immediate cessation of
   hostilities, and an international embargo on supplying arms to
   Hezbollah. Three days later, on August 14, 2006, the partial cease-fire
   came into effect.

   However, Israel continued to impose a naval and aerial blockade on
   Lebanon, in an attempt to prevent arms from reaching Hezbollah. By
   September 8, 2006, both blockades had been lifted. During and after
   that period, several breaches of the cease-fire have been recorded.

Aftermath

   The level of destruction that hit Lebanon has been described by the
   country's Prime Minister Fouad Siniora as "unimaginable." Much of
   Lebanon's infrastructure was destroyed, mainly bridges and roads, and
   estimates of the overall damage approached $15 billion.

   As a result of the conflict, 1,191 Lebanese civilians were killed and
   4,409 injured. In addition, approximately 1,000,000 Lebanese were
   displaced and forced to flee to safer areas. On the Israeli side, 44
   civilians were killed and approximately 1,350 injured. Estimates of the
   number of Hezbollah fighters killed range from 80 to 700, while 119 IDF
   soldiers were confirmed killed and approximately 400 injured.

   Many countries have provided much-needed aid to Lebanon. Major
   contributors include Saudi Arabia, Jordan, the European Union, the
   United Arab Emirates, and Egypt among others. During the war, the
   Jordanians helped by loading planes with about 67,500 blankets and
   mattresses as well as boxes of drugs and food. Sea routes were used to
   bring in supplies in large quantities to help some of the displaced
   people living in schools and with host families in Lebanon.

   In response to the growing international pressure for disarming
   Hezbollah, Hassan Nasrallah, the leader of Hezbollah, held a "victory
   celebration" in southern Beirut on September 22, 2006, which was
   attended by hundreds of thousands in a show of support to the
   continuing resistance. During the proceedings, Nasrallah proclaimed
   that no one would ever disarm Hezbollah and vowed to take action in
   retaliation for what he described as Israeli hostilities. He also added
   that, should Lebanon become capable of self-defense, Hezbollah would
   willingly lay down its arms.

Current situation

   Lebanon's current situation is highly fragile, as opposition to the
   standing government recently spiked in an uprising reminiscent of the
   Cedar Revolution and the events that precipitated the 1975-1990 civil
   war. Hezbollah, currently the single most powerful militia in Lebanon
   and the Free Patriotic Movement (FPM) as well as Amal have joined
   forces in demanding the immediate resignation of the current Saniora
   government as well as early elections, claiming that the current
   distribution of seats in both the Parliament and the Cabinet does not
   reflect the true will of the Lebanese people. They also accused the
   government of supporting the continuation of the 2006 Israel-Lebanon
   conflict.

   On November 19, 2006, in an attempt to diffuse some of the escalating
   fear of the country's relapsing into sectarian strife and fears of a
   possible coup d'état by Hezbollah, Nasrallah expressly forbade
   supporters of the opposition from engaging in any conflict or
   responding to any provocations. However, he refused to rule out the
   possibility of ultimately "taking the issue to the streets within a six
   hour notice", if the government does not meet the opposition's demands.

   On November 21, 2006, Pierre Amine Gemayel, Lebanon's Minister of
   Industry was assassinated in Jdeideh, a Christian neighbourhood on the
   outskirts of Beirut. He was known for being a young, outspoken member
   of the Lebanese government, opposed to the former occupation of Lebanon
   by Syria and its influence in the country. Analysts say Gemayel's death
   is likely to worsen tensions in the already divided country .

Neighbouring countries

   Flag of Syria  Syria
   Mediterranean Sea North
   West    Flag of Lebanon  Lebanon     East
   South
   Flag of Israel  Israel

   Countries and territories of the Middle East

   Bahrain • Cyprus • Egypt • Iran • Iraq • Israel • Jordan • Kuwait •
   Lebanon • Oman • Palestinian territories • Qatar • Saudi Arabia •
   Syria • Turkey ( disputed) • United Arab Emirates • Yemen
   Countries in Southwest Asia

   Armenia • Azerbaijan • Bahrain • Cyprus • Georgia • Iran • Iraq •
   Israel • Jordan • Kuwait Lebanon • Oman • Qatar • Saudi Arabia • Syria
   • Turkey • United Arab Emirates • Yemen
   Countries of Asia

   Afghanistan • Armenia • Azerbaijan ^1 • Bahrain • Bangladesh • Bhutan •
   Brunei • Cambodia • People's Republic of China ^2 • Cyprus • East Timor
   ^3 • Georgia ^1 • India • Indonesia ^3 • Iran • Iraq • Israel • Japan •
   Jordan • Kazakhstan ^1 • Kuwait • Kyrgyzstan • Laos • Lebanon •
   Malaysia • Maldives • Mongolia • Myanmar • Nepal • North Korea • Oman •
   Pakistan • Philippines • Qatar • Russia ^1 • Saudi Arabia • Singapore •
   South Korea • Sri Lanka • Syria • Tajikistan • Thailand • Turkey ^1 •
   Turkmenistan • United Arab Emirates • Uzbekistan • Vietnam • Yemen

   For dependent and other territories, see Dependent territory and List
   of unrecognized countries.

   ^1 Partly in Europe. ^2 The Republic of China (Taiwan) not officially
   recognized by the United Nations; see Political status of Taiwan.
   ^3 Partly or wholly reckoned in Oceania.
   Countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea

   Albania • Algeria • Bosnia and Herzegovina • Croatia • Cyprus • Egypt •
   France • Greece • Israel • Italy • Lebanon • Libya • Malta • Monaco •
   Montenegro • Morocco • Slovenia • Spain • Syria • Tunisia • Turkey

   For dependent and other territories, see Dependent territory and List
   of unrecognized countries.
   Arab League
   Flag of the League of Arab States

   Algeria • Bahrain • Comoros • Djibouti • Egypt • Iraq • Jordan • Kuwait
   • Lebanon • Libya • Mauritania • Morocco • Oman • State of Palestine •
   Qatar • Saudi Arabia • Somalia • Sudan • Syria • Tunisia • United Arab
   Emirates • Yemen
   Francophonie
   Members: Belgium • Benin • Bulgaria • Burkina Faso • Burundi • Cambodia
   • Cameroon • Canada • New Brunswick • Quebec • Ontario • Cape Verde •
   Central African Republic • Chad • Comoros • Côte d'Ivoire • Cyprus •
   Democratic Republic of the Congo • Djibouti • Dominica • Egypt •
   Equatorial Guinea • France • French Guiana • Gabon • Ghana • Guadeloupe
   • Guinea • Guinea-Bissau • Haiti • Laos • Lebanon • Madagascar • Mali •
   Martinique • Mauritania • Mauritius • Morocco • Niger • Republic of the
   Congo • Romania • Rwanda • Saint Lucia • São Tomé and Príncipe •
   Senegal • Seychelles • Saint-Pierre and Miquelon • Switzerland • Togo •
   Tunisia • Ukraine • Vanuatu • Vietnam

   Observers: Armenia • Austria • Croatia • Czech Republic • Georgia •
   Hungary • Lithuania • Mozambique • Poland • Serbia • Slovakia •
   Slovenia • Ukraine
   Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC)
   Flag of the OIC

   Afghanistan • Albania • Algeria • Azerbaijan • Bahrain • Bangladesh •
   Benin • Burkina Faso • Brunei • Cameroon • Chad • Comoros •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Djibouti • Egypt • Gabon • Gambia • Guinea •
   Guinea-Bissau • Guyana • Indonesia • Iran • Iraq • Jordan • Kuwait •
   Kazakhstan • Kyrgyzstan • Lebanon • Libya • Maldives • Malaysia •
   Mali • Mauritania • Morocco • Mozambique • Niger • Nigeria • Oman •
   Pakistan • State of Palestine • Qatar • Saudi Arabia • Senegal •
   Sierra Leone • Somalia • Sudan • Surinam • Syria • Tajikistan •
   Turkey • Tunisia • Togo • Turkmenistan • Uganda • Uzbekistan •
   United Arab Emirates • Yemen

   Observer countries: Bosnia and Herzegovina • Central African Republic •
   Russia • Thailand • Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus

   Observer Muslim organizations and communities:
   Moro National Liberation Front

   Observer international organizations:
   Economic Cooperation Organization • Organisation of African Unity •
   League of Arab States • Non-Aligned Movement • United Nations
   Semitic-speaking nations

   Arabic and Maltese

   Flag of Algeria  Algeria • Flag of Bahrain  Bahrain • Flag of Egypt
   Egypt • Flag of Iraq  Iraq • Flag of Jordan  Jordan • Flag of Kuwait
   Kuwait • Flag of Lebanon  Lebanon • Flag of Libya  Libya • Flag of
   Malta  Malta • Flag of Mauritania  Mauritania • Flag of Morocco
   Morocco • Flag of Oman  Oman • Flag of Palestinian National Authority
   Palestine • Flag of Qatar  Qatar • Flag of Saudi Arabia  Saudi Arabia •
   Flag of Sudan  Sudan • Flag of Syria  Syria • Flag of Tunisia  Tunisia
   • Flag of United Arab Emirates  United Arab Emirates • Flag of Western
   Sahara  Western Sahara • Flag of Yemen  Yemen

   Northwest Semitic ( Aramaic and Hebrew)

   Flag of Iraq  Iraq • Flag of Israel  Israel • Flag of Syria  Syria

   South Semitic

   Flag of Eritrea  Eritrea • Flag of Ethiopia  Ethiopia • Flag of Oman
   Oman • Flag of Yemen  Yemen
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lebanon"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
