   #copyright

Leeds

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

                              Leeds

   Image:dot4gb.svg
                           Statistics
   Population:           443,247
                         Ordnance Survey
   OS grid reference:    SE297338
                         Administration
   Metropolitan borough: City of Leeds
   Metropolitan county:  West Yorkshire
   Region:               Yorkshire and the Humber
   Constituent country:  England
   Sovereign state:      United Kingdom
                              Other
   Ceremonial county:    West Yorkshire
   Historic county:      Yorkshire ( West Riding)
                            Services
   Police force:         West Yorkshire Police
   Fire and rescue:      {{{Fire}}}
   Ambulance:            Yorkshire
                    Post office and telephone
   Post town:            LEEDS
   Postal district:      LS1, LS2 (City Centre), LS3-LS19, LS26
   Dialling code:        0113
                            Politics
   UK Parliament:        Leeds Central
   European Parliament:  Yorkshire and the Humber

   Leeds is a major city on the River Aire and the urban core of the City
   of Leeds metropolitan borough of West Yorkshire, England.

   According to the 2001 UK census the Leeds Urban Area had a population
   of 443,247 while the metropolitan borough had a population of 715,404
   and is one of England's core cities.

History

   The 1866 map of Leeds.
   Enlarge
   The 1866 map of Leeds.

   The name "Leeds" came from "Leodis", which was a name recorded in
   Anglo-Saxon sources for a Celtic kingdom that survived in the area for
   a while after the Anglo-Saxon invasion.

   Leeds has been known since being mentioned in the Domesday book of
   1086. Leeds was an agricultural market town in the Middle Ages, and
   received its first charter in 1207. In the Tudor period Leeds was
   mainly a merchant town, manufacturing woollen cloths and trading with
   Europe via the Humber estuary and the population grew from 10,000 at
   the end of the seventeenth century to 30,000 at the end of the
   eighteenth. At one point nearly half of England's total export passed
   through Leeds. The industrial revolution had resulted in the radical
   growth of Leeds whose population had risen to over 150,000 by 1840. The
   city's industrial growth was catalysed by the introduction of the Aire
   & Calder Navigation in 1699, Leeds and Liverpool Canal in 1816 and the
   railway in 1848. In 1893 Leeds had been granted city status. These
   industries that developed in the industrial revolution had included
   making machinery for spinning, machine tools, steam engines and gears
   as well as other industries based on textiles, chemicals and leather
   and pottery. Coal was extracted on a large scale and the still
   functioning Middleton Railway, the first commercial railway in the
   world, transported coal into the centre of Leeds.

   By the 20th century this social and economic had started to change with
   the creation of academic institutions such the academic institutions
   that are known today as the University of Leeds, Leeds Metropolitan
   University and Leeds Trinity & All Saints. This period had also
   witnessed expansion in medical provision particularly Leeds General
   Infirmary and St James's Hospital. Following World War II there was a
   decline in secondary industries that had thrived in the 19th century.
   In 1951, half the workforce was still in manufacturing; by 1971 the
   figure was a third. Leeds lost a third of its manufacturing jobs
   1971-81 (Champion & Townsend, 1990, p.82). In 1991, 64,000 were
   employed in manufacturing. In 2003, 2,103 firms employed 44,500 (10% of
   workforce) - see Leeds Economy Handbook. But there are still some large
   engineering firms. The largest make turbine blades, components, alloys,
   valves and pipelines for the oil industry, switchgear, printers'
   supplies, copper alloys, surgical and hospital equipment, pumps,
   motors, radiators.

   In the 1980s, the Conservative government designated Urban Development
   Corporations on a number of UK cities: some declining areas were taken
   out of local authority control and government funding was provided with
   the aim of speeding up and concentrating private sector investment in
   the most run-down areas. Leeds Development Corporation ran from 1988-95
   and helped to focus attention on two decayed industrial areas (lower
   Kirkstall Valley and the riverside area to the south east of the city
   centre). Achievements of LDC included refurbishment of many riverside
   properties, the opening up of Granary Wharf and the Royal Armouries
   development.

   Today Leeds is known as one of eight core cities that act as a focus of
   their respective regions and Leeds is generally regarded as the
   dominant city of the ceremonial county of West Yorkshire.

Industry and economy

          and List of companies based in Leeds

   Leeds Town Hall - Victorian civic confidence
   Enlarge
   Leeds Town Hall - Victorian civic confidence
   Briggate, Leeds
   Enlarge
   Briggate, Leeds
   River Aire at night, from Bridge End
   Enlarge
   River Aire at night, from Bridge End

   Leeds was recently voted Britain's Best City for Business by Omis
   Research. It is also regarded as the fastest growing city in the UKand
   has a diverse economy with the service sector now dominating over the
   city's manufacturing industries. Leeds is the largest financial centre
   outside the capital. New tertiary industries such as retail, call
   centres, offices and media have contributed to a high rate of economic
   growth since the early 1990s. Nearly 100,000 people work in financial
   and business services - about a quarter of the workforce. The strength
   of the economy is also indicated by the low unemployment rate.

   Leeds has one of the largest Live and Work Credit Unions in the UK.
   Membership is open to anyone who works or lives in Leeds. Employing
   over 40 people with offices in the centre and surrounding areas it
   brings financial services to everyone in Leeds. Leeds City Credit Union
   is a membership owned co-operative that provides financial services to
   the less well off as well as those with what is normally considered
   sufficient means. Regulated by the FSA it offers an ethical investment
   opportunity for anyone who wishes to see their savings aid the wider
   community.

   Growth sectors in financial & business services: banking, labour
   recruitment*, commercial cleaning, legal services, insurance, pension
   funds, computing*, architecture and civil engineering, real estate,
   investigation & security, accountancy, equipment leasing, consultancy &
   market research*, advertising, R&D* Some of the faster growing
   sub-sectors during the 1990s marked *

Transport

   The rail network is still of great importance. From Leeds station (the
   6th busiest in the UK- the busiest outside of London ) MetroTrains
   operated by Northern Rail operate to all parts of West Yorkshire and
   surrounding local and commuter locations and other operators including
   GNER, Virgin Cross Country, Midland Mainline and First Transpennine
   Express operate services to the rest of the country.

   Leeds has two railway lines offering direct services to London. The
   priciple route is along the East Coast Main Line although Midland
   Mainline offers an alternative route via Leicester along the Midland
   Main Line to London St Pancras soon to be the home of Eurostar
   international services.

   The city had plans for a tram network. However the government axed the
   scheme due to an unwillingness to pay for any costs over budget, and
   the Department for Transport's general dislike of trams and attachment
   to buses. The Merseyside transport authority Merseytravel is preparing
   a legal case against the Government to restore the tram system plans.
   Leeds remains the largest city in the European Union without a mass
   transit system.

   Leeds was chosen as the focus of the A58, A61, A62, A63, A64 and A65
   roads. Nowadays, with the M1 and M62 intersecting just to its south and
   the A1(M) passing just to its east, it is one of the principal hubs of
   the northern motorway network. The city centre is pedestrianised, and
   is encircled by the clockwise-only 'loop road'.

   Leeds Bradford International Airport is located to the north-west of
   the city and has scheduled flights to destinations within Europe, Egypt
   and Turkey.

Development

   In recent times Leeds has seen many new developments. Some large
   schemes that are proposed or under construction include:
     * Holbeck Urban Village regeneration
     * Clarence Dock (Completion 2007)
     * Quarry Hill Cultural Quarter
     * Leeds Metropolitan University rebuilding & partial relocation
     * Millennium Square
     * Leeds Station modernization
     * Leeds Arena
     * St. James' University Hospital Oncology wing (Jimmy's)
     * Harewood/Eastgate shopping quarters (commence Late 2006/Early 2007)
     * Trinity Shopping Quarter (commence 2006)
     * South Leeds Sports Centre
     * Leeds Bradford International Airport expansion
     * Whitehall Road
     * Wellington Place
     * Completion of Leeds Inner Ring Road and construction of East Leeds
       Relief Road

   High rise schemes are making a much bigger mark on Leeds' skyline.
   Sixteen skyscrapers are under construction or proposed, all of them
   taller than West Riding House - Leeds' tallest building since it was
   built in the 1970s. The UK's tallest building outside of London, La
   Lumiere, has also got the green light for construction in Leeds.
     * Bridgewater Place (construction)
     * The Plaza (construction)
     * La Lumiere 1 & 2 (construction imminent)
     * Criterion Place 1 & 2 (advanced planning)
     * The Gateway (construction)
     * Mayfair (advanced planning)
     * Brunswick Terrace
     * Spiracle Tower
     * Kite Tower
     * Leeds University
     * Wade Lane Apartments
     * Green Bank including Providence Tower ( GreenBank Website)
       (advanced planning)
     * Clarence Dock (construction)
     * Sweet Street (advanced planning)
     * Marshall Street (planning)
     * Monkbridge Forge (planning)
     * West Central

Areas of the City

     * Aberford
     * Adel
     * Alwoodley
     * Aireborough
     * Armley
     * Barwick & Kippax
     * Beckett Park
     * Beeston
     * Belle Isle
     * Bramley
     * Burmantofts
     * Burley
     * City
     * Chapel Allerton
     * Chapeltown
     * Colton
     * Cookridge
     * Cross Flatts
     * Cross Gates
     * East End Park
     * Farsley
     * Garforth
     * Gipton
     * Guiseley
     * Halton

                         * Halton Moor
                         * Harehills
                         * Hawksworth
                         * Headingley
                         * Holbeck
                         * Holt Park
                         * Horsforth
                         * Hunslet
                         * Hyde Park
                         * Kirkstall
                         * Ireland Wood
                         * Lawnswood
                         * Little London
                         * Meanwood
                         * Middleton
                         * Moorside
                         * Moortown
                         * Moor Grange
                         * Morley
                         * Oakwood
                         * Otley and Wharfedale
                         * Potternewton
                         * Pudsey
                         * Rawdon

                                                 * Richmond Hill
                                                 * Rothwell
                                                 * Roundhay
                                                 * Seacroft
                                                 * Shadwell village
                                                 * Sheepscar
                                                 * Stanningley
                                                 * Swillington
                                                 * Swinnow
                                                 * Temple Newsam
                                                 * Tinshill
                                                 * Weetwood
                                                 * West Park
                                                 * Wetherby
                                                 * Whinmoor
                                                 * Whitkirk
                                                 * Woodhouse
                                                 * Wortley
                                                 * Wykebeck
                                                 * Yeadon

   Prior to the 1974 reorganisation of government, the City of Leeds was
   defined as including the former parishes of Armley, Beeston, Bramley,
   Chapel Allerton, Farnley, Headingley/Burley, Holbeck, Hunslet, Leeds,
   Osmondthorpe, Potter Newton, Seacroft, Temple Newsam, Wortley . Since
   then, many modern definitions also include areas such as Garforth,
   Middleton and Rothwell. Seeing as all government functions are done by
   the wider Leeds district, official definitions of the boundaries are no
   longer considered important by the council.

Tourism

   Recently Leeds has received accolades in the field of tourism;
   including being voted by Conde Nast Traveller magazine Readers' Awards
   as the "UK's favourite city" and "Visitor City of the Year" by The Good
   Britain Guide. Leeds has excellent transport links with the rest of
   Yorkshire and the UK. Leeds Bradford International Airport has flights
   connecting to Europe, and the rest of the world via London Heathrow
   Airport, Paris Charles de Gaulle Airport and Amsterdam Schiphol
   Airport. Leeds Bradford International Airport is part of the Star
   Alliance. Leeds station is very modern and has regular trains to the
   rest of Yorkshire and the UK. Leeds also has excellent road links via
   the A1, M1, M62 and M621 motorway. Leeds also has a large modern bus
   station served by National Express and local bus services. It is also
   possible to travel to Rotterdam and Zeebrugge by ferry from Hull, only
   an hour away.

Culture

Sport

   The city has a strong sporting heritage, with Yorkshire County Cricket
   Club, Leeds Rhinos Rugby League Football Club and Leeds Tykes Rugby
   Union Football Club playing at Headingley Stadium, and Leeds United
   Association Football Club playing at Elland Road. Unlike many other
   large cities such as Manchester and Sheffield, Leeds only has one
   association football team.

   Leeds United were formed in 1919 on the bankruptcy of a previous club,
   Leeds City. Their first major trophies came in 1968 when they won the
   League Cup and the European Fairs Cup under the management of Don
   Revie. They won two league titles and an FA Cup before Revie left for
   the England team job in 1974. Their only major trophy since then was
   the 1992 league title. Between 1982 and 1990 Leeds were in the second
   tier of the English league, and returned to this level in 2004
   following a financial crisis which almost resulted in bankruptcy. They
   narrowly missed out on a return to the Premiership in 2006, when losing
   the Championship playoff final 3-0 to Watford.

   Leeds Rhinos were crowned Super League champions on 16 October 2004
   after defeating arch rivals Bradford Bulls 16-8 at Old Trafford.
   Unfortunately they lost the Grand Final to Bradford Bulls in 2005.
   Hunslet Hawks and Bramley Buffaloes are other Leeds-based rugby league
   teams.

   Leeds Tykes won their first ever trophy in 2005 with battling
   performance to defeat favourites Bath Rugby in the Powergen Cup final.
   In the 2005-06 season the Tykes were relegated from the Guinness
   Premiership.

   Leeds City AC is amongst the biggest and most successful athletics
   clubs in the North of England and has had the most successful men's
   harriers section in the country in the 21st century. Since the turn of
   the millennium the team has never been out of the top 4 in the National
   Cross Country Championships, winning in 2003 and 2006. In 2006 the team
   achieved the 'Grand Slam' of wins - Yorkshire, North of England and
   English National Champions.

   Leeds has a wealth of sports facilities including the 40,000 capacity
   Elland Road football stadium, a host stadium during the 1996 European
   Football Championship, 22,000 capacity Carnegie Headingley Stadium,
   world famous for both cricket and rugby league, Leeds International
   Pool (50m), South Leeds Stadium used for athletics, bowls, football and
   tennis. Other facilities include the Leeds Wall (climbing), Yeadon Tarn
   sailing centre, and Garforth Jets Badminton Club. Nearby, in
   Castleford, is Xscape (real snow indoor ski and snowboard slope with
   ice climbing wall).

Museums and the arts

   Leeds has a small number of museums, being the home of the Royal
   Armouries Museum (opened in 1996 when the collection was transferred
   from the Tower of London), the Leeds City Museum which is dedicated to
   the history of Yorkshire, the Thackray's Medical Museum and the Leeds
   City Art Gallery. Leeds also boasts the Grand Theatre (where Opera
   North is based), the City Varieties music hall (which has hosted
   performances by Charlie Chaplin and Harry Houdini) and the West
   Yorkshire Playhouse.

   The Leeds Festival takes place every year in Bramham Park, having moved
   from Temple Newsam after pressure from some local residents. It
   features some of the biggest names in rock and indie music. The city is
   home to the Leeds International Piano Competition, held every three
   years since 1963, which has launched the careers of many major concert
   pianists. There is also the Leeds International Concert Season, the
   largest local authority music programme of any UK city outside London.
   The city also has an internationally recognised film festival; the
   Leeds International Film Festival is the largest film festival in
   England outside London and shows films from around the world. It
   incorporates the highly successful Leeds Children & Young People's Film
   Festival, which is organised and put together entirely by people under
   18 years old.

   Some of the first moving pictures in the world were taken in the city,
   by Louis Le Prince, of Leeds Bridge in 1888, and the first set of
   traffic lights in Yorkshire were installed on Park Row.

Stately homes and parks

   Harewood House and the ruins of Kirkstall Abbey, which date from the
   12th century, are on the outskirts of the city. Other significant
   stateley homes that are located in proximity to Leeds include Bramham
   Park, Temple Newsam House and Lotherton Hall. To the north lies
   Roundhay Park with its well regarded Tropical World hothouse. Other
   parks in the Leeds area include Golden Acre Park which lies between
   Adel and Bramhope, Hall Park in Horsforth, Woodhouse Moor in Hyde Park,
   Potternewton Park between Chapeltown and Harehills, East End Park in
   the location of the same name, Temple Newsam situated south of Halton
   Moor, Halton, Whitkirk and Colton, Cross Flatts Park in Beeston and
   Middleton Park in Middleton.

Shopping

   Victoria Quarter
   Enlarge
   Victoria Quarter

   Leeds has become known as the Knightsbridge of the North. The diverse
   range of shopping, from individual one-off boutiques to large
   department stores, including Harvey Nichols, has greatly expanded the
   Leeds retail base. The Victoria Quarter is the jewel in Leeds' shopping
   crown, located on Briggate, Leeds' main shopping street. Other shopping
   attractions include the Corn Exchange, Leeds Kirkgate Market , Granary
   Wharfe, Leeds Shopping Plaza, Headrow Shopping Centre, The Light, The
   St Johns Centre, The Merrion Centre Leeds, Crown Point, Birstall Retail
   Park and the White Rose Centre. In addition, there are 2 proposed
   shopping centres, namely the Harewood/Eastgate Quarter and Trinity
   Quarter.

Music

          and List of bands originating in Leeds

   Artists

   Though not as prolific as its neighbour Manchester across the Pennines,
   or indeed Sheffield to its south, Leeds has still produced many notable
   acts. Most recently Kaiser Chiefs, The Music and Corinne Bailey Rae
   have joined the list of successful bands from the city. Also worth a
   mention are The Wedding Present, who released a 7 inch single, every
   month for a year. Every one hit the charts - a feat only achieved by
   one other artist: Elvis Presley. Leeds also produced one of the most
   famous one-hit-wonders ever, Chumbawamba

   Dance music and the clubbing scene

   House music had a big impact on Leeds when it arrived in the late
   1980's. Early house nights included Downbeat at the Warehouse, Meltdown
   at the Astoria in Harehills, and Joy and Kaos at various temporary
   venues, along with a thriving Shebeen or "Blues" scene in Chapeltown.

   Along with Sheffield and Bradford, Leeds was a centre for the Yorkshire
   Bleeps and Bass scene in 1989-1990, with influential local bands such
   as LFO, Nightmares on Wax, Ital Rockers, Unit 93 and Juno on
   Sheffield's Warp Records and Leeds' Bassic Records.

   Dance band Utah Saints hit the top ten several times between 1991 and
   1993.

   The earlier underground house scene developed into the Leeds club scene
   of the 1990's, when for a while Leeds held the title of Britain's
   clubbing capital. Both Back to Basics and mixed gay night Vague enjoyed
   the title of best club in Britain at different points in the decade,
   whilst The Orbit in Morley was an internationally recognised techno
   mecca (Orbit closed in the late nineties and was replaced by a
   restaurant).

   DIY scene

   Leeds is very well-known for its current DIY underground music scene,
   encompassing the genres of hardcore, post-hardcore, post-punk, and
   noise rock among others. There is a vibrant and active community based
   around the DIY ethic, supported in part by Cops and Robbers, a monthly
   guide to DIY events in and around Leeds.

   Festivals

   Leeds initially played host to the northern leg of the V festival
   between 1996 and 1998 before the event moved to Weston Park,
   Staffordshire.

   In 2000, Leeds played host to the first and as of 2006 the only ever
   BBC Radio 1 Love Parade at Roundhay Park.

   Since 1999 the Leeds Festival, a northern leg of the well established
   Reading Festival, has taken place on August bank holiday weekend. The
   event was initially held at Temple Newsam (the venue for the Leeds V
   Festival) before protests from residents forced a move to Bramham Park.

   Leeds is also home to the International Pianoforte Competition which is
   regarded highly. It was established in 1963 by Fanny Waterman with the
   15th competition starting in September 2006.

   West Yorkshire Playhouse and the neighbouring Venue at Leeds College of
   Music play host to the biennial FuseLeeds festival showcasing an
   eclectic mix of more left-field music.

   2006 had seen the two-day O2 Wireless Festival take place at Harewood
   House.

   Venues

   Leeds plays host to many venues, currently including Leeds University
   refectory (where The Who recorded their 1970 live album Live at Leeds),
   Leeds Metropolitan University , The Cockpit, Brudenell Social Club ,
   The Faversham , The Hi-Fi club , The Wardrobe, The Irish Centre,
   Joseph's Well , The New Roscoe , The Vine and The Mixing Tin among
   others.

   Occasional gigs are held in Millennium Square in the city centre
   (including the Kaiser Chiefs and Fall Out Boy in 2006), Roundhay Park
   (which was home to Love Parade in 2000 and has hosted gigs by the likes
   of Robbie Williams, U2, Michael Jackson and The Rolling Stones),
   Harewood House has hosted gigs by the likes of James Blunt and The Who,
   Leeds Town Hall (hosted the Kaiser Chiefs and many classical music
   events) and Leeds Parish Church.

   Recently attempts have been made to build an arena in the city
   (currently larger touring acts tend to play either Manchester or
   Sheffield owing to the relatively small capacity of the refectory,
   Leeds's biggest permanent venue).

Nightlife

   Leeds has a very large student population and boasts a large number of
   bars and nightclubs, as well as venues for live bands such as the
   Cockpit, The New Roscoe, Joseph's Well and The Wardrobe which combine
   to generate a vibrant nightlife. There are also a number of smaller
   venues which cater for underground and DIY gigs, such as Sela Bar and
   The Brudenell Social Club.

   Leeds has gained a reputation as one of the UK's favourite clubbing
   destinations. Often described as the UK's 'clubbing capital', Leeds is
   best known as the home of pioneering club nights Back to Basics and
   Speedqueen. Until a few years ago, Morley was home to the legendary
   Orbit, which for 13 years was known internationally as one of the
   original and best techno clubs in the country.

   Complete listings and reviews of bars, pubs and nightclubs in Leeds can
   be found online at Leeds City Guide, an extensive online venue and
   lifestyle guide. Live music events are also listed on Leeds Gig Guide,
   Cops and Robbers and 'Leeds, Live it, Love it'.

   In recent years a Gay nightlife scene has developed. The Bridge Inn and
   The New Penny, both on Call Lane, have long been Gay night spots.
   Queens Court offers a similar experience to its London counterpart
   Rupert Street. Recent additions such as Bar Fibre, on Lower Briggate
   and Mission offer more contemporary 'straight friendly' environments.
   During the summer months the secluded courtyard that lies between Bar
   Fibre and Queens Court is a beer garden. Recently opened clubs include
   the Velvet Underground and The Warehouse, home of the Saturday club
   night Electrocute.

   Towards Millennium Square and the Civic or Northern Quarter, is the
   newly developing entertainment district thriving on students. Recently,
   the Hard Rock Café and TigerTiger have opened here, and various upper
   class restaurants have opened in the Northern Quarter. Millennium
   Square bursts into life during the night with its many bars (such as
   Cocoon, Revolution and Haha!, to name but a few), and a big screen
   mounted on the Civic Theatre completes the Quarter. Millennium Square
   plays host to many large events such as Earth From The Air, Icecube (a
   large outdoor ice rink), Christmas markets, gigs, citywide parties and
   the world famous rhythms of the city festival. Millennium Square is
   adjacent to the Mandela Gardens, which Nelson Mandela opened in 2001. A
   number of public art features, fountains, a canal and greenery can be
   found here as an oasis amongst the city centre excitement.

   Leeds is home to a number of 'super-clubs' including Creation,
   Evolution and Oceana. Life Bar, Tiger Tiger and Discotheque by
   Gatecrasher are also large clubs.

   Leeds is also home to some Bohemian bars that are not aimed at the
   'usual' weekend crowd - especially the bars in and around Briggate and
   North Street ( North bar, Sandanista, Mojo, The Reliance(Reli), Reform,
   etc), Baby Jupiter on York Place and Milo on Call Lane.

Religious Communities

   Christianity

   The majority of people in Leeds consider themselves to be Christian of
   which most belong to the Church of England. Leeds also has a large
   Roman Catholic community and is the Episcopal of the Diocese of Leeds.
   The city also has several fairly large New Church congregations.

   Islam

   Leeds' Muslim community is prominent and thriving. Mosques can be found
   throughout the city, serving the large Muslim community. As well as
   this, pockets of Muslim-related shops, and restaurants to Islamic book
   shops can be found in Harehills and parts of Hyde Park and Beeston.

   Sikhism

   The Sikh community is represented by Gurdwaras (Temples) spread across
   the city. There is also a colourful religious annual procession, called
   the Nagar Kirtan, into Millennium Square in the City Centre around
   13th/14th April to celebrate Vaisakhi - the Sikh New Year and the Birth
   of the Religion. It's estimated around 3,000 Sikhs in Leeds take part
   in this annual event.

   Judaism

   Leeds has a large Jewish community, especially around the Alwoodley
   area.

   Hinduism

   The small Hindu community in Leeds have a Hindu temple at Hyde Park.
   Herein major Hindu religious festivals such as Ganesh Chaturthi, Durga
   Puja,Dusshera and Diwali are celebrated with gaiety.The temple is has
   all the major Hindu Deities and is also dedicated to the Lord Mahavir
   of the Jains

   Buddhism

   Various Buddhist sects are also represented in Leeds.

People from Leeds

   An inhabitant of Leeds is locally known as a Loiner, a word derived
   from the 'Loins' (or lanes) around Briggate in the city centre,
   although the term is rarely used or understood. The mock-classical
   adjectives Leodensian and Leodiensian are sometimes used by some local
   sports clubs, and the word Leodensian also features in the lyrics of "
   I Predict A Riot" by The Kaiser Chiefs.

   Many famous people have been born in Leeds including novelist Barbara
   Taylor Bradford, former Spice Girl Mel B and comedian Vic Reeves. Leigh
   Francis, creator of the TV show Bo' Selecta!, took his stage name '
   Avid Merrion' from the Merrion Centre in the city.

Artists based in Leeds

   Axis is an online database listing practising artists within the UK. It
   was started as a Leeds Metropolitan University project and over the
   last 15 years has grown to be the Internet based resource for finding
   artists for commissions.
     * Kerry Harker
     * Emma Bolland
     * Tony Quinn (Photographer) - Photographer based in Leeds
       specialising in images of the changing face of the City.
     * Derek Horton (writer)
     * Peter David Hamilton - (visual artist)
     * James Wakefield (photographer)

Education

   Parkinson Building, University of Leeds
   Enlarge
   Parkinson Building, University of Leeds

   Leeds has a very large number of primary schools, secondary schools and
   further and higher education establishments with Education Leeds having
   responsibility for statutory education for young people in the City.

   Leeds has two universities, the University of Leeds, with around 31,500
   full-time students (and a further 52,000 on short courses), and Leeds
   Metropolitan University with around 26,000 (according to UCAS; the LMU
   website claims 37,000). It also has several higher education colleges:
   Leeds College of Art and Design (formerly Jacob Kramer College),
   Trinity & All Saints' College accredited by the University of Leeds,
   and Leeds College of Music, which is the largest music college in the
   UK. This gives Leeds one of the largest student populations in the
   country. Indeed recently it has gained accolades as the Best UK
   University Destination in the Independent newspaper.

   The cities two main independent schools are Leeds Grammar School and
   Leeds Girls' High School. Leeds Grammar School is situated on the
   outskirts of the city at Alwoodley Gates and dating back to 1552, is
   the principal independent school for boys. Leeds Girls' High School is
   an independent, selective school for girls, located in Headingley and
   consistently ranked highly in education tables.

   The city is home to several further education colleges, such as Park
   Lane College Leeds (the largest FE College in Leeds with over 38,500
   students), Leeds College of Technology and Thomas Danby College.

   The city is home to many high schools such as Royds School, Rodillian
   High School, Allerton High School which was started in 1901, Roundhay
   School Technology College and Morley High School was founded as a
   grammar school in 1907, but became a mixed comprehensive in 1975. Notre
   Dame Catholic Sixth Form College is a very large college for A-level
   students close to Leeds City centre.

   OFSTED reports are available for all schools and further education
   colleges in Leeds.

   Under the Governments targets for better schools for children,
   Education Leeds has been given several £billion to help towards the
   cost of refurbishing or rebuilding primary and secondary schools in
   Leeds. One of the first high schools in Leeds to be rebuilt will be
   Pudsey Grangefield School (Mathematics and Computing Specialist
   Status).

Location Grid

                  North: Harrogate
   West: Bradford      Leeds       East: Selby
                  South: Wakefield
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leeds"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
