   #copyright

Leicester

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

   Leicester city centre, looking towards the Clock Tower
   Enlarge
   Leicester city centre, looking towards the Clock Tower

   Leicester ( pronounced [ˈlɛstə]) is the largest city in the East
   Midlands of England. It is the traditional county town of
   Leicestershire, and, since 1997, has been a self-governing unitary
   authority. It lies on the River Soar and at the edge of the English
   National Forest. In 2004, the population of the city proper was
   estimated at 285,100, with 441,213 living in the urban area. It is
   currently, by population, the 10th largest city in England and the 13th
   largest in the UK. It is also the 97th largest in Europe.

   The urban area extends beyond the boundaries of the city proper to
   include the satellite towns of Oadby, Wigston, Braunstone Town,
   Birstall, Glenfield, Blaby, Thurmaston, Syston and Leicester Forest
   East. A number of these towns are in fact closely integrated suburbs of
   the city itself, especially Glenfield and Braunstone. For areas within
   the city, see Areas of Leicester. In terms of population within the
   city limits it is the largest in the East Midlands.

   Leicester is one of the oldest cities in England, having been founded
   by the Romans.

General information

                                  City of Leicester
                             Image:EnglandLeicester.png
                                                               Geography
                         Status:                     Unitary, City (1919)
                         Region:                            East Midlands
              Ceremonial County:                           Leicestershire
                           Area:
                         - Total                             Ranked 276th
                                                                73.32 km²
                      Admin. HQ:                                Leicester
                        Latitude                               52°38'06"N
                       Longitude                                1°08'06"W
                 Grid reference:                                  SK 5804
                       ONS code:                                     00FN
                                                            Demographics
                     Population:
             - Total (2005 est.)
                       - Density                    Ranked 20th
                                                                  288,000
                                                              3,928 / km²
                      Ethnicity:                   63.9% White
                                                            29.9% S.Asian
                                                          3.1% Afro-Carib
                                                               2.3% Mixed
                                                            0.8% Chinese.
                                                                Politics
                               Leicester City Council
                                            http://www.leicester.gov.uk/
                     Leadership:                         Leader & Cabinet
                      Executive:         Liberal Democrats / Conservative
                            MPs: Patricia Hewitt, Peter Soulsby, Keith Vaz

   The city is next to the M1 motorway, and is on the Midland Main Line
   from London to Sheffield, Nottingham and Leeds. High-speed trains
   operated by Midland Mainline can reach London in just over an hour. It
   is also served by rail lines to Birmingham via Nuneaton, and to
   Peterborough.

   Major industries in Leicester today include food processing, hosiery,
   footwear, knitwear, engineering, electronics, printing and plastics.
   The clock tower
   Enlarge
   The clock tower

   The city centre is mainly Victorian with some later developments, which
   have usually been integrated in smoothly. The heart of the city centre
   is the Clock Tower, which is at the intersection of five routes into
   the city - High Street, Churchgate, Belgrave Gate, Humberstone Gate,
   and Gallowtree Gate. Today, the latter two are pedestrianised, and
   vehicles are restricted on the others.

   Leicester City Centre is home to the Haymarket and the Shires shopping
   centres, both of which face the clock tower. Leicester Market, Europe's
   largest covered market, is nearby. The historic core of the City lies
   slightly to the west, and monuments here include the Castle, the
   Anglican cathedral of St Martin, the medieval churches of St Mary de
   Castro and St. Nicholas, the Guildhall and the Jewry Wall.

   It is set to become a major city with many developments on the horizon
   implemented by the Leicester Regeneration Company including the £51
   million Leicester Performing Arts Centre designed by Rafael Viñoly.

   In 1990, Leicester was designated the UK's first Environment City, and
   won the European Sustainable City Award in 1996.

   Leicester has a large ethnic minority population, mainly from the
   Indian subcontinent. There are many Hindu mandirs, Sikh gurdwaras and
   Muslim mosques around the city, mostly converted from existing
   buildings. The Jain Temple in Leicester is near the city centre ( The
   Jain Centre). The area around Belgrave Road is known as the Golden
   Mile, and contains many Indian restaurants, jewellery shops, and other
   shops catering to the large Asian community in the neighbourhood. Many
   people travel to the area specifically for the restaurants, which serve
   authentic Indian cuisine. The annual Diwali celebrations are also held
   here and at the nearby Abbey Park, and are the biggest outside of
   India. There are also many of Afro-Caribbean descent (mainly from
   Antigua & Barbuda, Montserrat and Jamaica), the community being centred
   around Highfields to the southeast of the city centre, and Leicester
   plays host to the second-largest Caribbean Carnival in the UK after
   Notting Hill. While some wards in the North-East of the city are more
   than 70% Asian, wards in the West and South are all over 70% White. The
   city is set to become the first major urban area in the UK with a
   non-white ethnic majority population, by the time of the next census in
   2011.

History

   According to Geoffrey of Monmouth, the mythical king of the Britons
   King Leir founded the city of Kaerleir (Leicester). He was supposedly
   buried by Queen Cordelia in a chamber beneath the River Soar near the
   city dedicated to the Roman god Janus, and every year people celebrated
   his feast-day near Leir's tomb. William Shakespeare's King Lear is
   loosely based on this story.

Roman

   The remains of the Roman baths at Jewry Wall
   Enlarge
   The remains of the Roman baths at Jewry Wall

   Leicester is one of the oldest cities in England, with a history going
   back nearly 2000 years. The Roman city of Ratae Coritanorum was founded
   in AD 50 as a military settlement upon the Fosse Way Roman road. The
   city was named after the Corieltauvi, the Celtic tribe that dwelt in
   the area before the Romans arrived.

   Ratae Coritanorum grew into an important trading and military centre
   and one of the largest towns in Roman Britain. The remains of the baths
   of Roman Leicester can be seen at the Jewry Wall, and other Roman
   artefacts are displayed in the Jewry Wall museum adjacent to the site.

Christian martyrdoms?

   According to the Venerable Bede, Roman Leicester may have been the site
   of several early Christian Martyrdoms in Britain, at the same time as
   that of St. Alban the first English martyr, who was killed in the Roman
   city of Verulamium (beside modern-day St Albans. He writes:

          Passi sunt ea tempestate Aaron et Iulius Legionum urbis ciues,
          aliique utriusque sexus diuersis in locis perplures, qui
          diuersis cruciatibus torti, et inaudita membrorum discerptione
          lacerati, animas ad supernae ciuitatis gaudia perfecto agone
          miserunt.

             "At the same time suffered Aaron and Julius, inhabitants of
          the city of the legions, and many others of both sexes, in other
          places; who, having been tormented on the rack till their
          members were dislocated, and having endured various other
          unheard-of cruelties, yielded their souls, after the conflict
          was over, to the joys of the city above." - Historia
          ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum. Book One, Chapter Seven

   This 'city of the legions' may be identified with Chester, Caerleon, or
   Leicester.

Saxon and Viking

   The Roman town was largely abandoned when the Romans left Britain in
   the 5th century, but was later re-settled by Saxons. In the 9th
   century, Leicester was captured by the Danes (Vikings) and became one
   of the five boroughs (fortified towns) of Danelaw, although this
   position was short lived. The Saxon Bishop of Leicester fled to
   Dorchester-on-Thames and Leicester was not to become a bishopric again
   until the twentieth century.

   It is believed the name "Leicester" is derived from the words castra
   (camp) of the Ligore, meaning dwellers on the 'River Legro' (an early
   name for the River Soar). In the early tenth century it was recorded as
   Ligeraceaster = "the town of the Ligor people". The Domesday book later
   recorded it as Ledecestre.

Medieval

   Leicester had become a town of considerable importance by Medieval
   times. It was mentioned in the Domesday Book as 'civitas' (city), but
   Leicester lost its city status in the eleventh century owing to power
   struggles between the Church and the aristocracy. It was eventually
   re-made a city in 1919, and the Church of St Martin became Leicester
   Cathedral in 1927. The tomb of King Richard III is located in the
   central nave of the church although, according to local tradition, he
   is not actually buried there. He was originally buried in the
   Greyfriars Church in Leicester, but his corpse was exhumed under orders
   from Henry VII and cast into the River Soar.

   Leicester played a significant role in the history of England, when, in
   1265, Simon de Montfort forced King Henry III to hold the first
   parliament of England at the now-ruined Leicester Castle.

Tudor

   On 4 November 1530, Thomas Cardinal Wolsey was arrested on charges of
   treason and taken from York Palace. On his way south to face dubious
   justice at the Tower of London, he fell ill. The group escorting him
   were concerned enough to stop at Leicester. There, Wolsey's condition
   quickly worsened and he died on 29 November 1530 and was buried at
   Leicester Abbey, now Abbey Park.

18th and 19th centuries

   With the construction of the Grand Union Canal in the 1790s linking
   Leicester to London and Birmingham, Leicester began rapid
   industrialisation. The main industries being hosiery, footwear and,
   especially in the twentieth century, engineering. All are, however, in
   decline now.

   By 1832, railways had arrived in Leicester with the opening of the
   Leicester and Swannington Railway, which provided a supply of coal to
   the town from nearby collieries. By 1840 the Midland Counties Railway
   had linked Leicester to the national railway network, which further
   boosted industrial growth. By the 1860s Leicester had gained a direct
   rail link to London ( St Pancras) with the completion of the Midland
   Main Line. The Great Central Railway arrived in 1900, providing an
   alternative route to London. However, this closed in 1966.

   The borough expanded throughout the nineteenth century, most notably in
   1892 annexing Belgrave, Aylestone, Knighton and North Evington. The
   city obtained its current boundaries in 1935, with the annexation of
   the remainder of Evington, Humberstone, Beaumont Leys, along with part
   of Braunstone. It became a county borough when these were established
   in 1889, but, as with all county boroughs, was abolished by the Local
   Government Act 1972 in 1974, becoming an ordinary district of
   Leicestershire. It regained its unitary status in 1997.

Post WWII

   In the decades after World War II, Leicester gained a large population
   of immigrants from the Indian sub-continent, and from Kenya and Uganda
   in the early 1970s. These immigrant groups make up around 40% of
   Leicester's population, making Leicester one of the most ethnically
   diverse cities in the United Kingdom. Among the more recent arrivals
   are a group of Dutch citizens of Somali origin, apparently drawn by its
   free and easy atmosphere and by the number of mosques. In the UK,
   Leicester today is widely regarded as a model of inter-communal
   tolerance; however, for a short period in the 1970s, the neo-fascist
   National Front recorded high votes in the city. Leicester is expected
   by 2011 to become the first major city in Britain in which the ethnic
   minority population will form a majority.

Coat of Arms

   The Corporation of Leicester's coat of arms was first granted to the
   city at the Heraldic Visitation of 1619, and is based on the arms of
   the first Earl of Leicester, Robert Beaumont. The field is a white
   cinquefoil on a red background, and this emblem is used by the City
   Council.

   After Leicester became a city in 1919, the city council applied to add
   to the arms, permission for which was granted in 1929, when the
   supporting lions, from the Lancastrian Earls of Leicester, were added.

   The motto "Semper Eadem" was the Motto of Queen Elizabeth I, who
   granted a royal charter to the city. It means "Always the same". The
   crest on top of the arms is a white or silver legless wyvern with red
   and white wounds showing, on a wreath of red and white. The supporting
   Lions are wearing coronets in the form of collars, with the white
   cinquefoil hanging from them.

Economy

   This is a chart of trend of regional gross value added of Leicester at
   current basic prices published (pp.240-253) by Office for National
   Statistics with figures in millions of British Pounds Sterling.
   Year Regional Gross Value Added Agriculture Industry Services
   1995 3,561                      1           1,256    2,304
   2000 4,513                      -           1,425    3,088
   2003 5,087                      1           1,289    3,797
    1. ^ Components may not sum to totals due to rounding
    2. ^ includes hunting and forestry
    3. ^ includes energy and construction
    4. ^ includes financial intermediation services indirectly measured

Politics

   Leicester town hall.
   Enlarge
   Leicester town hall.

   On April 1, 1997, Leicester City Council became a unitary authority,
   local government up until then having been a two-tier system with the
   city and county councils being responsible for different aspects of
   local government services (a system which is still in place in the rest
   of Leicestershire). Leicestershire County Council retained its
   headquarters at County Hall in Glenfield, just outside the city
   boundary but within the urban area. The administrative offices of
   Leicester City Council are in the centre of the city at the New Walk
   Centre and other office buildings near Welford Place. Some services
   (particularly the police and the ambulance service) still cover the
   whole of the city and county, but for the most part the two councils
   are independent.

   After a long period of Labour administration (since 1979), the city
   council from May 2003 was run by a Liberal Democrat/ Conservative
   coalition under Roger Blackmore, which collapsed in November 2004. The
   minority Labour group ran the city until May 2005, under Ross Willmott,
   when the Liberal Democrats and Conservatives formed a new coalition,
   again under the leadership of Roger Blackmore.

   Leicester is divided into three Parliamentary constituencies. Leicester
   East and Leicester West are represented by Keith Vaz and Patricia
   Hewitt respectively - both members of the Labour Party. The third seat,
   Leicester South, became vacant in May 2004 on the death of Labour
   politician Jim Marshall. A by-election was held on July 15, and was won
   by Parmjit Singh Gill of the Liberal Democrats, with a 21% swing. This
   by-election saw almost 4,000 votes go to a Respect party candidate, who
   opposed the Iraq war. However, in the 2005 general election, Labour's
   unsuccessful byelection candidate and former Council leader Sir Peter
   Soulsby won Leicester South back for the party, and Vaz and Hewitt
   retained their seats.

Transport

Railway

   Leicester station frontage Leicester station is just east of the city
   centre, on the A6 road.

   Rail routes run north-south through Leicester, going south to London St
   Pancras and north to Nottingham station and beyond (this route being
   called the Midland Main Line). There are four platforms at Leicester.
   Junctions north and south of the city connect to other lines. Train
   operators using the station include Midland Mainline, and Central
   Trains.

Education

   Leicester is home to two universities, the University of Leicester (
   Royal Charter 1957) and De Montfort University (founded in 1992 from
   Leicester Polytechnic).
   University of Leicester seen from Victoria Park - Left to right: the
   Department of Engineering, the Attenborough tower, the Charles Wilson
   building.
   Enlarge
   University of Leicester seen from Victoria Park - Left to right: the
   Department of Engineering, the Attenborough tower, the Charles Wilson
   building.

   It is also home to the National Space Centre, due in part to the
   University of Leicester being one of the few universities in the UK to
   specialise in space sciences.

   Leicester City Local Education Authority initially had a troubled
   history when formed in 1997 as part of the local government
   reorganisation - a 1999 Ofsted inspection found "few strengths and many
   weaknesses", although there has been considerable improvement since
   then. While many state schools provide a good standard of education,
   there have been l problems with one or two of the large community
   colleges, in particular New College. However, recent changes of
   leadership at New College have seen a turnaround in the school's
   prospects.Current plans to improve the city's education system include
   the opening of City Academies part-sponsored by the Church of England
   and a local Christian businessman (a new school on the Saffron estate,
   and a replacement for New College), a £250 million "Building Schools
   for the Future" project using the Private Finance Initiative, the
   granting of state school status to the Leicester Islamic Academy, and
   the reorganisation of the city's special schools. Leicester City
   Council underwent a major reorganisation of children's services in
   2006, creating a new Children & Young People's Services department
   under the leadership of Sheila Lock.

Arts

   The city plays host to an annual Pride parade ( Leicester Pride), a
   Caribbean Carnival (the largest in the UK outside London), the largest
   Diwali celebrations outside of India, the largest comedy festival in
   the UK and the Summer Sundae music festival.

   Arts venues in the city include:
     * The Haymarket Theatre
     * The Peepul Centre
     * The Phoenix Arts Centre
     * The De Montfort Hall.
     * The Little Theatre.
     * The City Gallery (one of the regions leading contemporary art
       galleries)

Sport

   The Sports Statue on Gallowtree Gate
   Enlarge
   The Sports Statue on Gallowtree Gate

   Sports teams include Leicester City F.C. (football), Leicester Tigers
   (rugby union), Leicester Riders (basketball), and the Leicestershire
   County Cricket Club. The city has also hosted British and World track
   cycling championships at its Saffron Lane velodrome. Leicester
   racecourse is located to the south of the city in Oadby. Leicester is
   now sometimes regarded (by its inhabitants at least) as the sporting
   capital of the UK.

Recent titles won by local teams

     * 1996 County Cricket Championship
     * 1997 Coca Cola League Cup, Pilkington Cup
     * 1998 County Cricket Championship,
     * 1999 Allied Dunbar Premiership
     * 2000 Worthington League Cup, Allied Dunbar Premiership
     * 2001 Allied Dunbar Premiership, Zurich Championship, Heineken Cup
     * 2002 Zurich Premiership, Heineken European Cup
     * 2004 Twenty20 Cup
     * 2006 Twenty20 Cup

   To celebrate the successes of 1997-98, the Leicester Mercury organised
   the placement of a statue portraying a cricketer, a footballer, and a
   rugby-player on Gallowtree Gate, not far from the Clock Tower at the
   heart of the city.

   Leicestershire County Cricket Club are the only team that have won the
   Twenty20 Cup twice.

   Leicester City played the last Football League Cup Final at the Old
   Wembley Stadium beating Tranmere 2-1.

   Leicester Tigers are the only side to have retained the Heinekin Cup,
   and also share the record for most English Championships won (6), with
   Bath

Areas

     * Aylestone
     * Beaumont Leys, Bede Island, Belgrave, Black Friars, Braunstone
       Park, Braunstone Frith
     * Charnwood, City Centre, Clarendon Park, Crown Hills
     * Dane Hills
     * Eyres Monsell, Evington, Evington Valley
     * Frog Island
     * Goodwood
     * Hamilton, Highfields
     * Horston Hill, Humberstone, Humberstone Garden City
     * Knighton
     * Mowmacre Hill
     * Nether Hall, New Humberstone, New Parks, Newfoundpool, North
       Evington, Northfields
     * Rowley Fields, Rushey Mead
     * Saffron Lane Estate, Southfields, South Knighton, Spinney Hills, St
       Matthew's, Stoneygate
     * Thurnby Lodge
     * West End, West Knighton, Western Park, Woodgate

Places of Interest and Landmarks

   The inside of Leicester Cathedral
   Enlarge
   The inside of Leicester Cathedral

   Parks: Leicester Botanic Gardens, Abbey Park, Victoria Park, Gorse Hill
   City Farm

   Industry: Abbey Pumping Station, National Space Centre, Great Central
   Railway.

   Places of Worship: Shree Jalaram Prarthana Mandal (Hindu temple) , Jain
   Centre , Leicester Cathedral, Masjid Umar (Mosque)

   Historic Buildings: Leicester Guildhall, Belgrave Hall, Jewry Wall

   Shopping: Haymarket Centre, The Shires, Fosse Park (just outside the
   city).

   Sport : Walkers Stadium – Leicester City FC, Welford Road – Leicester
   Tigers RFC, Grace Road – Leicestershire County Cricket Club, John
   Sanford Sports Centre, Saffron Lane Sports Centre.

Famous Leicesterians

   A Leicesterian is somebody who comes from the city of Leicester,
   England. Famous people born in Leicester, educated there, or otherwise
   associated with the city include:

Academia

     * Graham Barnfield (sociologist)
     * W. G. Hoskins, (landscape historian)
     * Howard Jones (criminologist)

The arts and entertainment

     * James Allen (author)
     * Richard Armitage (actor, North and South)
     * David Attenborough (broadcaster and naturalist)
     * Richard Attenborough (actor and director, Jurassic Park)
     * Julian Barnes (author)
     * Biddy Baxter (editor, Blue Peter)
     * Manish Bhasin (BBC sports presenter, Football Focus)
     * Jeremy Bulloch (actor,Star Wars)
     * Graham Chapman (comedian, Monty Python)
     * Roger Chapman (singer, Family)
     * Thomas Cooper (poet)
     * Cornershop (band)
     * John Deacon (bassist, Queen)
     * The Deep Freeze Mice (band)
     * Diesel Park West (band)
     * Betty Driver (singer and actor, Coronation Street)
     * Terri Dwyer (actor, Hollyoaks)
     * Duncan Fegredo (comic book artist)
     * Anne Fine (author)
     * Stephen Frears (film director, Dangerous Liasons)
     * Ernest Gimson (architect, craftsman)
     * Gaye Bykers on Acid (band)
     * Robert Gotobed (drummer, Wire)
     * Ric Grech (bassist, Family, Blind Faith)
     * Kevin Hewick (singer)
     * Engelbert Humperdinck (singer, Release Me, Misty Blue)
     * David Icke (sports reporter, conspiracy theorist)
     * John Illsley (bassist, Dire Straits)
     * Kasabian (band)
     * Tony Kaye (keyboard player, Yes)
     * Dominic Keating (actor, Star Trek: Enterprise)
     * Michael Kitchen (actor)
     * McKenzie Lee (pornography actor)
     * Jon Lord (organist, Deep Purple)
     * Bill Maynard (actor, Coronation Street, Heartbeat)
     * Mark Morrison (singer, Return of the Mack)
     * Parminder Nagra (actor, Bend It Like Beckham, ER)
     * David Neilson (actor, Coronation Street)
     * Kate O'Mara (actor, Howards' Way)
     * Joe Orton (playwright)
     * Helen Pearson (actress, Hollyoaks)
     * Po! (band)
     * Prolapse (band)
     * Phil Shaw (inventor of extreme ironing)
     * Showaddywaddy (band)
     * C. P. Snow (author)
     * Elle Milano (band)
     * DJ SS (DJ and producer)
     * Una Stubbs (actor, Till Death Us Do Part)
     * Jon Tickle (Leicester University graduate, Brainiac: Science Abuse
       presenter)
     * Sue Townsend (author, Adrian Mole books)
     * John "Charlie" Whitney (guitarist, Family)
     * Colin Wilson (author)
     * Mark Wingett (actor, The Bill)
     * Alastair Yates (journalist, newsreader)

Business

     * Thomas Cook (travel agent)
     * Thomas White (merchant, philanthropist)
     * William Inman (shipping company owner)
     * William Wyggeston (merchant, philanthropist)

Politics

     * Alastair Campbell (journalist and political advisor)
     * Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester (founder of the English
       parliament)
     * Lady Jane Grey ("Queen for nine days")
     * Greville Janner (MP, barrister)

Religion

     * William Carey (missionary and translator)
     * George Fox (founder of the Religious Society of Friends)

Science

     * Henry Bates (naturalist and explorer)
     * Sir Alec Jeffreys ( geneticist and developer of genetic
       fingerprinting)(DNA)
     * Benjamin Ward Richardson (physician)

Sport

     * Emile Heskey (England international footballer)
     * Martin Johnson (Rugby player, Leicester and England's World-Cup
       winning Captain)
     * Chris Kirkland (England international footballer)
     * Gary Lineker (England international footballer, World Cup 1986
       Golden Boot Winner, sports presenter)
     * Michael Robinson (footballer, Spanish TV presenter)
     * Mark Selby, (snooker player and current Eight Ball Pool world
       champion)
     * Peter Shilton (Englands most capped footballer)
     * Ollie Smith (Rugby Union International)
     * Conor Smyth (Guinness Book of Records Egg & Spoon Race Champion)
     * Willie Thorne (snooker player and commentator)

Leicester Firsts

     * First BBC local radio station
     * First Space Shuttle Simulator outside USA
     * First automatic multi-storey carpark in Europe
     * First Tesco outside of London
     * First European Environment City
     * First roundabout in the UK
     * First criminal conviction using Genetic fingerprint as evidence.
     * First place to have Traffic Wardens

Twinning

   Leicester is twinned with:
  * People's Republic of China - Chongqing, China
  * Germany - Krefeld, Germany
  * Nicaragua - Masaya, Nicaragua

                                                   * India - Rajkot, India
                                                   * France - Strasbourg, France

Closest Cities & Towns

     * Loughborough - 18 km (11.5 miles)
     * Hinckley - 21 km (13 miles)
     * Market Harborough - 25 km (16 miles)
     * Melton Mowbray - 27 km (17 miles)
     * Rugby - 38 km (24 miles)
     * Coventry - 40 km (25 miles)
     * Nottingham - 42 km (26 miles)
     * Derby - 51 km (32 miles)
     * Northampton - 61 km (38 miles)
     * Peterborough - 66 km (41 miles)
     * Birmingham - 71 km (44 miles)
     * Milton Keynes - 90 km (56 miles)
     * Sheffield - 120 km (75 miles)
     * London - 162 km (101 miles)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leicester"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
