   #copyright

Lemon balm

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Plants

                  iLemon Balm
   Lemon Balm
   Lemon Balm
           Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Plantae
   Division: Magnoliophyta
   Class:    Magnoliopsida
   Order:    Lamiales
   Family:   Lamiaceae
   Genus:    Melissa
   Species:  M. officinalis

                                Binomial name

   Melissa officinalis
   Linnaeus

   Lemon Balm (Melissa officinalis), not to be confused with Bee Balm,
   Monarda species, is a perennial herb in the mint family Lamiaceae,
   native to southern Europe and the Mediterranean region.

   It grows to 70-150 cm tall. The leaves have a gentle lemon scent,
   related to mint. At the end of the summer, little white flowers full of
   nectar appear. These attract bees, hence the genus name Melissa ( Greek
   for 'honey bee'). Its flavour comes from the terpenes citronellal,
   citronellol, citral, and geraniol.

Cultivation and Use

Cultivation

   This herb can be easy to cultivate in United States Department of
   Agriculture Plant Hardiness Zones 4 to 9. In zone 4, it needs winter
   mulch and a well-drained sandy soil to survive. In zone 7, it can be
   harvested at least until the end of November. It is moderately
   shade-tolerant, much more so than most herbs. In dry climates, it grows
   best in partial shade.

   Lemon Balm grows in clumps and spreads vegetatively as well as by seed.
   In mild temperate zones, the stems of the plant die off at the start of
   the winter, but shoot up again in spring. It can be easily grown from
   stem cuttings rooted in water, or from seeds. Under ideal conditions,
   it will seed itself prolifically and can become a nuisance in gardens.

Food & Drink

   It is used as a flavouring in tisane and ice cream, but its most common
   use is to make herbal teas. It makes a particularly refreshing iced
   tea, especially when mixed with other herbs such as spearmint. It is
   also often paired with fruit dishes or candies.

   Lemon balm essential oil is very popular in aromatherapy. The essential
   oil is commonly co-distilled with lemon oil, citronella oil, or other
   oils.

Medicinal Uses

   The crushed leaves, when rubbed on the skin, are used as a repellant
   for mosquitos.

   Lemon Balm is also used medicinally as a herbal tea, or in extract
   form. It is claimed to have antibacterial, antiviral properties, and it
   is also used as a mild sedative or calming agent. At least one study
   has found it to be effective at reducing stress, although the study's
   authors call for further research. Its antibacterial properties have
   also been demonstrated scientifically, although they are markedly
   weaker than those from a number of other plants studied.

Gallery

   Leaves
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lemon_balm"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
