   #copyright

Liechtenstein

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; European
Countries

                    Fürstentum Liechtenstein
   Principality of Liechtenstein

   Flag of Liechtenstein Coat of arms of Liechtenstein
   Flag                  Coat of arms
   Motto: none
   Anthem: Oben am jungen Rhein
   ("High Above the Young Rhine")
   Location of Liechtenstein
          Capital        Vaduz
                         47°08′N 9°30′E
       Largest city      Schaan
    Official languages   German
   Government            Constitutional monarchy (Principality)
    - Prince             Hans-Adam II
    - Regent             Alois
    - Head of Government Otmar Hasler
       Independence
    - Date               1806 ( Treaty of Pressburg)
                              Area
    - Total              160 km² ( 215th)
                         62 sq mi
    - Water (%)          negligible
                           Population
    - July 2006 estimate 33 987 ( 211th)
    - 2000 census        33,307
    - Density            210/km² ( 52nd)
                         544/sq mi
        GDP ( PPP)       2006 estimate
    - Total              $2,850 million ( 184)
    - Per capita         $83,700 ( unranked)
        HDI  (2003)      n/a (n/a) ( unranked)
         Currency        Swiss franc ( CHF)
         Time zone       CET ( UTC+1)
    - Summer ( DST)      CEST ( UTC+2)
       Internet TLD      .li
       Calling code      +423^1
   ^1 Used Swiss area code 41 75 until 1999.

   The Principality of Liechtenstein (German: Fürstentum Liechtenstein) is
   a small, doubly landlocked country in Central Europe, bordered by
   Switzerland to its west and by Austria to its east. Mountainous, it is
   a winter sports resort, though it is perhaps best-known as a tax haven.
   Despite this, it is not heavily urbanized (like the Principality of
   Monaco or Gibraltar) but many cultivated fields and little farms
   characterize its landscape both in the north (Unterland) and in the
   south (Oberland). It is the smallest German-speaking country in the
   world.

History

   At one time, the territory of Liechtenstein formed a part (albeit a
   diminutive one) of the ancient Roman province of Raetia. For centuries
   this territory, geographically removed from European strategic
   interests, had little impact on the tide of European history. Prior to
   the reign of its current dynasty, the region was enfiefed to a line of
   the counts of Hohenems.

   The Liechtenstein dynasty, from which the Principality takes its name
   (rather than vice-versa), comes from Castle Liechtenstein in faraway
   Lower Austria, which the family possessed from at least 1140 to the
   13th century, and from 1807 onwards. Through the centuries, the dynasty
   acquired vast swathes of land, predominantly in Moravia, Lower Austria,
   Silesia and Styria, though in all cases, these territories were held in
   fief under other more senior feudal lords, particularly under various
   lines of the Habsburg family, to whom several Liechtenstein princes
   served as close advisors. Thus, and without any territory held directly
   under the Imperial throne, the Liechtenstein dynasty was unable to meet
   a primary requirement to qualify for a seat in the Imperial diet, the
   Reichstag.

   The family yearned greatly for the added power which a seat in the
   Imperial government would garner, and therefore searched for lands to
   acquire which would be unmittelbar or held without any feudal personage
   other than the Holy Roman Emperor himself having rights on the land.
   After some time, the family was able to arrange the purchase of the
   minuscule Herrschaft ("Lordship") of Schellenberg and countship of
   Vaduz (in 1699 and 1712 respectively) from the Hohenems. Tiny
   Schellenberg and Vaduz possessed exactly the political status required,
   no feudal lord other than their comital sovereign and the suzerain
   Emperor.

   Thereby, on January 23, 1719, after purchase had been duly made,
   Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor decreed Vaduz and Schellenberg were
   united, and raised to the dignity of Fürstentum (principality) with the
   name "Liechtenstein" in honour of "[his] true servant, Anton Florian of
   Liechtenstein". It is on this date that Liechtenstein became a
   sovereign member state of the Holy Roman Empire. Ironically, but as
   testament to the pure political expediency of the purchases, the
   Princes of Liechtenstein did not set foot in their new principality for
   several decades.
   Schloss Vaduz, overlooking the capital, is still home to the Princes of
   Liechtenstein.
   Enlarge
   Schloss Vaduz, overlooking the capital, is still home to the Princes of
   Liechtenstein.

   In 1806, most of the Holy Roman Empire was invaded by Napoleon I of the
   First French Empire. This event had broad consequences for
   Liechtenstein: imperial legal and political mechanisms broke down,
   while Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor abdicated the imperial throne: the
   Empire itself dissolved. As a result, Liechtenstein ceased to have any
   obligations to any feudal lord beyond its borders. Modern publications
   generally (although incorrectly) attribute Liechtenstein's sovereignty
   to these events. In reality, its prince merely became suzerain as well
   as remaining sovereign lord. From 25 July 1806 when the Confederation
   of the Rhine was founded, the prince of Liechtenstein was a member, in
   fact a vassal of its hegemon styled protector, French Emperor Napoleon
   I Bonaparte, until the dissolution of the Confederation on 19 October
   1813.

   Soon after, Liechtenstein joined the German Confederation ( 20 June
   1815 – 24 August 1866, presided by the Emperor of Austria).

   Until the end of World War I, Liechtenstein was closely tied first to
   the Austrian Empire and then to Austria-Hungary. However, the economic
   devastation caused by WWI forced the country to conclude a customs and
   monetary union with its other neighbour, Switzerland. The Army was
   disbanded already in 1868, out of financial considerations. At the time
   of the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, it was argued that
   Liechteinstein as a fief of the Holy Roman Empire (supposedly still
   incarnated in Liechtensteiner eyes at an abstract level in the person
   of the then-destitutued Austro-Hungarian Emperor, despite its formal
   dissolution in 1806) was no longer bound to Austria, then emerging as
   an independent state which did not consider itself as the legal
   successor to the Empire. Liechtenstein is thus the last independent
   state in Europe which can claim an element of continuity from the Holy
   Roman Empire.
   The Prince of Liechtenstein owns vineyards in Vaduz (in the
   foreground).
   Enlarge
   The Prince of Liechtenstein owns vineyards in Vaduz (in the
   foreground).

   During World War II, Liechtenstein remained neutral, while family
   treasures within the war zone were brought to Liechtenstein (and
   London) for safekeeping. At the close of the conflict, Czechoslovakia
   and Poland, acting to seize what they considered to be German
   possessions, expropriated the entirety of the Liechtenstein dynasty's
   hereditary lands and possessions in Bohemia, Moravia and Silesia — the
   Princes of Liechtenstein lived in Vienna until the Anschluss of 1938.
   The expropriations (subject to modern legal dispute at the World Court)
   included over 1,600 square kilometres (600  sq. mi) of agricultural and
   forest land, including also several family castles and palaces. It is
   thus little wonder that during the decades of the Cold War, citizens of
   Liechtenstein were forbidden by Czechoslovakia from even entering that
   country. Liechtenstein gave asylum to approximately 500 Russian
   Soldiers at the close of World War II; this is depicted in a monument
   at the border town of Hinterschellenberg. See Russian Monument
   Liechtenstein, and is marked on the country's tourist map.

   In dire financial straits following the war, the Liechtenstein dynasty
   often resorted to selling family artistic treasures, including for
   instance the priceless portrait " Ginevra de' Benci" by Leonardo da
   Vinci, which was purchased by the National Gallery of Art of the United
   States in 1967. However, the economic condition of Liechtenstein
   improved rapidly. During the decades following, Liechtenstein
   prospered, its economy modernizing with the advantage of low corporate
   tax rates which drew many companies to the country.

   The Prince of Liechtenstein is the world's 5th wealthiest
   head-of-state, with an estimated wealth of 4 billion dollars. The
   country's population enjoys one of the world's highest standards of
   living.

Politics

Administrative divisions

Geography

   Satellite image of Liechtenstein.
   Enlarge
   Satellite image of Liechtenstein.

   Liechtenstein is situated in the Upper Rhine valley of the European
   Alps. The entire western border of Liechtenstein is formed by the
   river. Measured north to south, the country is only about 15 miles (24
   km) long. In its east, Liechtenstein rises to higher altitudes; its
   highest point, the Grauspitz, reaches 2,599 metres (8,527  ft). Despite
   its alpine location, prevailing southerly winds make the climate of
   Liechtenstein rather mild. In winter, the mountain slopes are well
   suited to winter sports.

   Liechtenstein is one of only two doubly landlocked countries in the
   world; i.e., a landlocked country surrounded by other landlocked
   countries. The other is Uzbekistan. It is the only country with a
   predominantly German-speaking population that does not share a border
   with the Federal Republic of Germany.

Economy

   Looking northward at Vaduz city-centre.
   Enlarge
   Looking northward at Vaduz city-centre.

   Despite its small geographic area and limited natural resources,
   Liechtenstein is currently the only country in the world with more
   registered companies than citizens, it has developed into a prosperous,
   highly industrialized, free-enterprise economy, and boasts a financial
   service sector and also living standard which compare favourably to
   those of the urban areas of Liechtenstein's large European neighbours.
   Advantageously low business taxes — the maximum tax rate is 18% — as
   well as easy Rules of Incorporation have induced about 73,700 holding
   (or so-called 'letter box') companies to establish nominal offices in
   Liechtenstein. Such processes provide about 30% of Liechtenstein's
   state revenue.

   Recently, Liechtenstein has shown strong determination to dispel the
   country's unhelpful image as a centre for international
   money-laundering.

   Liechtenstein participates in a customs union with Switzerland and
   employs the Swiss franc as national currency. The country imports more
   than 90% of its energy requirements. Liechtenstein has been a member of
   the European Economic Area (an organization serving as a bridge between
   the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and the European Union)
   since May 1995. The government is working to harmonize its economic
   policies with those of an integrated Europe. Since 2002,
   Liechtenstein's rate of unemployment has doubled, although it stood at
   only 2.2% in the third quarter of 2004. Currently, there is only one
   hospital in Liechtenstein, the Liechtensteinisches Landesspital in
   Vaduz. The GDP (PPP) is $1.786 billion and $54,000 per person.

   Liechtenstein's most recognizable international company, and largest
   employer is Hilti, a manufacturer of concrete fastening systems.
   Liechtenstein is also the home of the Curta calculator.

Demographics

   Liechtenstein is the fourth smallest country of Europe, after the
   Vatican City, Monaco and San Marino. Its population is primarily ethnic
   Alemannic, though its resident population is approximately one third
   foreign-born, primarily Germans from the Federal Republic of Germany,
   Austria, and the Swiss Confederation, other ( Latin) Swiss, Italians
   and Turks. Foreigners make up two-thirds of the country's workforce.
   Nationals are reffered to by the plural: Liechtensteiners.

   The official language is German; most speak Alemannic, a highly
   divergent dialect of German (see Middle High German). About 76% of the
   population adhere to the Roman Catholic faith, while about 7% are
   Protestant, the remaining 17% are agnostic, atheist or belonging to one
   of the country's minority religions like Islam, Hinduism and Judaism.

   On November 27, 2005, Liechtenstein voters rejected an initiative that
   would prohibit abortion, artificial birth control, and living wills in
   the principality. Instead, a government-sponsored counterproposal,
   relativizing differences and still allowing them to be prohibited
   phenomena, was ratified with a scarce majority. The anti-abortion
   (pro-life) initiative was supported by Roman Catholic Archbishop
   Wolfgang Haas. Hereditary Prince Alois was initially sympathetic to the
   anti-abortion proposal, but became neutral during the run-up to the
   vote.

Transport

   There are about 250 kilometres (155  mi) of paved roadway within
   Liechtenstein, and 9.5 kilometres (5.9 mi) of railway. The country's
   rails are administered by the Austrian Federal Railways as part of the
   route between Feldkirch, Austria, and Buchs SG, Switzerland. Four
   stations in Liechtenstein, including Schaan-Vaduz, Forst Hilti,
   Nendeln, and Schaanwald, are served by an irregular stopping-train
   service running between Feldkirch and Buchs. While EuroCity and other
   long distance international trains also make use of the route, these do
   not call at Liechtenstein stations. Liechtenstein Bus is a subsidiary
   of the Swiss Postbus system, and connects to the Swiss bus network at
   Buchs SG and at Sargans as well as the Austrian city of Feldkirch.

Culture

   Due to Liechtenstein's small size, the country has been strongly
   affected by external cultural influences, most notably those
   originating in the southern German-speaking areas of Europe, including
   Austria, Bavaria, Switzerland, and the Tyrol. The Historical Society of
   the Principality of Liechtenstein plays a role in preserving the
   culture and history of the country.

Sport

   Liechtenstein football teams play in the Swiss football leagues. The
   Liechtenstein Cup allows access to one Liechtenstein team each year in
   the UEFA Cup; FC Vaduz, a team playing in the Swiss Challenge League
   (i.e. the second level of Swiss football) is the most successful team
   in the Cup, and scored their greatest success in the European Cup
   Winners' Cup in 1996 when they defeated the Latvian team FC
   Universitate Riga by 1–1 and 4–2, to go on to a lucrative fixture
   against Paris St Germain, which they lost 0–4 and 0–3.

   The Liechtenstein national football team has traditionally been
   regarded as an easy target for any team drawn against them, a fact that
   served as the basis for a book about Liechtenstein's unsuccessful
   qualifying campaign for the 2002 World Cup by British author Charlie
   Connelly. In one surprising week during autumn 2004, however, the team
   managed a 2–2 draw with Portugal, which only a few months earlier had
   been the losing finalists in the European Championships. Four days
   later, the Liechtenstein team travelled to Luxembourg where they
   defeated the home team by 4 goals to 0 in a 2006 World Cup qualifying
   match. They are still considered by many to be an easier touch than
   most, however, they have been steadily improving over the last few
   years, and are now considered the best of the European "minnows".

   As an alpine country, the main opportunity for Liechtensteiners to
   excel is in winter sports such as downhill skiing: Hanni Wenzel won two
   gold medals in the 1980 Winter Olympics. With nine medals overall (all
   in alpine skiing), Liechtenstein has won more Olympic medals per capita
   than any other nation. The country's single ski area is Malbun.

   Vaduz, Liechtenstein is considering a bid for either the 2018 Winter
   Olympics or 2022 Winter Olympics

Neighbouring countries

   Flag of Switzerland  Switzerland North Flag of Austria  Austria
   West    Flag of Liechtenstein  Liechtenstein     East
   South
   Flag of Switzerland  Switzerland
                                 Countries of Europe
   Albania ·

   Andorra · Armenia^1 · Austria · Azerbaijan^2 · Belarus · Belgium ·
   Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus^1 · Czech Republic
   · Denmark · Estonia · Finland · France · Georgia^2 · Germany · Greece ·
   Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy · Kazakhstan^2 · Latvia ·
   Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Republic of Macedonia · Malta
   · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands · Norway · Poland ·
   Portugal · Romania · Russia^2 · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia ·
   Slovenia · Spain · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey^2 · Ukraine · United
   Kingdom · Vatican City

   (1) Entirely on another continent but having socio-political
   connections with Europe. (2) Has significant territory in Asia.

   European Free Trade Association (EFTA) Flag of Iceland   Iceland | Flag
    of Liechtenstein   Liechtenstein | Flag of Norway   Norway | Flag of
                          Switzerland   Switzerland

   Monarchies of the World
   African: Lesotho • Morocco (⁂) • Swaziland (*)

   Asian: Bahrain (⁂) • Bhutan (*) • Brunei (*) • Cambodia (!) • Japan •
   Jordan (⁂) • Kuwait (⁂) • Malaysia ( !) • Nepal • Oman (*) • Qatar (*)
   • Saudi Arabia (*) • Thailand • Tonga • United Arab Emirates ( !)

   Commonwealth Realms: Antigua and Barbuda • Australia • Bahamas •
   Barbados • Belize • Canada • Grenada • Jamaica • New Zealand • Papua
   New Guinea • Saint Kitts and Nevis • Saint Lucia • Saint Vincent and
   the Grenadines • Solomon Islands • Tuvalu • United Kingdom

   Other European monarchies (including the EU): Andorra ( !) • Belgium •
   Denmark • Liechtenstein (⁂) • Luxembourg • Monaco (⁂) • Netherlands •
   Norway • Spain • Sweden • Vatican City ( Holy See) (*!)

   * absolute monarchy, ⁂ semi-constitutional monarchy, ! electoral
   monarchy
                  Germanic-speaking nations and regions in Europe
   Scandinavian: Flag of Åland  Åland Islands • Flag of Denmark  Denmark •
   Flag of Faroe Islands  Faroe Islands • Flag of Iceland  Iceland • Flag
   of Norway  Norway • Flag of Sweden  Sweden

   German/ Franconian: Flag of Austria  Austria • Flag of Belgium  Belgium
   • Flag of Germany  Germany • Flag of Liechtenstein  Liechtenstein •
   Flag of Luxembourg  Luxembourg • Flag of Netherlands  Netherlands •
   Flag of Switzerland  Switzerland

   Anglo-Frisian: Flag of Republic of Ireland  Ireland • Flag of Friesland
     Friesland • Flag of United Kingdom  United Kingdom • Gibraltar
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liechtenstein"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
