   #copyright

Lilongwe

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography

   Location of Lilongwe in Malawi

   Lilongwe, estimated population 597,619 (2003 census), is the capital of
   Malawi. It lies in the country's central region, on the Lilongwe river,
   near the border of Malawi, Mozambique, and Zambia, and on the main
   north-south highway of Malawi, the M1. Lilongwe is located at 13°59′S
   33°47′E (-13.98333, 33.78333).

History

   The city started life as a small village on the banks of the Lilongwe
   river, and became a British colonial administrative centre at the
   beginning of the 20th century. Due to its location on the main
   north-south route through the country and the road to Northern Rhodesia
   (now Zambia), Lilongwe became the 2nd largest city in Malawi. In 1974,
   the capital of the country was formally moved from Zomba (the third
   largest city today in Malawi) to Lilongwe. Although, Lilongwe is the
   official capital of Malawi and has grown immensely since 1974, most
   commercial activity takes place in Malawi's largest city, Blantyre.
   Recently, as part of political restructuring, the parliament has been
   shifted to Lilongwe and all parliament members are required to spend
   time in the new capital. Lilongwe is now the political centre of
   Malawi, but Blantyre remains the Economic capital.

General

   As compared to other African capitals, Lilongwe is politically stable,
   safe, and quiet. Many European and South African expatriates live in
   Lilongwe, and many NGOs (Care International, Plan International,
   Concern, UNHCR, UNFAO, WFP, Population Services International, The UNC
   Project, World Camp), international aid organizations ( Peace Corps,
   USAID, DFID), and international corporations, particularly
   tobacco-related firms, operate out of Lilongwe. As a result, most
   western visitors will find the city to be accommodating and friendly.
   Many coffee shops, cafes, bars, clubs, restaurants, and even a casino
   are located in Lilongwe. In Lilongwe, as opposed to rural Malawi, one
   can live, work, or vacation in a manner that most westerners would
   consider typical, if not luxurious.

   However, most of Lilongwe's Malawian citizens live on just a few
   dollars a day and many are unemployed. The population of Lilongwe has
   grown as villagers, including young orphaned children, from the
   surrounding rural areas have relocated to the capital in search of
   often non-existent jobs and the unattainable quality of life enjoyed by
   government officials, NGO and other international workers, and
   expatriates. Despite the highly visible class differences, most of the
   cities residents go about their lives in relative harmony. Street crime
   is uncommon, but begging and street hustling are not.

   During the rainy season, between October and April, Lilongwe is muddy,
   humid, and hot. During the other months of the year, Lilongwe is dry
   and dusty. June and July are particularly cold and windy months.

   Lilongwe is a hot-spot for the HIV/AIDS epidemic in Malawi. It is
   estimated that up to 20% of the urban population is HIV positive.
   Frighteningly, the Malawi National AIDS Commission reports that
   professionals, especially teachers and agricultural extension agents -
   many of whom travel between urban centers and rural villages, are dying
   faster than they can be replaced. Also, the central region of Malawi is
   experiencing extreme deforestation. It is feared that rural citizens
   will have no access to wood for cooking fires, heating fires, and
   building materials by 2015. Problems with HIV/AIDS and deforestation
   are interrelated to the rapid population growth the city is currently
   experiencing.

Areas

   The city has many districts known as Areas. Areas are numbered, and
   range from one to fifty or more as the city grows - City Centre not
   being a numbered Area. The Areas are not necessarily consecutively
   numbered from one area to another.

   Some Notable Areas are:
     * City Centre is by far the most modern, developed area of Lilongwe.
       Many banks (Stanbic - or Standard Chartered, National Bank of
       Malawi, the Reserve Bank of Malawi), diplomatic missions, exclusive
       hotels ( Le Meridien Capital Hotel), airline offices (including
       South African Airlines, Ethiopian Airlines, British Airways, Kenya
       Airways) and international corporate offices are located in City
       Centre.
     * Area 2: Old Town (North of A1) - Closest to the city centre;
       thriving commercial district, frequented primarily by locals;
       clothing, local food, western-style groceries, car parts, building
       supplies, bicycles/bicycle accessories are available here; home to
       Lilongwe's main local market, two major mosques, and a sprawling
       mini-bus station.
     * Area 3: Old Town (West of A1) - West bank of the Lilongwe river;
       large, wealthy residential neighborhoods, expatriate bars, nice
       hotels, western style shopping and restaurants, private expatriate
       clinics (Moyo Wathanzi on Likuni Road - Dr. Huber of Amsterdam).
     * Area 47: Home to African Bible College, and its dependable,
       inexpensive missionary clinic which is typically staffed by
       American doctors.
     * While the areas mentioned above are quite wealthy, safe, and
       modern, many citizens of Lilongwe live in
       sub-standard/non-permanent housing in a variety of Areas, often
       without electricity or running water.

Transport

   Lilongwe is served by Malawi Railways and Shire Bus Lines, and local
   buses and minibuses run between Old Town, City Centre, Kamuzu
   International Airport, and other urban centers, including Mzuzu and
   Blantyre. Taxis are available from hotels and a taxi rank on
   Presidential Way, North of City Centre Shopping Centre. Most major
   urban roads are severely congested, and most Malawians prefer, or are
   economically limited to, walking or travel by bicycle. Kamuzu
   International Airport, located about 35 km north of Lilongwe in the
   suburb of Lumdazi, offers local turbo-prop flights and flights on a
   number of major airlines to South Africa, Kenya, Dubai, and Ethiopia.

Shopping

   The main western-style shopping area is around Shoprite and the Nico
   Centre in Area 3, on the west bank of the Lilongwe river in Old Town. A
   newer, similar shopping center is located near the Mchinji round-about
   across from the Seven Eleven filling station - the Crossroads Shopping
   Centre. Several internet cafes are located in and around these two
   shopping centres. Gifts and crafts can be bought from the post office
   craft market directly opposite the Nico Centre. To get a fair deal in
   the craft market, you must bargain hard. Pharmacies, bureau de changes
   and banks (including Stanbic and Malawi National Bank) are located
   throughout the city. ATM's which accept VISA cards are available at the
   banks mentioned above in City Centre and Area 3. It should be noted
   that almost any necessity can be purchased in Lilongwe, and many
   back-packers and overland travellers stop in Lilongwe to stock-up and
   enjoy city life for a few days.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lilongwe"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
