   #copyright

Lima

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Central & South American
Geography

                                  Lima
                    Location in Perú           Coat of Arms
                                                  City Flag
                       City nickname La Ciudad de los Reyes

                                                       (City of the Kings)
                             Founded       January 18, 1535
                         Government:
                            - Region      Lima Metropolitan
                          - Province                   Lima
                             - Mayor  Luis Castañeda Lossio
                               Area:
                             - Total              804.3 km²
                      - Subdivisions           30 districts
               - Latitude/ Longitude              12°2.6'S
                                                   77°1.7'W
                         Population:
                             - Total
                         -Metro Area
                           - Density    6,872,766
                                                  8,187,398
                                                  8,544 km²
                             Demonym               limeño/a
                   City calling code                      1
                           Time zone             UTC/ GMT-5
                    Official website     www.munlima.gob.pe

   Lima is the capital and largest city in Peru, as well as the capital of
   Lima Province. It is the cultural, industrial, financial, and transport
   hub of the country. The city is located in an area encompassing the
   valleys of the Chillón, Rímac and Lurín rivers. It lies on a desertic
   coast adjacent to the bay in the Pacific Ocean where its port was built
   and named Callao.

   Founded by Spanish conquistador Francisco Pizarro, Lima is also known
   as the City of Kings. For more than three centuries, Lima was the most
   important city and the greatest metropolis in South America. More than
   four centuries have passed since its founding as a Spanish city, and
   Lima has become an expression of Peru's heritage, with nearly one-third
   of the nation's population living in its metropolitan area.

   While there is no formal administrative definition for the city of
   Lima, it is generally considered to be comprised of the central 30 out
   of the 43 districts of Lima province, corresponding roughly to the
   urban area centered on the historic Cercado de Lima district. The city
   serves as the core of the Lima Metropolitan Area, one of the ten
   largest metropolitan areas in the Americas.

   San Francisco de Asís Church
   Enlarge
   San Francisco de Asís Church

   The city was founded by conquistador Francisco Pizarro on January 18,
   1535, naming it Tres Veces Coronada Ciudad de los Reyes as the location
   was decided at Epiphany, the January 6. Lima, its original name,
   however persisted. It is uncertain where the name originated, but it is
   thought that it derives from the Aymara word lima-limaq, (yellow
   flower) or from Quechuan rimaq (talking). In the oldest Spanish maps of
   Peru, both Lima and Ciudad de los Reyes can be seen together as the
   names of the city. The river that feeds Lima is still known to this day
   as "Rimac" which is thought to be the origin of the city's name, the
   "valley of the Rimac". The river is also nicknamed the "Talking river"
   (Río Hablador in Spanish).

   Lima became the most important city in the Spanish Viceroyalty of Peru,
   which encompassed nearly all of Spain's possessions in South America
   during the colonial era (mid 1500s to early 1800s).

   In 1746, many important and monumental buildings were damaged and or
   destroyed (later repaired) in an earthquake. The City of Kings'
   cultural patrimony and incomparable, beautiful architecture remained
   prevalent. Its architectural and political importance in Latin America
   were equalled only by Mexico City.

   In 1996, the Japanese embassy hostage crisis took place in Lima, an
   affair which received global media attention. It ended on April 22,
   1997 when Peruvian Armed Forces commandos stormed the building by
   carrying out a frontal daytime attack after tunneling underground into
   the embassy to rescue the seventy-two hostages. One hostage died of
   medical complications, two soldiers.

Demographics

   1888 German map of Lima and Callao
   Enlarge
   1888 German map of Lima and Callao

   The Lima Metropolis ranks among Latin America's largest and densest
   urban concentrations, with estimated populations (as of 2005) of 6.9
   million for the urban area, 7.4 million for the entire province, and
   8.2 million for the metropolitan area. The population of Lima features
   a very complex mix of racial and ethnic groups. Traditionally,
   Mestizos, Peruvians of mixed Spanish and Amerindian descent, have been
   the largest contingent, making up much of the middle class. However,
   political and economic instability of Peru during the latter half of
   the twentieth century created unprecedented poverty and violence in the
   towns of the countryside Andean or highlands, forcing hundreds of
   thousands of peasants of full-blooded Amerindian descendants to migrate
   to Lima, thus greatly augmenting the Lima's population. Unlike other
   ethnic groups that live in Lima and only speak Spanish, most of the
   peasant population that migrated to Lima speak primarily Quechua or
   Aymara before Spanish, rather than Spanish. While a number of
   Amerindians eventually attain middle class status, others still live in
   shantytowns, locally known as pueblos jóvenes (young towns). These
   areas often lack such basic services as electricity and running water.
   It is expedcted, that over the next ten years, the population of these
   shantytowns will diminsh to 8% of the population of Lima. Europeans,
   the economically dominant segment of the population, are mostly of
   Spanish descent, but there are significant numbers of Italians, Germans
   and others. Afro-Peruvians, initially brought to the region as slaves,
   are yet another important part of the city's ethnic quilt. Finally,
   during the 20th century, Lima also gained signicant Asian communities,
   particularly of Japanese and Chinese ancestry. The former constitute
   the largest Japanese concentration in South America after São Paulo.

   The racial demographics for the city of Lima are:
     * 50% Mestizo (mixed European and Ameridian ancestry)
     * 29% Amerindian
          + 85% Quechua
          + 15% Aymara
     * 15% White
          + 65% Spanish
          + 35% Italian, German, or other European ancestry
     * 3% Black
     * 3% Asian (Mainly from Japanese and Chinese descent)

Geography

Physical setting

   Lima metropolitan area from space, March 2005
   Enlarge
   Lima metropolitan area from space, March 2005

   The city of Lima (urban area) covers about 800 km². It is located on
   mostly flat terrain in the Peruvian coastal plain, within the valleys
   of the Chillón, Rímac and Lurín rivers. The city slopes gently from the
   shores of the Pacific Ocean into valleys and mountain slopes located as
   high as 500 mASL. As in the rest of the region, the extreme dryness of
   the climate means that away from the river valleys and irrigated areas
   the local terrain is absolutely barren of vegetation. During extreme El
   Ninos or unusually wet winters, patchy short vegetation may develop in
   some of the mountains located immediately to the east of the city as
   part of the coastal "lomas" ecosystem, but these green slopes are not
   evident, since they may be hidden within the grayish barren landscape.

Climate

   Lima's climate is quite mild, despite being located in the Tropics. The
   average low temperatures range from 58°F (14°C) to 68°F (20°C) and the
   highs average around 78°F, with 32°C (90°F) considered extremely high.
   While these temperatures are generally thought of as mild and
   comfortable in other places, because of the narrow range on the
   thermometer, the locals think of these lower temperatures as very cold
   and the warmer temperatures as very hot.

   Relative humidity is very high, and produces brief morning fog from
   December to June and persistent low clouds from May to November. Sunny,
   moist and warm summers (Dec-Apr) are followed by cloudy, damp and cool
   winters (Jun-Oct). Rainfall is almost unknown. The yearly average of
   0.7cm (0.3in) reported at the airport is the lowest of any large
   metropolitan area in the world. Inland locations receive 1 to 6 cm of
   rainfall, which accumulates mainly during the winter months. Summer
   rain occurs in the form of isolated light and brief afternoon or
   evening events, leftover from afternoon storms that generate over the
   Andes. The peak of the 'rainy season,' which really does not apply,
   occurs during winter when late-night/morning drizzle events (locally
   called 'garúa','llovizna' or 'camanchaca') become frequent. All these
   climatic phenomena arise from the combination of semi-permanent coastal
   upwelling and the presence of the cold Humboldt Current just offshore.

Districts and neighborhoods

   Lima city proper is generally considered to be comprised of the
   densely-populated, thirty central districts of Lima Province. Each
   district is headed by a mayor, although the Metropolitan Lima Municipal
   Council (Municipalidad Metropolitana de Lima), led by the mayor of
   Lima, also has authority in these districts, including the thirteen
   outer districts of Lima province.

   The historical downtown of the city is located in the Lima District,
   which is locally known as Cercado de Lima. This is where most vestiges
   of Lima's colonial heyday remain, as well as the Presidential Palace
   and the Metropolitan Lima Municipal Council.

   The neighborhoods of Miraflores and San Isidro are among the wealthiest
   in the city with most of Lima's upscale hotels and other tourist
   destinations located in them. The latter district is also an important
   financial centre that is nowadays far more important in Lima's daily
   business life than the Cercado. The districts of La Molina, San Borja
   and Santiago de Surco offer quieter, residential areas.

   Barranco, south of Miraflores, is known as a bohemian neighbourhood and
   has earned recognition for its population of writers and intellectuals.
   Miraflores aerial view.
   Enlarge
   Miraflores aerial view.
   Miraflores Coast line.
   Enlarge
   Miraflores Coast line.

   The most populous districts of Lima lie in the north and south ends of
   the city. Their population is comprised principally of immigrants from
   other regions of Peru. Many of them are poor people of indigenous
   origin who arrived during the mid and late twentieth century after
   being displaced by terrorism, agrarian crises, and general economic
   frustration. These peasants invaded the vast desert areas and hillsides
   in the districts of the Cono Norte and Cono Sur areas, populating new
   slums known as pueblos jóvenes. The majority of the people are poor and
   live in slums with no electricity and running water.

   In recent years, however, these populous districts and the people
   living in there are becoming wealthier at a slow pace, and the amount
   of business operations being performed in there has steadily increased.
   It is common knowledge that if anybody wants to make money, the
   northern districts are the place to do it.

Education

Universities

   The city has the largest concentration of higher-education institutions
   in the country. The National University of San Marcos, founded on May
   12, 1551 during Spanish colonial regime is the oldest continuously
   functioning university in the Americas and considered by many Peruvians
   "La decana" in the sense of " dean of universities" across Peru.

   The Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú is the oldest private
   university (established on 1917). Other notable private institutions
   that are located in the city are Universidad del Pacifico, UPC and
   Cayetano Heredia University.

   Other state owned universities also play key roles in teaching and
   research, such as the Universidad Nacional de Ingeniería, Universidad
   Nacional Federico Villarreal and Universidad Nacional Agraria La
   Molina, but the Universidad Nacional de Ingenieria (National University
   for Engineering) is regarded as one of the most prestigious
   universities for science and engineering careers in the country and
   probably one of the hardest to be admitted to.

   These universities are highly especialized for some careers, for
   instance, for humanities the Universidad Mayor de San Marcos, for Law
   studies the Pontificia Universidad Catolica del Peru, for medicine, the
   Univesidad Nacional Cayetano Heredia, for Business and Economics, the
   Universidad del Pacifico and for Sciences and Engineering, the
   Universidad Nacional de Ingenieria mostly known as UNI.

Libraries

   Founded by José de San Martín, Peru's oldest and most important
   library, the National Library of Peru is located in downtown Lima. As
   it has suffered wars and earthquakes throughout history, a new location
   for the library has been built in the San Borja district, with transfer
   of the library's holdings beginning in March of 2006. This
   modernization program aspires to turn the library into one of Latin
   America's most modern libraries.

Commerce and industry

   Lima has substantial textile, paper, paint, and food products
   industries.

   In recent decades, Lima has rapidly expanded and the city has seen much
   unregulated development. In the last decade, air pollution has risen to
   alarming levels, as no restrictions are allowed on the age or
   efficiency of motor vehicles. Leaded petrol is no longer sold however.

   The " Estadio Monumental "U"", located in Lima, is Peru's largest and
   most modern stadium; it seats eighty-thousand spectators.

Transport

   Lima mass transit service (Lima Metro or Tren Urbano) currently in
   operation at Villa El Salvador lines. Enlarge
   Lima mass transit service ( Lima Metro or Tren Urbano) currently in
   operation at Villa El Salvador lines.

   Lima does not have a public bus system. Private busses, commonly known
   as micros or combis, are very cheap but their routes are confusing
   especially to foreigners. Combis are often crowded and poorly
   maintained.

   Taxis vary in quality of service and price. They can be stopped at any
   street, or private taxi companies can be called to pick up passengers
   at a certain address.

   Numerous inter- urban bus companies offer transportation to other
   cities in Peru. Quality varies depending on the price, from luxury
   express buses to uncomfortable and crowded micros.

   Nowadays Lima's mayor is working on a new bus system called
   Metropolitano where all buses will have exclusive lines; it has been
   told that new buses must be acquired by the companies working in the
   metropolitan area, this busses will be bought from a Chinese company,
   the same company that sells buses to Italy. The mayor's hope is to see
   a new massive transport system in the next few years.

   To improve the quality of taxis running in Lima, a new law has been
   promulgated forbidding the importation of used cars; the city of Lima
   hopes that this law will promote the use of newer cars in the city,
   reducing vehicle emissions and smog.

   An agreement signed by Mayor Luis Castañeda and President Alejandro
   Toledo on February 17, 2005, provided funding for finishing the Lima
   Metro, an above-ground mass-transit system which will link the downtown
   area with the financial district, San Isidro. The project was launched
   in the late 1980s but left unfinished by former president Alan García.

   Lima's main passenger gateway for national and international air
   travelers is Jorge Chávez International Airport. International
   travelers should know that check in for most airlines are three and a
   half hours before take off.

Tourist attractions

   Government Palace
   Enlarge
   Government Palace

   The Historic centre of Lima, located in downtown Lima and the Rímac
   District, was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1988 due to the
   large number of historical buildings dating from the Spanish colonial
   era, a small number of which have now been restored. In particular, the
   monumental Plaza Mayor, with the 16th century Cathedral and the
   Presidential Palace, and the catacombs of the Convento de San Francisco
   are popular with visitors.

   Several sections of the Lima City Walls can still be seen. These fine
   examples of Spanish medieval fortification were used to defend Lima
   from attacks from pirates and corsairs.

   The city also has a number of fine museums, notably the National Museum
   of Anthropology, Archaeology, and History and the Rafael Larco Herrera
   Archaeological Museum, both in the Pueblo Libre district.

   Many small beaches, which are heavily visited during the summer months,
   are located by the southern Pan-American Highway. The most well-known
   ones are located in the districts of Santa María del Mar, Punta
   Hermosa, Punta Negra, San Bartolo and Pucusana. Also, the district of
   Ancón, located north of the city, has a very popular beach resort.

   Numerous restaurants, clubs and hotels have been opened in these places
   to serve the many beachgoers. The beaches in Lima itself are not
   suitable for swimming because the city's sewage is dumped raw into the
   ocean.
   Torre Tagle Palace, built in 1735
   Enlarge
   Torre Tagle Palace, built in 1735

   The suburban district of Cieneguilla and the town of Chosica (in the
   Lurigancho District) provide attractive green landscapes at a short
   distance from the city. Because of their elevation (over 500 meters),
   the sun shines in these areas even during winter and hence they are
   visited by residents of Lima to escape from the winter fog.

   Recently, the Palomino Islands near the port of Callao have attracted
   visitors due to a population of sea lions.

   Situated in Monterrico, the Gold Museum, together with the even more
   interesting textile museum. Here can be seen almost perfectly preserved
   thousand year old garments and feathered capes recovered from the
   waterless deserts of Western Peru. Also in the same building, an arms
   museum with a huge range of antique Spanish firearms, among muskets and
   arquebuses.

Sites of interest

     * Historical Centre of Lima
     * Beaches and Waterfront
          + Ancón
          + Barranquito
          + Aguadulce
          + Los Pavos
          + Las Cascadas
          + Las Sombrillas
          + Costa Linda
          + Paracas

     * Museums
          + Gold Museum
          + Lima Wall Museum
          + Museum of the Nation (Museo de la Nación)
          + Japanese Inmigration Museum
          + National Museum of the Archaeology, Anthropology, and History
            of Peru (Museo Nacional del Arqueología, Antropología, e
            Historia del Perú)
          + Natural History Museum, Lima (Museo de Historia Natural)
          + Arts & Peruvian Popular Traditions Museum
          + Miguel Grau House-Museum
          + Ricardo Palma House-Museum
          + Morro de Arica soldiers Museum
          + Italian Arts Museum
          + Congress and Inquisiton Museum
     * Colonial Buildings
          + Justice Palace
          + Rimac Building
          + Governor's House
          + Lima's Cathedral
          + Saint Lorenzo Church
          + Saint Rose of Lima Church
          + Congress of the Republic
          + Lima's Mayor House
          + Segura Theatre
          + Italian Arts Museum
          + Lima's Art Centre
          + Lima's City Walls Park
          + Torre Tagle Palace
          + Acho Plaza
          + Saint Martin Plaza
          + National Culture Institute
          + University Park
          + Desamparados Train Station
          + Rosa Nautica Restaurant
          + Perez Aranibar Children House
          + Naval Heroes Park
     * Islands
          + San Lorenzo Island
     * Amusement Parks
          + Lima's Zoo, San Miguel
          + Kart Circuit, Magdalena del Mar
          + Daytona Park, Surco
          + Sports Centre, Miraflores
          + Apolo (Ice-Skating Park), San Isidro
          + Lima's Hippodrome, Surco
          + La Granja Villa, Chorrillos
          + Sports Centre, Barranco
     * Zoos
          + Parque de las Leyendas
          + Centro Ecologico Recreacional de Huachipa

Notable people born in Lima

Artists

     * Felipe Pinglo Alva, father of Peruvian Musica criolla
     * Susana Baca, Grammy award- winner folk singer
     * Eva Ayllon, first-class "criollo" (folk music) singer, she is
       trying other styles (jazz, blues, salsa) with distinct success
     * Juan Diego Florez, world recognized tenor, a possible successor to
       Pavarotti, in the maestro's own words.

Historical

     * Saint Rose of Lima ( April 20, 1586- August 30, 1617) Patron Saint
       of America, first Roman Catholic saint born in the Americas.
     * Saint Martin of Porras
     * Saint Turibius of Mongrovejo, Archbishop of Lima

Politicians

     * Javier Valle Riestra, lawyer and politician
     * Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, first Latin American to become
       Secretary-General of the UN.

Sportspeople

     * Teófilo Cubillas, football (soccer) player
     * Jefferson Farfán, football (soccer) player
     * Luis Horna, tennis player
     * Jean Carlos Gamarra, taekwondo player
     * Sofia Mulanovich, world champion surfer
     * Claudio Pizarro, football (soccer) player
     * Nolberto Solano, football (soccer) player
     * Cecilia Tait, volleyball player
     * Jaime Yzaga, tennis player
     * Roberto Palacios, football (soccer) player
     * Jean Pierre Saux, football (soccer) player

Journalists

     * Jaime Bayly, Tv journalist and writer.
     * Cesar Hildebrandt

Writers

     * Mario Vargas Llosa
     * Alfredo Bryce Echenique, writer (novels, memories, and short
       stories), among which the renowned A world for Julius (in Spanish:
       "Un Mundo para Julius".)
     * Julio Ramón Ribeyro, writer best known for his short stories, and
       awared in 1994 by the Juan Rulfo prize.
     * Ricardo Palma, writer of "Tradiciones Peruanas"
     * Jaime Bayly, writer, journalist, and media personality

Contemporary Musicians

     * Pedro Suarez Vertiz, pop singer
     * Líbido, indie rock band
     * Mar de Copas, indie rock band
     * Gian Marco, pop singer and composer
     * Arena Hash, pop band
     * Campo de Almas, indie pop band
     * Fragil, rock pop band
     * Leusemia aka Leuzemia, progressive rock band
     * Inyectores aka G3, punk rock band
     * Diazepunk, punk rock band
     * La Sarita, folk rock band
     * Rafo Raez, rock singer and composer
     * Dolores Delirio, indie rock band
     * Daniel F, rock singer and composer (also Leusemia's vocalist and
       considered by some people as the best peruvian composer in the
       present time)

Reality TV Stars

     * Johanna Botta, on shows such as Real World and Real World/Road
       Rules Challenge

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lima"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
