   #copyright

Lithuania

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; European
Countries

   SOS Children works in Lithuania. For more information see SOS Children
   in Lithuania
                      Lietuvos Respublika
   Republic of Lithuania

   Flag of Lithuania Coat of arms of Lithuania
   Flag              Coat of arms
   Motto: Vienybė težydi  ( Lithuanian)
   "Let unity flourish"
   Anthem: Tautiška giesmė
   Location of Lithuania
   Capital
   (and largest city) Vilnius
                      54°40′N 25°19′E
   Official languages Lithuanian
   Government         Parliamentary democracy
    - President       Valdas Adamkus
    - Prime Minister  Gediminas Kirkilas
      Independence    from the Soviet Union
    - Declared        February 16, 1918
    - Declared        March 11, 1990
    - Recognized      September 6, 1991
    Accession to EU   May 1, 2004
                             Area
    - Total           65,300 km² ( 123rd)
                      25,212 sq mi
    - Water (%)       negligible
                          Population
    - 1996 estimate   3,392,000 ( 131st)
    - Density         53/km² ( 144th)
                      137/sq mi
       GDP ( PPP)     2005 estimate
    - Total           $49.49 billion ( 75th)
    - Per capita      $14,158 ( 49th)
      HDI  (2004)     0.857 (high) ( 41st)
        Currency      Lithuanian litas (Lt) ( LTL)
       Time zone      EET ( UTC+2)
    - Summer ( DST)   EEST ( UTC+3)
      Internet TLD    .lt^1
      Calling code    +370
   ^1Also .eu shared with other European Union member states.

   Lithuania, officially the Republic of Lithuania ( Lithuanian: Lietuva;
   official — Lietuvos Respublika), is a country in northern Europe. The
   largest of the three Baltic States situated along the Baltic Sea, it
   shares borders with Latvia to the north, Belarus to the southeast,
   Poland and the Russian exclave of the Kaliningrad Oblast to the
   southwest. Lithuania has been a member state of the European Union
   since May 1, 2004.

History

   Lithuania entered into the annals of European history when it has been
   first mentioned in a medieval German manuscript, the Quedlinburg
   Chronicle, on February 14, 1009. The Lithuanian lands were united by
   Mindaugas in 1236, and neighboring countries referred to it as "the
   state of Lithuania". The official coronation of Mindaugas as King of
   Lithuania, on July 6, 1253, marked its recognition by Christendom, and
   the official recognition of Lithuanian statehood as the Kingdom of
   Lithuania.

   During the early period of the Gediminids (1316-1430), the state
   occupied the territories of present-day Belarus, Ukraine, and parts of
   Poland and Russia. By the end of the 14th century, Lithuania was the
   largest country in Europe. The Grand Duchy of Lithuania stretched
   across a substantial part of Europe, from the Baltic to the Black Sea.
   Lithuanian nobility, city dwellers and peasants accepted Christianity
   in 1385, following Poland's offer of its crown to Jogaila, the Grand
   Duke of Lithuania. Grand Duke Jogaila was crowned King of Poland on
   February 2, 1386. Lithuania and Poland were joined into a personal
   union, as both countries were ruled by the same Jagiellon dynasty.

   In 1401, the formal union was dissolved as a result of disputes over
   legal terminology, and Vytautas, the cousin of Jogaila, became the
   Grand Duke of Lithuania. A royal crown had been bestowed upon Vytautas
   in 1429 by Sigismund, the Holy Roman Emperor, but Polish magnates
   prevented the coronation of Vytautas by seizing the crown as it was
   being brought to him. A new crown was ordered in Germany and a new date
   set for the coronation, but a month later Vytautas died in an accident.

   In 1569, Lithuania and Poland formally united into a single dual state
   called the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. As a member of the
   Commonwealth, Lithuania retained its sovereignty and its institutions,
   including a separate army and currency. In 1795, the joint state was
   dissolved by the third Partition of the Commonwealth, which forfeited
   its lands to Russia, Prussia and Austria, under duress. Over ninety
   percent of Lithuania was incorporated into the Russian Empire and the
   remainder into Prussia.

   On February 16, 1918, Lithuania re-established its independence. From
   July, 1918, until November of that year, Monaco-born King Mindaugas II
   was pronounced the titular monarch of Lithuania, until the country's
   parliament opted for a republican form of government. From the outset,
   territorial disputes with Poland (over the Vilnius region and the
   Suvalkai region) and with Germany (over the Klaipėda region, German:
   Memelland) preoccupied the foreign policy of the new nation. During the
   interwar period, the constitutional capitol was Vilnius, although the
   city itself was annexed by Poland from 1920 to 1939 (see History of
   Vilnius for more details). The Lithuanian government at the time was
   relocated to Kaunas, which officially held the status of temporary
   capital.

   In 1940, at the beginning of World War II, the Soviet Union occupied
   and annexed Lithuania in accordance with the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact.
   It later came under German occupation, during which around 190,000 or
   91% of the Lithuanian Jews were killed, resulting in one of the worst
   death rates of the Holocaust. After the retreat of the German army,
   Lithuania was re-occupied by the Soviet Union in 1944.

   During the Soviet and Nazi occupations between 1940 and 1954, Lithuania
   lost over 780,000 residents. An estimated 120,000 to 300,000 of that
   number were killed or exiled to Siberia by the Soviets, while others
   chose to emigrate to western countries.
   Map showing changes in the territory of Lithuania from the 13th century
   to the present day
   Enlarge
   Map showing changes in the territory of Lithuania from the 13th century
   to the present day

   Fifty years of communist rule ended with the advent of perestroika and
   glasnost in the late 1980s. Lithuania, led by Sąjūdis, an
   anti-communist and anti-Soviet independence movement, proclaimed its
   renewed independence on March 11, 1990. Lithuania was the first Soviet
   republic to do so, though Soviet forces unsuccessfully tried to
   suppress this secession. The Soviets attacked the Vilnius TV Tower on
   the night of January 13, 1991, an act that resulted in the death of 13
   Lithuanian civilians. The last Russian troops left Lithuania on August
   31, 1993 — even earlier than they departed East Germany

   On February 4, 1991, Iceland became the first country to recognize
   Lithuanian independence. Sweden was the first to open an embassy in the
   country. The United States of America never recognized the Soviet claim
   to Lithuania or to the other two Baltic republics.

   Lithuania joined the United Nations on September 17, 1991. On May 31,
   2001, Lithuania became the 141st member of the World Trade
   Organization. Since 1988, Lithuania has sought closer ties with the
   West, and so on January 4, 1994, it became the first of the Baltic
   States to apply for NATO membership. On March 29, 2004, it became a
   full and equal NATO member and on May 1, 2004, Lithuania joined the
   European Union.

Politics

   Current President of Lithuania Valdas Adamkus (right) meeting with Vice
   President of the United States Dick Cheney in Vilnius in May 2006
   Enlarge
   Current President of Lithuania Valdas Adamkus (right) meeting with Vice
   President of the United States Dick Cheney in Vilnius in May 2006

   Since Lithuania declared independence on March 11, 1990, it has kept
   strong democratic traditions. In the first general elections after the
   independence on October 25, 1992, 56.75% of the total number of voters
   supported the new constitution. Drafting the constitution was a long
   and complicated process. The role of the President fueled the most
   heated debates. Drawing from the interwar experiences, politicians made
   many different proposals ranging from strong parliamentarism to the
   United States' model. Eventually a compromise semi-presidential system
   was agreed upon.

   The Lithuanian head of state is the President, elected directly for a
   five-year term; he or she may serve a maximum of two consecutive terms.
   The post of President is largely ceremonial with functions of
   overseeing foreign affairs and national security policy. The President
   is also the commander-in-chief. The President, with the approval of the
   parliamentary body, the Seimas, also appoints the prime minister and on
   the latter's nomination, appoints the rest of the cabinet, as well as a
   number of other top civil servants and the judges for all courts. The
   judges of the Constitutional Court (Konstitucinis Teismas), who serve
   for nine year terms, are appointed by the President (three judges), the
   Chairman of the Seimas (three judges) and the chairman of the Supreme
   Court (three judges).

   The unicameral Lithuanian parliament, the Seimas, has 141 members who
   are elected to four-year terms. 71 of the members of this legislative
   body are elected in single constituencies, and the other 70 are elected
   in a nationwide vote by proportional representation. A party must
   receive at least 5% of the national vote to be represented in the
   Seimas.

Administration

   Lithuania is subdivided into 10 counties and 60 municipalities
   Enlarge
   Lithuania is subdivided into 10 counties and 60 municipalities

   The current administrative division was established in 1994 and
   modified in 2000 to meet the requirements of the European Union.
   Lithuania now has a three-part administrative division: Lithuania is
   divided into 10 counties (Lithuanian: singular — apskritis, plural —
   apskritys) that are further subdivided into 60 municipalities
   (Lithuanian: singular — savivaldybė, plural — savivaldybės) which
   consist of over 500 elderates (Lithuanian: singular — seniūnija, plural
   — seniūnijos).

   The counties are ruled by county governors (Lithuanian: apskrities
   viršininkas) who are appointed by the central government. These
   officials ensure that the municipalities adhere to the laws of
   Lithuania and the constitution. County government oversees local
   governments and their implementation of the national laws, programs,
   and policies.

   Municipalities are the most important unit. Some municipalities are
   historically called "district municipalities", and thus are often
   shortened to "district"; others are called "city municipalities",
   sometimes shortened to "city." Each municipality has its own elected
   government. In the past, the election of municipality councils occurred
   once every three years, but it now takes place every four years. The
   council elects the mayor of the municipality and other required
   personnel. The municipality councils also appoint elders to govern the
   elderates. There is currently a proposal for direct election of mayors
   and elders, however that would require an amendment to the
   constitution.

   Elderates are the smallest units and they do not play a role in
   national politics. They were created so that people could receive
   necessary services close to their homes; for example, in rural areas
   the elderates register births and deaths. They are most active in the
   social sector: they identify needy individuals or families and
   distribute welfare or organize other forms of relief.

   The current system of administrative division receives frequent
   criticism for being too bureaucratic and ineffective. Significant
   complaints are made about the number of counties, since they do not
   have much power vested in them. One proposal is to create four lands, a
   new administrative unit, the boundaries of which would be determined by
   the ethnographic regions of Lithuania. The benefit would be that the
   lands would follow natural boundaries, rather than being defined by
   bureaucrats or politicians. Another of the proposed solutions involves
   reducing the number of counties so that there would be five in total,
   each based in one of the five largest cities with populations of over
   100,000. Others complain that elderates have no real power and receive
   too little attention; they could potentially become local initiative
   communities which could tackle many rural problems.

Geography

   Physical map of Lithuania. Click on the image for better resolution.
   Enlarge
   Physical map of Lithuania. Click on the image for better resolution.
   A cottage at a hotel in a rural area is a sign of increasingly popular
   rural tourism
   Enlarge
   A cottage at a hotel in a rural area is a sign of increasingly popular
   rural tourism

   Lithuania is situated in northern Europe and is the largest and most
   populous of the Baltic states. It has around 99 kilometres (61.5 mi) of
   sandy coastline, of which only about 38 kilometres (24 mi) face the
   open Baltic Sea; the rest of the coast is sheltered by the Curonian
   sand peninsula. Lithuania's major warm-water port, Klaipėda, lies at
   the narrow mouth of the Curonian Lagoon (Lithuanian: Kuršių marios), a
   shallow lagoon extending south to Kaliningrad. The main river, the
   Neman River, and some of its tributaries carry international shipping
   vessels.

   The Lithuanian landscape has been smoothed by glaciers. The highest
   areas are the moraines in the western uplands and eastern highlands,
   none of which are taller than 300 metres (1,000 ft) above sea level,
   with the maximum elevation being Aukštojas Hill at 294 metres (964
   feet). The terrain features numerous lakes, Lake Vištytis for example,
   and wetlands; a mixed forest zone covers 30% of the country. The
   climate lies between maritime and continental, with wet, moderate
   winters and summers. According to some geographers, Lithuania's
   capitol, Vilnius, lies a few kilometres south of the geographical
   centre of Europe.

   Lithuania consists of the following historical and cultural regions:
     * Aukštaitija — literally, the "Highlands"
     * Samogitia (Lithuanian: Žemaitija) — literally, the "Lowlands"
     * Dzūkija (Lithuanian: Dzūkija or Dainava)
     * Sudovia (Lithuanian: Sūduva or Suvalkija)
     * Lithuania Minor also known as "Prussian Lithuania" — (Lithuanian:
       Mažoji Lietuva or Prūsų Lietuva). Most of it is currently
       controlled by Russia ( Kaliningrad Oblast).

Economy

   Vilnius Financial Center is a symbol of rapid economic growth of
   Lithuania
   Enlarge
   Vilnius Financial Centre is a symbol of rapid economic growth of
   Lithuania

   In 2003, prior to joining the European Union, Lithuania had the highest
   economic growth rate amongst all candidate and member countries,
   reaching 8.8% in the third quarter. In 2004 -7.3%; 2005 - 7.6%; 2006
   second quarter - 8.4% growth in GDP reflected impressive economic
   development. Most of the trade Lithuania conducts is within the
   European Union.

   It is a member of the World Trade Organization, and the European Union.
   By UN classification, Lithuania is a country with a high average
   income. The country boasts a well developed modern infrastructure of
   railways, airports and four lane highways. It has almost full
   employment, with an unemployment rate of only 2.9%. According to
   officially published figures, EU membership fueled a booming economy,
   increased outsourcing into the country, and boosted the tourism sector.
   The litas, the national currency, has been pegged to the Euro since
   February 2, 2002 at the rate of EUR 1.00 = LTL 3.4528, and Lithuania is
   expected to switch to the Euro on 1 January 2009.
   Klaipėda port is the only port in Lithuania and is vital to its economy
   Enlarge
   Klaipėda port is the only port in Lithuania and is vital to its economy

   Like other countries in the region (Estonia, Latvia) Lithuania also has
   a flat tax rate rather than a progressive scheme. Lithuanian income
   levels still lag behind the rest of the older EU members, with per
   capita GDP in 2006 at 56% of the EU average. Lower wages may have been
   a factor that in 2004 influenced the trend of emigration to wealthiest
   EU countries, something that has been made legally possible as a result
   of accession to the European Union. In 2006 income tax was reduced to
   27% and a further reduction to 24% is expected in October of 2007.
   Income tax reduction and 14% annual wage growth is starting to make an
   impact with some emigrants gradually beginning to come back. The latest
   official data show emigration in early 2006 to be 30% lower than the
   previous year, with 3,483 people leaving in four months.

Demographics

   The great yard of Vilnius University, one of the oldest universities in
   Northern Europe. About 70% of Lithuanian high school graduates continue
   their studies in universities and colleges.
   Enlarge
   The great yard of Vilnius University, one of the oldest universities in
   Northern Europe. About 70% of Lithuanian high school graduates continue
   their studies in universities and colleges.
   The oldest wooden church is located in Palūšė. Lithuania has strong
   Catholic traditions.
   Enlarge
   The oldest wooden church is located in Palūšė. Lithuania has strong
   Catholic traditions.

Ethnic diversity

   83.5% of the Lithuanian population are ethnic Lithuanians who speak the
   Lithuanian language (one of the two surviving members of the Baltic
   language group), which is the official language of the state. Several
   sizable minorities exist, such as Poles (6.7%), Russians (6.3%), and
   Belarusians (1.2%).

   Poles are the largest minority, concentrated in southeast Lithuania
   (the Vilnius region). Russians are the second largest minority,
   concentrated mostly in two cities; they constitute sizeable minorities
   in Vilnius (13%) and Klaipėda (20%) and a slim majority in the town of
   Visaginas (55%)

   Because of Soviet occupation, most Lithuanians can communicate in
   Russian. According to the Eurostat poll about 80% of the Lithuanians
   can hold a conversation in Russian and almost all are familiar with the
   most general phrases and expressions. Nowadays, most Lithuanian schools
   teach English as a first foreign language, but students may also study
   German, or, in some schools, French. Schools where Russian and Polish
   are the primary languages of education exist in the areas populated by
   these minorities.

Religion

   The historically predominant religion is Roman Catholicism. The Roman
   Catholic Church has been the majority confession since the
   Christianization of Lithuania in the 14th century. No less than 79% of
   Lithuanians are Roman Catholic. The Roman Catholic Church used to be an
   influential factor in the country, and some priests actively led the
   resistance against the Communist regime and, after independence was
   regained, against socialism and liberalism, especially in ethical
   questions.

   The nationally renowned anti-communist resistance shrine, the Hill of
   Crosses, upon which thousands of Latin rite crosses of all sizes have
   been placed, is located near the city of Šiauliai. During the late
   1800s, the erecting of Latin crosses upon the mentioned hill was
   forbidden by the Czarist Russian Orthodox authorities. During the 20th
   century, the Soviet authorities also forbade such explicit religious
   symbols. The crosses were removed in 1961, with tractors and
   bulldozers, but despite Soviet prohibitions, Lithuanian Roman Catholics
   continued to put small crucifixes and larger crosses on this Hill of
   the Crosses. Pope John Paul II visited the hill during his visit to
   Lithuania, primarily because it was a sign of anti-Communist Catholic
   resistance, as well as a Roman Catholic religious site. Lithuania was
   the only majority-Catholic former Soviet republic.

   The diverse Protestant community (1.9% of the total population) is much
   smaller than the Roman Catholic Church; Protestants are scattered all
   over the northern and western parts of Lithuania. Lithuania was
   historically positioned in between the two German-controlled states of
   Livonia to the north and the Protestant formerly monastic, Teutonic
   State of Prussia to its south. In the 16th century, from those two
   regions Lutheran Protestantism started to spread into the country.
   Since 1945 Lutheranism in the country has declined.

   Various Protestant churches have established missions in Lithuania
   since 1990, including the United Methodists, the Baptist Union, the
   Mennonites, and World Venture.

   The country also has minority communities of Eastern Orthodoxy (mainly
   among the Russian minority), to which about 4.9% of the total
   population belongs, as well as of Judaism, Islam, and Karaism (an
   ancient offshoot of Judaism represented by a long-standing community in
   Trakai), which together make up another 1.6% of the population.

Largest cities

   Rank    City     Population Population
                               Density
                                           Area   Region
   1    Vilnius     541 824    1379/km²  401 km²   East
   2    Kaunas      360,637    2319/km²  157 km²  Middle
   3    Klaipėda    187,316    1926/km²  98 km²    West
   4    Šiauliai    129,037    1605/km²  81 km²   North
   5    Panevėžys   115,315    2236/km²  52 km²   North
   6    Alytus      69,145     1747/km²  40 km²   South
   7    Marijampolė 47,356     2271/km²  21 km²   South
   8    Mažeikiai   40,925     2956/km²  14 km²   North
   9    Jonava      34 696                        Middle
   10   Utena       32 881     2191/km²  15,1 km²  East

Culture

   A sculpture of angel - a symbol of tongue-in-cheek Republic at Užupis,
   Vilnius
   Enlarge
   A sculpture of angel - a symbol of tongue-in-cheek Republic at Užupis,
   Vilnius
     * List of famous Lithuanians
     * Lithuanian literature
     * Lithuanian mythology
     * Music of Lithuania

Neighbouring countries

   Flag of Latvia  Latvia Flag of Belarus  Belarus
   Flag of Sweden  Sweden  Image:Template CanadianCityGeoLocation West.png
     Baltic Sea North
   West    Flag of Lithuania  Lithuania     East
   South
   Flag of Russia  Russia Flag of Poland  Poland Flag of Belarus  Belarus
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lithuania"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
