   #copyright

Liverpool

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

   CAPTION: City of Liverpool

   Image:EnglandLiverpool.png
   Geography
         Status       Metropolitan borough, City (1880)
         Region       North West England
    Ceremonial county Merseyside
     Historic county  Lancashire
          Area
   - Total            Ranked 232nd
                      111.84 km²
        Admin HQ      Liverpool
       ISO 3166-2     GB-LIV
        ONS code      00BY
    OS grid reference SJ437905
       Coordinates    53°25N 3°W
         NUTS 3       UKD52
   Demographics
       Population:
   - Total (2005 est.)
   - Density          Ranked 5th
                      447,500
                      4,001 / km²
        Ethnicity     94.3% White
                      1.1% S. Asian
                      1.2% Afro-Caribbean
                      1.2% Chinese
   Politics
                 Liverpool City Council
       Leadership     Leader & Cabinet
         Control      Liberal Democrats

   Liverpool is a city and metropolitan borough in North West England,
   along the eastern side of the Mersey Estuary.

   Built across a ridge of hills rising up to a height of around 230 feet
   (70 metres) above sea-level at Everton Hill, the city's urban area runs
   directly into Bootle and Crosby in Sefton to the north, and Huyton
   Dovecot and Prescot in Knowsley to the east. It faces Wallasey and
   Birkenhead across the River Mersey to the west.

   Liverpool is governed by Liverpool City Council, one of five councils
   within the Metropolitan county of Merseyside, and is one of England's
   core cities and its fifth most populous - 441,477 in 2002, with 816,000
   in the Liverpool Urban Area, which includes suburbs on the Liverpool
   side of the Mersey but not those on the Wirral.

   Inhabitants of Liverpool are referred to as Liverpudlians and nicknamed
   " Scousers", in reference to the local meal known as 'scouse', a form
   of stew. The word scouse has also become synonymous with the Liverpool
   accent and dialect.

   In the late 19th century, Liverpool laid claim to being the "second
   Port of the Empire", handling more goods than any British city outside
   London. During the late 20th century, the decline of the Port of
   Liverpool as a source of employment and the later contraction of
   manufacturing industry in the city region badly affected the city's
   economy. However, the city's economy has grown strongly and faster than
   the national average since the mid nineties.

   In 2007, the city will be celebrating its 800th anniversary, and in
   2008, will hold the European Capital of Culture title.

History

   A map of Liverpool from 1947
   Enlarge
   A map of Liverpool from 1947

   King John's letters patent of 1207 announced the foundation of the
   borough of Liverpool and by the middle of the 16th century the
   population was still only around 500. In the 17th century there was
   slow progress in trade and population growth. A number of battles for
   the town were waged during the English Civil War, including an
   eighteen-day siege in 1644. In 1699 Liverpool was made a parish by Act
   of Parliament, that same year its first slave ship, Liverpool Merchant,
   set sail for Africa. As trade from the West Indies surpassed that of
   Ireland and Europe, Liverpool began to grow. The first wet dock in
   Britain was built in Liverpool in 1715. Substantial profits from the
   slave trade helped the town to prosper and rapidly grow. By close of
   the century Liverpool controlled over 41% of European and 80% of
   Britain's slave commerce.

   By the start of the nineteenth century, 40% of the world's trade was
   passing through Liverpool and the construction of many major buildings
   reflected this wealth. In 1830, Liverpool (along with Manchester)
   became the first city to have an intercity rail link, through the
   Liverpool and Manchester Railway. The population continued to rise
   rapidly, especially during the 1840s when the Irish began arriving by
   the thousands due to the Great Famine. By 1851, approximately 25% of
   the city was Irish-born. During the first part of the 20th century,
   Liverpool was pulling in emigrants from across Europe. During World War
   II there were 80 air-raids on Merseyside, killing 2500 people and
   causing damage to almost half the homes in the metropolitan area. Since
   1952 Liverpool has been twinned with Cologne, Germany, a city that
   shared the horrifying experience of excessive aerial bombing.
   Significant rebuilding followed the war, including massive housing
   estates and the Seaforth Dock, the largest dock project in Britain.

   The population of Liverpool peaked in the 1931 census, which reported
   855,688 inhabitants. This had declined to 610,114 by 1961, and further
   to 439,476 in the 2001 census.

   In the 1960s Liverpool became a centre of youth culture. The "
   Merseybeat" sound which became synonymous with The Beatles and fellow
   Liverpudlian pop bands of the era catapulted the city to the front of
   the popular music scene. Economically however the city has been in
   decline since the 1950s with the loss of numerous employers and from
   the 1970s onwards Liverpool's docks and traditional manufacturing
   industries went into sharp decline. The advent of containerization
   meant that Liverpool's docks became largely obsolete. In the early
   1980s unemployment rates in Liverpool were amongst the highest in the
   UK.

   In 1974, Liverpool became a metropolitan district within the newly
   created metropolitan county of Merseyside, it had previously been in
   Lancashire. At the end of the century Liverpool was concentrating on
   regeneration which still continues today, with the city winning the
   accolade of European Capital of Culture for 2008. Capitalising on the
   popularity of the 1960s pop group The Beatles and other groups of the
   Merseybeat era, tourism has also become a significant factor in
   Liverpool's economy.

   In 2004, property developer Grosvenor started the Paradise Project, a
   £920m development centred on Paradise Street, which will involve the
   most significant changes to Liverpool's city centre since the post-war
   reconstruction.

Culture

   Liverpool is internationally known as a cultural centre, with a
   particularly rich history in popular music, performing and visual arts.

   During the late 1960s, the city also became well known for the
   Liverpool poets, of whom Roger McGough and the late Adrian Henri are
   among the best known. The anthology The Mersey Sound, by Henri, McGough
   and Brian Patten, has sold over 500,000 copies since first being
   published in 1967.

   In 2003, Liverpool was named European Capital of Culture for 2008. A
   series of cultural events during 2004-9 is planned, peaking in 2008.
   Liverpool European Capital of Culture 2008 flag, flying in front of the
   Port of Liverpool Building
   Enlarge
   Liverpool European Capital of Culture 2008 flag, flying in front of the
   Port of Liverpool Building

Performing arts

   A flourishing orchestra, the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra
   performs in its own home, the Liverpool Philharmonic Hall, and
   Liverpool has a strong history of performing arts which is reflected in
   the number of theatres in the city.
     * Empire
     * Everyman
     * Liverpool Playhouse
     * Neptune
     * Liverpool Philharmonic Hall
     * Royal Court
     * Unity

   Several of the city's theatres have successful theatre companies,
   including the Everyman & Liverpool Playhouse and the Unity Theatre .
   SuperLambBanana, a well-known sculpture in the Albert Dock area,
   recently relocated
   Enlarge
   SuperLambBanana, a well-known sculpture in the Albert Dock area,
   recently relocated

Visual arts

   Liverpool has a vibrant artistic life. Several pre-Raphaelites are
   among the important paintings in the Walker Art Gallery. Sudley House
   contains another major collection of pre 20th century art . The Tate
   Liverpool gallery houses the modern art collection of the Tate in the
   north of England. The FACT centre hosts touring multimedia exhibitions.

   The Liverpool Biennial is a festival of arts held (as the name implies)
   every two years. The festival generally runs from mid September to late
   November and comprises three main sections; the International, The
   Independents and New Contemporaries although many fringe events are
   timed to coincide. It was during this event in 2004 that Yoko Ono's
   work "My mother is beautiful" caused widespread public protest by
   exhibiting photographs of a naked woman's pubic area on the main
   shopping street. Despite protests the work remained in place.

   The 2006 Biennial has recently started and will run to mid November,
   exhibitions can be found dotted around Liverpool City centre and
   include such things as the lions in front of St. Georges Hall being
   caged, and St. Lukes Church being filled with upturned boats, maps of
   the display along with some exhibitions can be found at FACT
   cinema/gallery.

Sport

   Liverpool has two Premier League football clubs: Everton F.C. at
   Goodison Park and Liverpool F.C. at Anfield. Both teams have enjoyed a
   considerable amount of success, with Liverpool having won a record 18
   League titles,The European Cup five times and the FA Cup seven times
   whilst Everton, who have been present in the top professional league
   longer than any other club, except Arsenal, having won nine league
   titles, the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup once and the FA Cup five times.
   During the 1980's both Clubs enjoyed huge success dominating both the
   league and cup competitions in England and Europe. Highlights of this
   period were the FA Cup finals of 1986 and 1989 involving both clubs.

   County cricket is occasionally played in Liverpool, with Lancashire
   County Cricket Club typically playing one match every year at Liverpool
   Cricket Club, Aigburth.

   Aintree Racecourse to the north of Liverpool in the adjacent borough of
   Sefton is home to the famous steeplechase, the Grand National. One of
   the most famous events in the international horse racing calendar, it
   is held over a number of days in early April of each year. In addition
   to horse-racing, Aintree has also hosted motor racing, including the
   British Grand Prix in the 1950s and 1960s.

   Liverpool Harriers, who meet at Wavertree Athletics Centre are one of
   five athletic clubs. Liverpool has a long history of boxing that has
   produced John Conteh, Alan Rudkin and Paul Hodkinson and hosts high
   level amateur boxing events. Park Road Gymnastics Centre provides
   training to a high level. The City of Liverpool Swimming Club has been
   National Speedo League Champions 8 out of the last 11 years. Liverpool
   Tennis Development Programme based at Wavertree Tennis Centre is one of
   the largest in the UK . Liverpool is also home to the Red Triangle
   Karate Club, which provided many of the 1990 squad that won the World
   Shotokan Championships in Sunderland. Luminaries include Sensei
   Keinosuke Enoeda, Sensei Frank Brennan, Sensei Andy Sherry and Sensei
   Terry O'Neill, who is also famous for various acting roles.

   Rugby league is played at amateur and student level within the city -
   the last professional team bearing the city's name was Liverpool City,
   which folded in the 1960s.

Landmarks

   Liverpool waterfront by night, as seen from the Wirral.
   Enlarge
   Liverpool waterfront by night, as seen from the Wirral.
   The Royal Liver Building towers over Water Street and the Town Hall
   Enlarge
   The Royal Liver Building towers over Water Street and the Town Hall
   View of Liverpool Anglican cathedral
   Enlarge
   View of Liverpool Anglican cathedral
   Liverpool's skyline, as seen from the River Mersey. The Liver Building
   is central. (Closeup view)
   Enlarge
   Liverpool's skyline, as seen from the River Mersey. The Liver Building
   is central. ( Closeup view)
   The Parish Church of St. Nicholas and the Atlantic Tower hotel near
   Pier Head. The Atlantic Tower was designed to resemble the prow of a
   ship to reflect Liverpool's maritime history.
   Enlarge
   The Parish Church of St. Nicholas and the Atlantic Tower hotel near
   Pier Head. The Atlantic Tower was designed to resemble the prow of a
   ship to reflect Liverpool's maritime history.
   Liverpool's inner city has many handsome Georgian terraced streets.
   Enlarge
   Liverpool's inner city has many handsome Georgian terraced streets.

   Liverpool contains over 2,500 listed buildings (of which 26 are Grade I
   listed and 85 are Grade II* listed). It is the inheritance of
   high-minded public spirit since the late 18th century, largely with
   Dissenter impetus, resulting in more public sculpture than in any UK
   city aside from Westminster, more listed buildings than any city apart
   from London and, surprisingly, more Georgian houses than the city of
   Bath. Many well-known architects are represented in Liverpool,
   including Peter Ellis, Harvey Lonsdale Elmes, John Foster, Sir Giles
   Gilbert Scott, Sir Edwin Lutyens and Sir Frederick Gibberd.

Waterfront

   In 2004 Liverpool's waterfront was declared as a UNESCO World Heritage
   site, reflecting the city's importance in the development of the
   world's trading system and dock technology.

   The docks are central to Liverpool's history, with arguably the
   best-known being Albert Dock: the first enclosed, non-combustible dock
   warehouse system in the world and the first structure in Britain to be
   built entirely of cast iron, brick and stone, designed by Jesse
   Hartley. Restored in the 1980s, the Albert Dock is the largest
   collection of Grade I listed buildings in Britain. Part of the old dock
   complex is now the home to the Merseyside Maritime Museum, Museum of
   Liverpool Life and the Tate Liverpool. Other relics of the dock system
   include the Stanley Dock Tobacco Warehouse, which at the time of its
   construction in 1901, was the world's largest building in terms of
   area.

   The Pier Head is arguably the most famous image of Liverpool, the
   location of the Three Graces, three of Liverpool's most recognisable
   buildings. The first is the Royal Liver Building, built in the early
   1900s and surmounted by two bronze domes with a Liver Bird (the symbol
   of Liverpool) on each. The second is the Cunard Building, the
   headquarters of the former Cunard shipping company. The third is the
   Port of Liverpool Building, the home of the former Mersey Docks and
   Harbour Board which regulated the city's docks.

   In front of these buildings at the waters edge are the memorials to the
   men of the merchant navy who sailed out of the port during both World
   Wars. Memorials to the British mariners, Norwegian, Dutch and to the
   many thousands of Chinese seamen who manned Britain's ships cluster
   together here. Perhaps most intereting is the Chinese memorial to the
   men forcibly deported from the city after World War Two and to the
   families they left behind. see:

Places of worship

   The thousands of migrants and sailors passing through Liverpool
   resulted in a religious diversity that is still apparent today. This is
   reflected in the equally diverse collection of religious buildings, and
   two Christian cathedrals.

   The parish church of Liverpool is the Anglican Our Lady and St
   Nicholas, colloquially known as "the sailors church", which has existed
   near the waterfront since 1257. It regularly hosts to Catholic masses.
   Other notable churches include the Greek Orthodox Church of St Nicholas
   (built in the Byzantine style), and the Gustav Adolfus Kyrka (the
   Swedish Seamen's Church, reminiscent of Nordic styles).

   Liverpool's wealth as a port city enabled the construction of two
   enormous cathedrals, both dating from the 20th century. The Anglican
   Cathedral, designed by Sir Giles Gilbert Scott, has one of the longest
   naves, largest organs and heaviest and highest peals of bells in the
   world. The Roman Catholic Metropolitan Cathedral was initially planned
   to be even larger; of Sir Edwin Lutyens' design, only the crypt was
   completed. The cathedral was eventually built to a simpler design by
   Sir Frederick Gibberd; while this is on a smaller scale than Lutyens'
   original design, it still manages to incorporate the largest panel of
   stained glass in the world. Appropriately enough, the road running
   between the two cathedrals is called Hope Street.

   Liverpool has a number of synagogues, of which the Grade II* listed
   Moorish-revival Princes Road Synagogue is perhaps most notable.
   Liverpool has a thriving Jewish community.

   The city had one of the earliest mosques in Britain, founded in 1887 by
   William Abdullah Quilliam, a lawyer who had converted to Islam.
   Currently the main mosque in Liverpool is the Al-Rahma mosque.

Other notable buildings

   The area around William Brown Street has been labelled the city's
   'Cultural Quarter', owing to the presence of the William Brown Library,
   Walker Art Gallery and World Museum Liverpool, just three of
   Liverpool's many neo-classical buildings. Nearby is St George's Hall,
   perhaps the most impressive of these neo-classical buildings, was built
   to serve both as a concert hall and as the city's law courts. Also in
   this area are Wellington's Column and the Seble Fountain.

   Liverpool's Town Hall dates from 1754 and has a beautifully-designed
   interior.

   The term Red Brick University, applied to many British universities
   dating from a similar period, was inspired by the University of
   Liverpool's Victoria Building, noted for its clock tower.

   Some of Liverpool's landmarks are better known for their oddness rather
   than for their role. Williamson's tunnels are architecturally unique as
   being the largest underground folly in the world. The Philharmonic
   Dining Rooms are noteworthy for their ornate Victorian toilets, which
   have become a tourist attraction in their own right.

Education

   In Liverpool primary and secondary education is available in various
   forms supported by the state include secular, Church of England,
   Jewish, and Roman Catholic. Islamic education is available at primary
   level, but there is currently no secondary provision.

   One of Liverpool's important early schools was The Liverpool Blue Coat
   School; founded in 1708 as a charitable school, it continues today. The
   Belvedere School is one of the leading private schools in the city,
   along with Liverpool College founded in 1840 and Merchant Taylors'
   School. Another of Liverpool's notable senior schools is St. Edward's
   College, a former private high school located in West Derby. Historic
   grammar schools, such as the Liverpool Institute High School &
   Liverpool Collegiate, closed in the 1980s are still remembered as
   centres of academic excellence.

   Liverpool has three universities, the University of Liverpool,
   Liverpool Hope University and Liverpool John Moores University. Edge
   Hill University, originally founded as a teacher-training college in
   the Edge Hill district of Liverpool, is now located in Ormskirk in
   South-West Lancashire.

   The Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, founded to address some of
   the problems created by trade, continues today as a post-graduate
   school in the University of Liverpool and is one of only two
   institutions internationally that house the de facto standard
   anti-venom repository.

   Liverpool Hope University, founded in 1844, is situated on both sides
   of Taggart Avenue in Childwall and a second Campus in the City Centre
   (The Cornerstone). Hope is quickly making a name for itself within the
   Liberal Arts, the University has also enjoyed many successes in terms
   of high graduate employability, campus development, and a substantial
   increase in student applications from outside of the City.

   Liverpool John Moores University was previously a polytechnic, and
   gained university status in 1992. It is named in honour of Sir John
   Moores, one of the founders of the Littlewoods football pools and
   retail group, who was a major benefactor.

   The Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts was set up by (Sir) Paul
   McCartney in 1996, to train artistes and technicians. It is situated in
   the building which formerly housed the Liverpool Institute High School
   for Boys and is affiliated with Liverpool John Moores University.
   Recently, LIPA has been awarded the ability to issue its own degrees,
   and is moving towards becoming an independent higher education
   instution.

   The city has one further education college, Liverpool Community
   College. The college will recruit around 21,000 students in the
   academic year 2006/07.

Transport

Mersey crossings

   There are three tunnels under the River Mersey: one railway tunnel, the
   Mersey Railway Tunnel; and two road tunnels, Queensway Tunnel and
   Kingsway Tunnel.

   The Mersey Ferry continues to provide an important link between
   Liverpool and the Wirral, as well as a tourist attraction. Made famous
   by the song Ferry Cross the Mersey by Gerry and the Pacemakers, the
   song is now played on the ferryboats themselves every time they prepare
   to dock at Liverpool after a tourist cruise.

   The Mersey is crossed upstream from Liverpool at Runcorn and Widnes, by
   the Silver Jubilee Bridge (usually known simply as the "Runcorn
   Bridge") and the Runcorn railway bridge.

Airport

   In 2001, Liverpool Airport, near Speke in the south of the city, was
   renamed Liverpool John Lennon Airport, in honour of the late Beatle
   John Lennon. The airport's logo consists of a sketch that Lennon had
   drawn of himself, and the words "Above us only sky", lyrics from his
   song Imagine. The airport was the starting point for many Beatles tours
   in the sixties, and image of the boys boarding planes there were seen
   throughout the world.

Port

   In 2002 716,000 passengers used the Port of Liverpool, with the Isle of
   Man and Ireland being the two most important passenger routes.

Railways

   Liverpool is served by the Merseyrail urban rail network. The sections
   in the city centre are mostly underground. It has three lines: the
   Northern Line, which runs to Southport, Ormskirk, Kirkby and Hunts
   Cross, the Wirral Line, which runs through the Mersey Railway Tunnel
   and has branches to New Brighton, West Kirby, Chester and Ellesmere
   Port and the City Line, only from Lime Street, for St Helens, Wigan,
   Warrington and Manchester.

   The city's main railway station for longer-distance services is Lime
   Street station. Trains operate to destinations including London,
   Birmingham, Manchester, Preston, Leeds, Scarborough, Sheffield,
   Nottingham and Norwich.

Buses

   Long distance coach services arrive at and depart from the Norton
   Street Coach Station. Local buses serve the whole of the city and its
   surrounding areas.

Historic

   Historically, Liverpool had an extensive tram network; however, this
   was dismantled in the 1950s. From 1893 to 1956, the Liverpool docks
   were served by the Liverpool Overhead Railway. A number of other
   railway lines, such as the Canada Dock Branch from Edge Hill to
   Kirkdale, no longer see passenger services, or have been removed
   completely, such as the North Liverpool Extension Line.

Proposed

   In 2001 a plan to build new a light rail system, Merseytram, was
   developed. After central government insisted on additional guarantees
   prior to the release of previously committed funds, it was cancelled in
   November 2005. However, it is to be included in the transport plan from
   2006-2011, as it is deemed to be an important part of Liverpool's
   development.

Famous Liverpudlians

   A great many famous names have been associated with Liverpool; see
   Liverpudlians.

   Liverpool has also played a large part in UK (and sometimes world) Pop
   Music culture since the 1960s. For a list of some noteworthy groups
   from the area, consult the list of famous bands from Liverpool.

Economy

   This is a chart of trend of regional gross value added of Liverpool at
   current basic prices published (pp.240-253) by the Office for National
   Statistics with figures in millions of pounds sterling.
   Year Regional Gross Value Added Agriculture Industry Services
   1995 4,394                      3           950      3,440
   2000 5,681                      4           1,033    4,644
   2003 6,595                      6           953      5,636

   The economy of Liverpool is beginning to recover from its long,
   post-World War II decline. Between 1995 and 2001 GVA per head grew at
   6.3% annum. This compared with 5.8% for inner London and 5.7% for
   Bristol. The rate of job growth was 9.2% compared with a national
   average of 4.9% for the same period, 1998- 2002. However, Liverpool is
   still comparatively poor; a 2001 report by CACI showed that Liverpool
   still had four of the ten poorest postcode districts in the country.

   Like the rest of the United Kingdom the city has seen a large growth in
   the service sector, both public and private. Government offices include
   parts of the National Health Service and Home Office agencies such as
   the Criminal Records Bureau and the Identity and Passport Service,
   formerly the UK Passport Agency. Private sector service industries have
   invested in Liverpool too with several major call centres opening of
   late. The activities of the port have left the site with a
   communications infrastructure that had for a long time exceeded
   requirements.

   Growth in the areas of New Media has been helped by the existence of a
   relatively large computer game development community. Sony based one of
   only a handful of European PlayStation research and development centres
   in Wavertree, after buying out noted software publisher Psygnosis.
   Indeed, according to a 2006 issue of industry magazine 'Edge' (issue
   162), the first professional quality PlayStation software developer's
   kits were largely programmed by Sony's Liverpool 'studio' — the console
   has since become one of the World's most successful consumer products
   ever.

   Tourism is a major factor in the economy and will be of increasing
   importance in the run up to the Liverpool's year as European Capital of
   Culture. This has led to a great increase in the provision of high
   quality services such as hotels, restaurants and clubs. The buildings
   of Liverpool not only attract tourists but also film makers, who
   regularly use Liverpool to double for many cities around the worlds and
   making it the second most filmed city in the UK.

Twin towns

   Liverpool participates in international town twinning schemes to foster
   good international relations. Partners include:
     * Germany - Cologne (German: Köln), Germany
     * Nicaragua - Corinto, Nicaragua
     * Republic of Ireland - Dublin, Ireland
     * Australia - Liverpool, New South Wales, Australia
     * Ukraine - Odessa, Ukraine
     * Netherlands - Rotterdam, Netherlands
     * People's Republic of China - Shanghai, People's Republic of China

Trivia

   In a competition organised by the conservation charity Plantlife in
   2002, the sea-holly was nominated as Liverpool's county flower.

   Alois Hitler, Jr. the half-brother of Adolf Hitler lived in the city,
   was married, and had a child. There is a rumour that Adolf visited
   Liverpool in 1911 before the outbreak of World War I, and that he drank
   in the Poste House pub on Cumberland Street.

Districts of Liverpool

   Districts of Liverpool include:
     * Aigburth, Allerton, Anfield
     * Belle Vale, Broadgreen
     * Canning, Childwall, Clubmoor, Croxteth
     * Dingle, Dovecot
     * Edge Hill, Everton
     * Fairfield, Fazakerley
     * Garston, Gateacre, Grassendale
     * Hunts Cross
     * Kensington
     * Kirkdale, Knotty Ash
     * Mossley Hill
     * Netherley, Norris Green
     * Old Swan
     * St Michael's Hamlet, Speke, Stoneycroft
     * Toxteth, Tuebrook
     * Walton, Wavertree, West Derby, Woolton

Council wards

   City council wards of Liverpool include:
     * Allerton and Hunts Cross, Anfield
     * Belle Vale
     * Central, Childwall, Church, Clubmoor, County, Cressington, Croxteth
     * Everton
     * Fazakerley
     * Greenbank
     * Kensington, Kirkdale, Knotty Ash
     * Mossley Hill
     * Norris Green
     * Old Swan
     * Picton, Princes Park
     * Riverside
     * Speke Garston, St Michaels
     * Tuebrook and Stoneycroft
     * Warbreck, Wavertree, West Derby, Woolton
     * Yew Tree

Parliamentary constituencies and MPs

   Liverpool has five parliamentary constituencies: Liverpool Garston,
   Liverpool Riverside, Liverpool Walton, Liverpool Wavertree and
   Liverpool West Derby. At the 2005 general election, all were held by
   the Labour Party, and are represented by Maria Eagle, Louise Ellman,
   Jane Kennedy, Peter Kilfoyle and Robert Wareing respectively.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liverpool"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
