   #copyright

Local community

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Politics and government

   Local community is a geographically defined community, a group of
   people living close to each other.

   The term community suggest that its members have some relations that
   are communal - experiences, values, and/or interests may be shared,
   they may interact with each other and are concerned about mutual and
   collective well-being.

   Local community has been an issue of concern in social criticism and
   theoretical sociology, among others, especially in contrast to the
   modern society. The central idea, either expressed or rejected, is that
   local community has been in decline, if not lost, in our contemporary
   life.

Benefits of local community

   The benefit of local community is not limited to its appeal to popular
   imagination. Some empirical and theoretical research has indicated a
   range of benefits.

   The interpersonal ties (often called community network) within a local
   area enables various resource-sharing among the networked people.
   Lending small amount of money among the individuals ( micro_lending) is
   one form of this sharing.

   It may take a more subtle form of paying attention to each other and
   watch delinquent of criminal activities, as well as accident, leading
   to a higher public safety and lower crime rate.

   In general, diffusion of innovations research suggests that peer
   networks play a great role in the process of diffusion of knowledge and
   practices throughout a society. Medical practices and advice which
   enhance public health and sanitation would be shared among people more
   effectively given strong interpersonal networks. Adoption of new
   technologies would often occur through the network. (See also two-step
   flow of information and opinion leadership)
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Local_community"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
