   #copyright

Loch Ness

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

   Loch Ness

   Loch Ness (Scottish Gaelic: Loch Nis) is a large, deep freshwater loch
   in the Scottish Highlands ( 57°18′N 4°27′W) extending for approximately
   37 km (23 miles) southwest of Inverness. The Loch's surface is 15.8
   metres above sea level.

   Loch Ness is best known for the alleged sightings of the legendary Loch
   Ness Monster ("Nessie"), although it is scenic in its own right. Boat
   cruises operate from various locations along its shores giving tourists
   the chance to look for the monster.

   Loch Ness is the largest body of water on the geologic fault known as
   the Great Glen, which runs from Inverness in the north to Fort William
   in the south. The Caledonian Canal, which links the sea at either end
   of the Great Glen, uses Loch Ness for part of its route.

   The loch is one of a series of interconnected, murky bodies of water in
   Scotland. Quite large, Loch Ness has exceptionally low water visibility
   due to a high peat content in the surrounding soil. It is the second
   deepest loch in Scotland, and the UK.
   Loch Ness, with Urquhart Castle in the foreground.
   Enlarge
   Loch Ness, with Urquhart Castle in the foreground.

   Loch Ness is the second largest Scottish loch by surface area at
   56.4 km^2 (21.8 sq mi) but due to its extreme depth is the largest by
   volume. The loch contains more fresh water than all that in England and
   Wales combined. At its deepest part, 226 m (740 feet), London's BT
   Tower at 189 m (620 feet) would be completely submerged.
   Locks on Caledonian Canal in Fort Augustus, Loch Ness in the background
   Enlarge
   Locks on Caledonian Canal in Fort Augustus, Loch Ness in the background

   It also acts as the lower storage reservoir for the Foyers
   pumped-storage hydroelectric scheme, which was the first of its kind in
   Britain. The turbines were originally used to provide power for a
   nearby mill, but now electricity is generated and supplied to the
   National Grid.

   At its southwestern end, near Fort Augustus, one can see the only
   island on Loch Ness. Cherry Island is an example of a Crannog (
   artificial islands generally from the Iron Age).

   At Drumnadrochit there is a Loch Ness Monster exhibition centre, which
   contains information on the legendary creature.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loch_Ness"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
