   #copyright

Lomé

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography

   Location of Lomé in Togo

   Lomé, estimated population 700,000 ( 1998), is the capital of Togo.
   Located on the Gulf of Guinea, Lomé is the country's administrative and
   industrial centre and its chief port. The city exports coffee, cocoa,
   copra, and palm kernels. It also has an oil refinery. Coordinates:
   6°7′55″N, 1°13′22″E The city was founded in the eighteenth century by
   the Ewe people. In 1882, the village, known then as Bey Beach, became a
   major trading centre with the arrival of Chico and Octaviano Olympio as
   agents for the British trading firm A. and F. Swanzy.

   Bey Beach became the capital of Togo when the German rulers transferred
   capital status from Aneho in 1897. The city then grew quickly until it
   was taken by the French Army in 1914 during World War I.

   Lomé lies in the extreme south west of Togo, up against the Ghanaian
   border. Attractions in the city include Lomé Grand Market, the Togo
   National Museum in the Palais de Congrés, a fetish (voodoo) market,
   Lomé Cathedral, beaches and the former wharf.

   The University of Lomé previously called University of Benin is located
   in Lomé Tokoin Campus . Togo's main airport is outside the city, while
   the tallest building in Lomé and in all of Togo is the 2 Fevrier
   Sofitel Hotel building. The former railway line to Blitta runs from the
   city.

   Neighbourhoods in Lomé include Kodjoviakopé, Nyekonakopé, Amoutivé,
   Tokoin and Bé. The northern neighbourhoods are almost separated from
   the centre by a lagoon.

International agreements signed in Lomé

Lomé Convention

   The Lomé Convention is a trade and aid agreement between the European
   Union (EU) and 71 African, Caribbean, and Pacific (ACP) countries. It
   was first signed on February 28, 1975 in Lomé.

Lomé Peace Accord

   The Lomé Peace Accord was a peace agreement between the warring parties
   in the civil war in Sierra Leone. With the assistance of the
   international community, Sierra Leone President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah and
   Revolutionary United Front leader Foday Sankoh signed the Peace Accord
   on July 7, 1999. However, the agreement did not last and the Sierra
   Leone Civil War continued for two more years.

Famous people from Lomé

     * Emmanuel Adebayor, football player
     * Kossi Agassa, football player
     * Yao Aziawonou, football player
     * Razak Boukari, football player
     * Abbe Ibrahim, football player
     * Souleymane Mamam, football player
     * Daré Nibombé, football player

Sister Cities

     * Taipei, Taiwan
     * Bay City, Michigan, United States

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lom%C3%A9"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
