   #copyright

Long pepper

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Food and agriculture;
Plants

                 iLong pepper
   Long pepper's leaves and fruit
   Long pepper's leaves and fruit
           Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Plantae
   Division: Magnoliophyta
   Class:    Magnoliopsida
   Order:    Piperales
   Family:   Piperaceae
   Genus:    Piper
   Species:  P. longum

                                Binomial name

   Piper longum
   L.

   Long pepper (Piper longum) is a flowering vine in the family
   Piperaceae, cultivated for its fruit, which is usually dried and used
   as a spice and seasoning. Long pepper is a close relative of the black
   pepper plant, and has a similar, though generally hotter, taste. The
   word pepper itself is derived from the Sanskrit word for long pepper,
   pippali. The fruit of the pepper consists of many minuscule fruits —
   each about the size of a poppy seed — embedded in the surface of a
   flower spike; it closely resembles a hazel tree catkin. Another species
   of long pepper, Piper retrofractum, is native to Java.
   Dried long pepper catkins
   Enlarge
   Dried long pepper catkins

   Prior to the European discovery of the New World, long pepper was an
   important and well-known spice. The ancient history of black pepper is
   often interlinked with (and confused with) that of long pepper. The
   Romans knew of both and often referred to either as just piper; many
   ancient botanists erroneously believed dried black pepper and long
   pepper came from the same plant. Only after the discovery of the New
   World and of chile peppers did the popularity of long pepper decline.
   Chile peppers, some of which, when dried, are similar in shape and
   taste to long pepper, were easier to grow in a variety of locations
   more convenient to Europe. Today, long pepper is an extremely rare
   ingredient in European cuisines, but it can still be found in Indian
   vegetable pickles, some North African spice mixtures, and in Indonesian
   and Malaysian cooking.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Long_pepper"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
