   #copyright

Long-tailed Tit

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

                 iLong-tailed Tit

                             Conservation status

   Least Concern (LC)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Aves
   Order:   Passeriformes
   Family:  Aegithalidae
   Genus:   Aegithalos
   Species: A. caudatus

                                Binomial name

   Aegithalos caudatus
   (Linnaeus, 1758)

   The Long-tailed Tit, Aegithalos caudatus, is a very small passerine
   bird. It breeds in most of Europe and Asia. It is a non-migratory
   species.

   It is closely related to the true tits, and in winter it is often found
   with tit flocks.

   This is a very small bird at only 13–15 cm in length including its very
   long tail, which itself makes up 7–9 cm of the total. The Long-tailed
   Tit is black and brown above and whitish below, with reddish flanks. It
   has a white crown. North European birds (A. c. caudatus) have
   completely white heads and flanks.

   This is a restless species, constantly on the move as it searches for
   insects and other small food items. It is usually found in small
   flocks, and has been described as an avian sheep.

   Long-tailed Tits are birds of deciduous woodlands with undergrowth.
   They nest in a tree or shrub. Six to twelve eggs are laid in a woven
   closed nest. The nest is held together with spider webs, and
   camouflaged with lichen. Adult birds will find a relative's nest and
   help feeding their "nephews and nieces", if their own nest is predated.

   The call is loud trisyllabic srih-srih-srih.

Gallery

   Long-tailed Tit

                           Long-tailed Tit

                                          Long-tailed Tit

                                                         Long-tailed Tit

   Long-tailed Tit juvenile
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Long-tailed_Tit"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
