   #copyright

Lusaka

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography

   SOS Children works in Lusaka, Zambia, Africa. For more information see
   SOS Children in Lusaka, Zambia
   Location of Lusaka in Zambia

Geography

   Lusaka is the capital and largest city of Zambia. It is located in
   south central Zambia at 15°25′S 28°17′E, on a plateau at 1300 m (4265
   ft) in altitude. It has a population of 1,084,703 (2000 census). It is
   in the Region of Lusaka, being the central province of Zambia, this
   naturally makes it the most densely populated and the most tribally
   diverse region. The untamed Lunsemfwa River is near the city and the
   drop into the Zembezi Valley is quite a distance from the capital.

History

   Lusaka was expanded in 1905 by European settlers, at the site of a
   village named after the village headman Lusaaka. Due to its central
   location in the country, in 1935 it replaced Livingstone as the capital
   of the British colony Northern Rhodesia. After the federation of
   Northern and Southern Rhodesia in 1953, it was a centre of the civil
   disobedience movement that led to the creation of the independent state
   of Zambia. In 1964 it became the capital of the newly independent
   Zambia.

Culture

   The city centre lies around Cairo Road, around which lie the New City
   Market and Kamwala Market, a major shopping area, and the Zintu
   Community Museum. Further east lies the government area, around the
   Cathedral Hill and Ridgeway areas. Other suburbs include Elizabetha
   Villa, Fairview, Kabulonga, Kabwata (a working class area, home to the
   Kabwata Cultural Centre), Madras, Manda Hill (another major shopping
   area), Northmead (known for its nightlife), Olympia Park, Rhodes Park,
   Roma, Thorn Park and Woodlands. Attractions include Lusaka National
   Museum, the Political Museum, the Zintu Community Museum, the Freedom
   Statue, the Zambian National Assembly, the Agricultural Society
   Showgrounds (known for their annual show), the Moore Pottery Factory,
   the Lusaka Playhouse theatre, a cinema, the Cathedral of the Holy
   Cross, a centotaph, a golf club, the Lusaka Central Sports Club, and
   the zoo and botanical gardens of the Munda Wanga Environmental Park.
   The city is also home to the University of Zambia.

Modern times

   Lately, Lusaka has become a popular urban settlement for most Zambians
   and tourists alike. It's central nature and fast growing infrastructure
   sector has increased donor confidence and as such Zambians are seeing
   signs of development in the form of job creation, housing etc.
   Consequently, it is quite evident that with proper and effective
   economic reforms, Lusaka as well as Zambia as a whole will develop
   considerably, Lusaka is a great place with different animals to see.

Airport

   The city is home to Lusaka International Airport and lies on the
   railway line from Livingstone to Kitwe. This airport is the hub of
   Zambian Airways. The airport is also used as a military airport as well
   as a public one.

2011 All African Games

   Lusaka will host the 2011 All-Africa Games. A new stadium of a 70,000
   capacity will be built in Lusaka for the games. This is the first time
   the country has held the games and may help build up a bright future as
   the stadiums may provide a chance for children to learn sport and
   perhaps for the city to get a slight make over.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lusaka"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
