   #copyright

Lynton and Barnstaple Railway

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Railway transport

               Lynton & Barnstaple Railway

                        Location
   Place         Exmoor, Devon, England
   Terminus      Woody Bay
                  Commercial Operations
   Name          Lynton & Barnstaple Railway
   Built by      Promotor: Sir George Newnes, Bart.
                 Engineer: James Szlumper
                 Contractor: James Nuttall
   Gauge         1 ft 11^1⁄[2] in (597 mm)
                  Preserved Operations
   Owned by      Lynton and Barnstaple Railway Trust
   Operated by   Lynton and Barnstaple Railway Co. Ltd.
   Stations      10
   Length        19 miles 20 chains (31.0 km)
   Gauge         1 ft 11^1⁄[2] in (597 mm)
   Preserved era Woody Bay: mid- 1930s
                   Commercial History
   Opened        11 May 1898
   Closed        29 September 1935
                  Preservation History
   1979          L&BR Association formed
   1985          Woody Bay station purchased
   1993          Railway Company formed
   2000          Association reformed as Trust
   2004          Woody Bay reopened
   2005          Bridge 67 reinstated
   2006          Killington Lane opened

   The Lynton & Barnstaple Railway (L&B) opened as an independent railway
   in May 1898. It was a single track narrow-gauge railway just over
   19 miles (30 km) long running through the rugged and picturesque area
   bordering Exmoor in North Devon, England. Although opened after the
   1896 Light Railways Act, it was authorised under its own Act of
   Parliament and built to higher (and more costly) standards than others
   of the time.

   Briefly, the line earned a small return for shareholders, but for most
   of its life, the L&B made a loss. In 1922 the L&B was taken over by the
   Southern Railway, and eventually closed in September 1935.


   Lynton and Barnstaple Railway

     Rarely, if ever before, has the closing of a railway aroused such a
      keen interest as has been awakened throughout the country by the
     running of the last trains over the narrow gauge Barnstaple-Lynton
   section of the Southern Railway. This is to be attributed very largely
      to the unusual character of the line and the magnificent scenery
                          through which it passes.


   Lynton and Barnstaple Railway

   wrote an observer of the time.

   Seventy years later, much of the line is still in evidence. The most
   spectacular edifice is the brick-built Chelfham Viaduct. Fully restored
   in 2000, its eight 42 foot wide arches reach 70 feet above the Stoke
   Rivers valley — the largest narrow-gauge railway structure in England.

   Lynton and Bratton Fleming stations are now private residences,
   Blackmoor Gate is a restaurant, Barnstaple Town a school. Chelfham and
   Woody Bay both serve the new L&B.

   Chelfham station is used for volunteer accommodation, while Woody Bay
   is the main centre of operations. A short section reopened to
   passengers in 2004. Bridge 67 was generously rebuilt as a gift by
   Edmund Nuttall Ltd. — a firm descended from James Nuttall of
   Manchester, the main contractors for the original construction —
   allowing an extension to Killington Lane in 2006. Work is progressing
   on the next section, towards Parracombe.

History

   Extract from an early contemporary map showing the route
   Enlarge
   Extract from an early contemporary map showing the route

   Following the opening of the Devon and Somerset Railway. to Barnstaple,
   there were calls for an extension to serve the twin villages of Lynton
   and Lynmouth, which were popular with holiday-makers.

   Through the middle of the 19th century, several schemes were proposed,
   from established railway companies and independent developers. One
   scheme suggested electric power, while another proposed a line from
   South Molton.

   None of these schemes offered sufficient prospects to encourage
   investment, and few got further than initial plans.

   Due to the difficult terrain, one scheme suggested a gauge of
   1 ft 11^1⁄[2] in (597 mm), already in use on the Festiniog Railway and
   elsewhere, to ease construction. This scheme was supported by Sir
   George Newnes who became chairman of the company. The Lynton &
   Barnstaple Railway Bill was passed on 27 June 1895, and the line opened
   on 11 May 1898 with public service commencing on 16 May.

   The scheme did not meet with universal enthusiasm. From the beginning
   there were doubts as to the intentions of the promoters. Although often
   attributed to the difficult terrain, many of the sinuous curves and
   deviations were due to resistance by local landowners along parts of
   the route.

   A guide published whilst the line was being built stated:


   Lynton and Barnstaple Railway

   On the highest point at Lynton a pretentious mansion has been built for
     himself by the proprietor of a certain well known publication, whom
     some look on as the benefactor and others as the evil genius of the
    place. Through his enterprise it is that the "lift" was made in 1888,
       to be cursed by conservative and artistic souls, but blessed by
   unwieldy bodies and rheumatic limbs; he has also favoured the railway,
      now a fait accompli, and the pier which seems so much wanted. Yet
   whatever may be said of the railway, there is good reason for doubting
     if the pier would be a real advantage. It would certainly flood the
        place with a class of excursionists for whom there is little
      accommodation, and on whom, for the most part, its characteristic
                       beauties would be thrown away.


   Lynton and Barnstaple Railway

   The L&B seldom attracted sufficient passengers to remain viable. The
   journey of nearly twenty miles took on average an hour and a half. To
   satisfy several influential residents, the terminus at Lynton was some
   distance from the town itself, and from the cliff railway to Lynmouth.

   Declining tourism during World War I, improved roads, increased car
   ownership further depleted the line's income until it was no longer
   economic. A guidebook published in 1921 described the situation:


   Lynton and Barnstaple Railway

     The railway which has made this corner more accessible is of narrow
   gauge, requiring a change of carriage at the Town station, Barnstaple.
    ... Unfortunately, this line does not seem to be a financial success,
     and its service, out of season at least, is not a very liberal one.


   Lynton and Barnstaple Railway

   Despite numerous cost-saving measures and extra investment in the line,
   the Southern Railway was unable to reverse the trend, and closed the
   line.

   The last train ran on 29 September 1935. The Southern removed
   everything they could use elsewhere, and by 8 November, had lifted the
   track from Lynton to Milepost 15⅓ - on the Barnstaple side of Woody Bay
   station. On 13 November an auction was held, although the railway
   failed to attract much interest. Most rolling stock, and all but one
   loco, was sold for scrap and broken up at Pilton. Some coaches were
   sectioned for use as garden sheds. Third class seats became garden
   furniture, and first class seats found their way into local snooker
   halls and Masonic Lodges. In December, Plymouth ship breaker Sidney
   Castle won the tender to dismantle the railway. The remaining track was
   lifted by June 1936, and in September, surviving loco Lew was shipped
   abroad. The stations and track bed were auctioned in 1938.

   The L&B had an exemplary safety record, and no members of the public
   were killed or injured during its 37-year existence, although accidents
   at Braunton Road and Chumhill did claim the lives of three track
   workers.

Reawakening

   Laying track, Woody Bay, 2003
   Enlarge
   Laying track, Woody Bay, 2003
   Hand shunting, Woody Bay, 2003
   Enlarge
   Hand shunting, Woody Bay, 2003

   Unlike the Welsh Highland Railway, the track bed was sold off piecemeal
   - often reverting to the original owners, paying much less than they
   had sold it for originally. Although there has been minor development
   on parts of the route, and Wistlandpound Reservoir has flooded the
   track bed close to its mid-point, much is still in open countryside,
   with many sections identifiable.

   The Lynton & Barnstaple Railway Association (now a charitable trust)
   was formed in 1979. Woody Bay Station was purchased by the Lynton and
   Barnstaple Railway Company in 1995 and, after much effort, a short
   section of railway reopened to passengers in 2004. This was extended to
   over a mile in 2006, with steam and diesel-hauled trains running
   between Woody Bay and the new, temporary terminus at Killington Lane.

   In 1995, the Lynbarn Railway — at the Milky Way, a theme park near
   Clovelly, was created and operated by L&B volunteers. Profits from this
   funded the purchase, restoration and reopening of Woody Bay. The
   Lynbarn was handed over to the park in 2005, once Woody Bay had become
   established, and continues to operate as part of the attraction.

   Little original rolling stock survived, but one restored coach (Coach
   7) and a brake van (Van 23) are on display at Woody Bay. Parts of two
   other coaches, and two goods vans are in storage and will form part of
   a "heritage train" to complement more modern stock.

   Another original coach, used as a summer house, is on show (unrestored)
   at the National Railway Museum York, and a third, has been running on
   the Ffestiniog Railway in North Wales for longer than it did on the
   L&B. Due to the Ffestioiog's smaller loading gauge, the roof profile
   was altered so it can pass through Garnedd tunnel.

   A 1915 Kerr Stuart "Joffre" class 0-6-0T loco was bought in 1983, and
   named Axe. It is being restored for use at Woody Bay.

   A new Lew class locomotive — Lyd — is being built at Boston Lodge for
   use on the Welsh Highland Railway. Although an independent project, it
   is planned for Lyd to visit Woody Bay. So that it can pass Gernedd
   tunnel, while looking authentic, Lyds cab will have adjustable side
   panels.

   The Trust owns several ex-industrial diesel locomotives, restored and
   maintained at L&B engineering works in Bratton Fleming. Other visiting
   diesel and steam locomotives have also seen service since services
   restarted.


                         L&B Stations (1898-1935)

            * Barnstaple Town
            * Pilton (Goods only)
            * Snapper Halt
            * Chelfham
            * Bratton Fleming

                                             * Blackmoor Gate
                                             * Parracombe Halt
                                             * Woody Bay
                                             * Caffyns Halt
                                             * Lynton and Lynmouth

                            Modern L&B Stations

            * Killington Lane (opened 2006)
            * Woody Bay (reopened 2004)

The route

   Chelfham Viaduct; the largest narrow gauge railway structure in England
   Enlarge
   Chelfham Viaduct; the largest narrow gauge railway structure in England
   From 700 feet up on Exmoor, looking towards the hilltops, and beyond,
   the sea...
   Enlarge
   From 700 feet up on Exmoor, looking towards the hilltops, and beyond,
   the sea...

   The route of this diminutive railway and the scenery through which it
   passes, has been described many times, such as in a 1920s guide to the
   area:


   Lynton and Barnstaple Railway

    The line at first keeps up the winding course of the Yeo with Pilton
      church tower on the left, and that of Goodleigh presently, on the
     right, marking a side valley, for which the train stops at Snapper
    Halt, whence, by Goodleigh one might have an alluring ramble back to
                                 Barnstaple.

       Chelfham (pron. Chellam) is reached by a fine viaduct over the
   tributary stream, where 2 miles east stands Stoke Rivers, through which
      the above round might be extended. The line has now left the Yeo,
   mounting eastward up the Bratton Valley to Bratton Fleming Station near
     the lofty village of Bratton Fleming. The next station is Blackmoor
     (900 feet), lying under the tumuli of Kentisbury Down to the left,
    whence one might descend on foot to Lynton and Lynmouth (7 miles) or
        Ilfracombe (10 miles) from the crossroads at Blackmoor Gate.

      The railway has next to wind around the deep hollow in which lies
    Parracombe (Fox and Geese Inn) [ sic], where, near the halt platform,
   can be seen the tower of the old church, another of those said to have
    been built in expiation of Thomas à Becket's murder. Hence flows the
    Heddon water, which one might follow down its beautiful course by the
   Hunter's Inn. The cyclist will find a way diverging from the main road
   a little beyond Parracombe. At the last station, Wooda Bay^*, two miles
   behind this place and its neighbour Trentishoe, the line has reached a
      highest point of about 1000 feet. Beyond this, it crooks down the
     valley of the West Lyn (best glimpses on right hand), past Caffyn's
    Down Halt (for the golf links), ending some half-mile behind Lynton,
             and over a mile by the zig-zag road from Lynmouth.

   The road (17 miles) keeps pretty much the course of the railway, except
   in the central stage, where it strikes a mile further north to Loxhore,
      before leaving the valley of the Yeo, then rejoins the railway at
                                 Blackmoor.


   Lynton and Barnstaple Railway

   (Note Wooda Bay station was actually renamed Woody Bay in 1901) As well
   as several foot- and cycle-routes which can still be followed today,
   the hostelry in Parracombe mentioned in the article remains a popular
   venue (although the geese are now singular).

Gradient profile

   The L&B rises and falls several times along its length. Starting at
   150 feet above sea level, The first 3¾ miles, through Barnstaple, and
   along the Yeo Valley stays relatively level. Collard Bridge marks the
   start of an 8 mile climb, mainly at one in fifty, to Blackmoor Gate. A
   shallower down-gradient follows, of about 2 miles, towards Parracombe
   Bank, and the start of another climb, of about 2½ miles, to Woody Bay —
   at 1000 feet, the highest railway station in England. The line then
   falls, again mostly at one in fifty - to Lynton & Lynmouth station,
   still 700 feet above the sea, and hidden by the landscape from the town
   of Lynton.

Rolling stock

   One of the most distinctive aspects of the L&B was its Rolling Stock,
   with the locomotives appearing originally in a livery of plain lined
   green, and later on a black base, with chestnut under-frames, hauling
   passenger carriages coloured terracotta with off-white upper panels,
   and light grey goods wagons. The schemes were simplified as individual
   vehicles were repainted. With the arrval of Lew the livery was slowly
   changed to the Southern Maunsell version for locos and passenger stock,
   and umber for the goods wagons. The loco headlamps which had been black
   under the L&B were re-painted red.
   Ffestiniog coach no. 14 (ex-L&B no. 15) (centre) at Tanybwlch
   Enlarge
   Ffestiniog coach no. 14 (ex-L&B no. 15) (centre) at Tanybwlch
   Yeo and train approaching Woody Bay in Southern Days
   Enlarge
   Yeo and train approaching Woody Bay in Southern Days

Locomotives

   At least three contractors' locomotives were used for construction.
   Unusually, some of the temporary track was wider than the final gauge -
   the section around Parracombe Bank for example, spanning the Heddon
   valley, was built to 3 ft gauge, with a locomotive known as Winnie. A
   fifth locomotive - perhaps named Spondon - may also have been used,
   although little is known of either of these. In 1900, Kilmarnock was
   sold by the L&B. It is believed to have been left behind by James
   Nuttall, as a result of the financial difficulties and litigation
   between railway and contractor.

   The L&B used only coal-fired steam motive power. In 1896, the Hunslet
   Engine Company submitted two designs (a 2-4-2T and a 4-4-0T), but
   eventually an order was placed for three 2-6-2Ts from Manning Wardle &
   Co of Leeds. The locos were named after local rivers: Yeo, Exe, and
   Taw. These were supplemented by a 2-4-2T, Lyn, built by the Baldwin
   Locomotive Works of Philadelphia, USA, as the Company realised that
   three locos would be insufficient. Baldwin was selected as they could
   deliver the loco — based largely on standard components — more quickly
   than domestic suppliers, who had a backlog of orders, caused by a
   national engineering dispute over the 8 hour working day resulting in a
   lock-out by employers from July 1897 and January 1898. The loco,
   delivered in knock-down form, was assembled at Pilton and first steamed
   in July 1898. The Manning Wardles were delivered ahead of the lock-out,
   and Yeo and Taw were used in the final stages of construction. Exe was
   stored locally in a stable, where she received the unwelcome attention
   of thieves who made away with brass fittings and fixtures.

   In 1923 the L&B was absorbed into the Southern Railway, and began an
   upgrade programme. All stock was repainted in Southern Maunsell livery,
   and track and buildings were improved. A fifth locomotive, Lew was
   purchased in 1925, with improvements to the original Manning Wardle
   design.

The fate of Lew

   Although bought at the auction (it is believed by Barwicks of London)
   by December 1935, Lew was working for Sidney Castle, the dismantler of
   the railway. This work was completed by July 1936 and in September, Lew
   was moved by rail to Swansea and loaded onto the S.S. Sabor destined
   for the port of Pernambuco (since renamed Recife), Brazil. Most of the
   relevant shipping records were destroyed in World War II, so today
   there is no way of discovering its eventual destination. It is unlikely
   that Lew was destined for a coffee plantation as this crop was in
   decline in the 1930s. More likely it went to either a cotton or sugar
   cane plantation. It is possible, although unlikely, that Lew is still
   intact somewhere in Brazil, abandoned or perhaps still in use, but
   despite several attempts, no trace of the locomotive, or evidence of
   its fate, has so far been found.

Passenger stock

   Coach 7 at Woody Bay, 2005
   Enlarge
   Coach 7 at Woody Bay, 2005
   Van 23 in the loading bay, Woody Bay, 2005
   Enlarge
   Van 23 in the loading bay, Woody Bay, 2005

   Sixteen passenger carriages were delivered for the opening. Built by
   the Bristol Wagon & Carriage Works Co. Ltd., these comprised six
   different types, all the same size, being 39 ft 6 in long, 6 ft wide,
   (7 ft 4 in over steps) and 8 ft 7 in high — large by narrow gauge
   standards — and certainly superior to any previous British narrow gauge
   stock.

   The coaching stock was extremely solidly constructed, and offered
   levels of accommodation far in advance of anything else at the time -
   certainly compared to any other narrow gauge railway. Almost 70 years
   later, the design was used as the basis for a new rake of carriages
   built by the Ffestiniog - testament to the excellence of the original
   design.

   The body for coach 17 was built in 1911, by local firm Shapland and
   Petter, and mounted on a steel underframe constructed by the railway in
   its own workshops at Pilton. Marginally longer than the earlier
   coaches, it contained both smoking and non-smoking accommodation for
   first and third class passengers, as well as the brake van space.

Goods stock

   The Southern Railway introduced several new items of goods stock, and
   also purchased two ex-War Department travelling cranes for the line.

   Goods-only trains were a rarity, and the usual practice was to attach
   goods wagons to any scheduled passenger services. Whilst the shunting
   of wagons at intermediate stations no doubt added to the interest of
   the tourist and occasional traveller, it also added marginally to the
   journey time.

   The open goods wagons were originally delivered with a single top-hung
   side door on each side, but these proved innefficient, and all were
   eventually converted to side hung double doors. By 1907, most had been
   fitted with tarpaulin rails. The goods vans used the same underframe,
   and were fitted with double sliding doors on each side.

   The bogie open doors were also originally top-hung, but converted by
   the railway at Pilton.

   Wagon No. 19 was originally used by the contractors. After the railway
   opened, it was modified and entered revenue service in 1900. At only
   6 tons it was regularly used in preference to one of the 8 ton wagons
   as it reduced the overall weight of a train.

   Van 23 - now restored and at Woody Bay - was built at Pilton by the
   L&B. Unlike all other L&B stock, its underframe was entirely made of
   wood.

   The travelling cranes were ex-WD stock, and fitted with outriggers,
   rated at 3 tons with a fifteen feet radius, 4½ tons at 11 ft 6 in.
   Intended as recovery cranes in the event of a derailment, neither saw
   much use. One crane, with its match truck, was kept in the long
   headshunt at Pilton, the other was put to use in Lynton goods yard.

   The 1927 bogie goods vans were originally fitted with heavy diagonal
   wooden cross braces at each end, but these were later replaced with
   single diagonal angle-iron braces.


   L&B Locomotives (1898 - 1935)
   Name       Works No Type    Manuf.
   Yeo         1361    2-6-2T  MWL
   Exe         1362    2-6-2T  MWL
   Taw         1363    2-6-2T  MWL
   Lyn        15965    2-4-2T  BLW
   Lew         2042    2-6-2T  MWL
   Contractors' Locomotives ( - 1898)
   Excelsior   970     0-4-2WT WGB
   Slave      1430     0-4-0ST WGB
   Kilmarnock  703     0-4-0ST ABA
   Modern L&B Locomotives (1995 - )
   For a list of modern locomotives, go HERE


   L&B Goods Stock (1898-1935)
   (For a list of all goods stock, go HERE
   L&B
   No. Southern
   Number Wagon Type Manuf. Date
   1 28304 Open Goods BWC 1897
   2 28305 Open goods BWC 1897
   3 47036 Goods van BWC 1897

   L&B Coaching Stock (1898-1935)
   For a list of all coaching stock, go HERE
   L&B
   No. Southern
   Number Coach Type Manuf. Date
   1 6991 Saloon brake end observation BWC 1897
   2 6992 Saloon brake end observation BWC 1897
   3 2473 Saloon end observation BWC 1897
   Modern L&B Rolling Stock (1995-)
   For a list of modern stock, go HERE

The future

   Restoring passenger services from Woody Bay has been a major
   undertaking by the enthusiastic volunteers. Although much of the track
   bed survives intact, several obstacles — including Wistlandpound
   Reservoir — must be overcome if the greater part of the route is to be
   restored, fulfilling the hopes expressed in a card left at Barnstaple
   on the day after the line closed — Perchance it is not dead, but
   sleepeth...

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lynton_and_Barnstaple_Railway"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
