   #copyright

Macau

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Asia

   中華人民共和國澳門特別行政區
   Região Administrativa Especial de Macau da República Popular da China
   Macau Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China

   Flag of Macau Emblem of Macau
   Flag          Emblem
   Motto: none
   Anthem: March of the Volunteers
   (national anthem of the PRC)
   Location of Macau
   Capital none ^1
   22°10′N 113°33′E
   Most populated freguesia Freguesia de Nossa Senhora de Fátima
   Official languages Cantonese ( de facto)
   Portuguese
   Mandarin ( de jure)
   Government
    - Chief Executive Edmund Ho Hau-wah
   Establishment
    - occupied by Portugal 1557
    - Portuguese colony August 13, 1862
    - SAR of the PRC December 20, 1999
   Area
    - Total 28.2 km² ( not ranked)
   10.9 sq mi
    - Water (%) 0
   Population
    - 2006 (2nd qtr) estimate 503,000 ( 168th)
    - 2000 census 431,000
    - Density 17,310/km² ( 2nd)
   44,784/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total $11.5 billion ( 139th)
    - Per capita $24,300^2 ( 2005)
   HDI  (2003) 0.909^2 (high) ( n/a)
   Currency Macanese pataca ( MOP)
   Time zone MST ( UTC+8)
    - Summer ( DST) not observed
   Internet TLD .mo
   Calling code +853
   ^1 Historically, the capital was "Cidade do Nome de Deus de Macau" (or
   Macau Peninsula; this name abolished upon reunification). The
   government headquarters were located in the St. Lawrence Parish.
   ^2 Information obtained from the Direcção dos Serviços de Estatística e
   Censos (Statistics and Census of the Government of Macau Special
   Administrative Region)

   The Macau Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of
   China ( Traditional Chinese: 中華人民共和國澳門特別行政區 [ in Mandarin , in
   Cantonese ] ; Portuguese: Região Administrativa Especial de Macau da
   República Popular da China [ in Portuguese ], abbreviated as RAEM),
   commonly known as Macau or Macao ( Traditional Chinese: 澳門, or
   informally known as 馬交) is a small territory on the southern coast of
   the People's Republic of China. Administered by Portugal until 1999, it
   was the oldest European colony in China, dating back to the 16th
   century. The administrative power over Macau was transferred to the
   People's Republic of China (PRC) in 1999, and it is now one of two
   special administrative regions of the PRC, together with Hong Kong.

   Besides historical Chinese and Portuguese world-heritage relics,
   Macau's biggest attraction is its gambling industry and casinos. Though
   many forms of gambling are legal here, the most popular game is
   baccarat, which generates over two thirds of the gaming industry's
   gross receipts.

Macao v. Macau

   Lotus Fountain in Macau
   Enlarge
   Lotus Fountain in Macau

   The name "Macau" (Portuguese pronunciation IPA: [mɐ.'kaw]) is thought
   to be derived from the Templo de A-Má (Temple of A-Ma or Ma Kok Temple)
   (媽閣廟, Cantonese Jyutping: Maa1 Gok3 Miu6, local pronunciation: Maa5
   Gok3 Miu6 or Maa5 Gok3 Miu5), a still-existing landmark built in 1448
   dedicated to the goddess Matsu.

   The Chinese name Aomen 澳門 ( pinyin: Àomén, Cantonese Jyutping: Ou3
   Mun4) means "Inlet Gates". The "gates" refer to two erect gate-like
   mountains of Nantai (Chinese: 南台; pinyin: Nántái) and Beitai (Chinese:
   北台; pinyin: Běitái). Alternately, Ao may derive from Macau's previous
   name Heong San Ou, as it is geographically situated at "Cross' Door".
   Macau is also known as Hou Keng Ou (壕鏡澳 Oyster-mirror Inlet), Heong San
   Ou (香山澳 Xiangshan-ao; Fragrant-mountain Inlet), Lin Tou (蓮島 Liandao;
   Lotus Island), as well as Soda Port (疏打埠).

History

   Quartel dos Mouros
   Enlarge
   Quartel dos Mouros

Sixteenth to eighteenth centuries

   Chinese fishermen have been living and working in the Pearl River Delta
   for over four thousand years. The small peninsula and islands that came
   to be called Macau were first settled by the Portuguese in the
   sixteenth century. Prior to that, they belonged to various counties
   within the Chinese Empire, with the village of Mong Ha (Wangxia),
   located on the Macau peninsula, having been settled during the Yuan
   Dynasty.

   In 1535, the Portuguese obtained the right to anchor ships in Macau
   harbours and carry out trading activities. In 1553, the Portuguese were
   enabled to go ashore and establish a settlement, in order to dry out
   goods drenched by sea water, as a reward for defeating pirates and to
   serve as middlemen for trade with Japan and India.

   In 1557, the Portuguese established a permanent settlement in Macau,
   and beginning in 1670, Portugal leased the territory, although there
   was no transfer of sovereignty. Macau prospered as a port and was the
   subject of repeated attempts by the Dutch to conquer it in the 17th
   century.

Nineteenth century

   The Chapel of St. Francis Xavier on Coloane island, with a forecourt
   displaying Portuguese pavement, a sign of Macau's Portuguese History.
   Enlarge
   The Chapel of St. Francis Xavier on Coloane island, with a forecourt
   displaying Portuguese pavement, a sign of Macau's Portuguese History.

   Following the Opium War (1839-42), Portugal occupied Taipa and Coloane
   in 1851 and 1864 respectively. In 1887, Portugal and the Qing
   government signed the Sino-Portuguese Draft Minutes and the Beijing
   Treaty, in which China ceded to Portugal the right to "perpetual
   occupation and government of Macau"; conversely, Portugal pledged to
   seek China's approval before transferring Macau to another country.

Before the 1960s

   In 1928, the Kuomintang government and the Portuguese government
   concluded the "Sino-Portuguese Friendship and Trade Treaty". Making
   only a few provisions concerning tariff principles and matters relating
   to business affairs, the treaty failed to mention the question with
   regard to Macau's position. Consequently, the situation of Portuguese
   occupation and government of Macau remained unchanged. In 1938
   Portuguese troops occupied the Hengqin Island which had already been
   settled by Portuguese missionaries. Hengqin were taken by the Japanese
   in 1941 and reverted to China in the end of World War II.

After the 1960s

   Fortaleza do Monte.
   Enlarge
   Fortaleza do Monte.

   In 1966 residents tried to obtain a licence for a private school in
   Taipa, the first of two islands connected to and forming part of Macau.
   After being rejected many times they went ahead and started building
   without permits. On November 15, 1966, Portuguese police arrested the
   school officials and beat construction workers, residents, and press
   reporters. As a result, Chinese teachers and students gathered at the
   Governor’s Palace to protest; some even got inside the Palace to cite
   the quotations of Mao Zedong and sang Chinese revolutionary songs. On
   December 3 the government ordered them to be arrested. This stirred up
   the anger of the general public and more people came to protest. They
   pulled down the statue of Colonel Vicente Nicolau de Mesquita at Largo
   do Senado at the city centre, and burned archive documents - some
   irreplaceable - at the Leal Senado Building and the Holy House of
   Mercy. Portuguese soldiers from Africa, who came to Macau on holiday,
   were called in and martial law was declared. As a result of the
   protests, 11 people were killed by police and 200 were injured. The
   incident is often referred to as "12-3," with reference to the date of
   the riots.
   Casas-Museu da Taipa (The Taipa Houses - Museum, Macau)
   Enlarge
   Casas-Museu da Taipa (The Taipa Houses - Museum, Macau)

   The Chinese people adopted a "three no's" approach as a means to
   continue their struggle with the Government — no taxes, no service, no
   selling to the Portuguese. They were successful and on January 29, 1967
   the Portuguese government of Macau signed a statement of apology. This
   marked the beginning of equal treatment and recognition of Chinese
   identity and of de facto Chinese control of the colony, as an official
   apology underlined the fact that after 1949, administration of Macau
   continued only at the behest of the Mainland Communist government.
   Flag of Macao(before handover)
   Enlarge
   Flag of Macao(before handover)

   After the leftist military coup of 1974, the now democratic Portuguese
   government was determined to relinquish all its overseas possessions,
   but the People's Republic of China did not favour Macau's immediate
   return to Chinese sovereignty and asked Portugal to continue to
   administer it. In 1976, Lisbon redefined Macau as a "territory under
   Portuguese administration," and granted it a large measure of
   administrative, financial and economic autonomy. The Chinese Government
   stated on many occasions that Macau has always been Chinese territory
   and the issue left by history should be settled through negotiations
   when conditions were ripe.

Transitional period, handover

   Portugal and the People's Republic of China agreed in 1979 to regard
   Macau as "a Chinese territory under (temporary) Portuguese
   administration". Negotiations between the Chinese and Portuguese
   governments on the question of Macau started in June 1986. In 1987, an
   international treaty, known as the Sino-Portuguese Joint Declaration,
   was signed to make Macau a Special Administrative Region of the PRC.

   The Chinese government assumed sovereignty over Macau on December 20,
   1999, ending 329 years of Portuguese rule.

Legal system and judiciary

   In order to implement the principle of high degree of autonomy, the
   basic and original framework of the legal system of Macau must also be
   preserved for at least 50 years after 20 December 1999 according to the
   provision made by the Sino-Portuguese Joint Declaration on the Question
   of Macau.

   The legal system is based largely on Portuguese law or Portuguese civil
   law system. The territory has its own independent judicial system, with
   a high court. Judges are selected by a committee and appointed by the
   chief executive. Foreign judges may serve on the courts. In July 1999
   the chief executive appointed a seven-person committee to select judges
   for the SAR. 24 judges were recommended by the committee and were then
   appointed by Mr. Ho.

   Macau has three courts: the Court of the First Instance, the Court of
   the Second Instance, and the Court of Final Appeal, Macau's highest
   court. Sam Hou Fai is the President (Chief Justice) of the Court of
   Final Appeal.

   No death penalty or life imprisonment is currently imposed in Macau SAR
   due to the prohibition by the Penal Code of Macao (Article 39).
   Ampliate reformations in legal system in Macau can be seen after
   handover. The prominent example is using Chinese language in courts, in
   addition to the process of legislation.

Government and politics

Introduction

   Chief Executive Edmund Ho Hau Wah (何厚鏵)
   Enlarge
   Chief Executive Edmund Ho Hau Wah (何厚鏵)

   The status of Macau since reverting to People's Republic of China
   sovereignty on 20th December 1999 is defined in the Sino-Portuguese
   Joint Declaration and the Basic Law, Macau's constitution promulgated
   by China's National People's Congress in 1993. The Joint Declaration
   and the Basic Law specify that Macau's social and economic system,
   lifestyle, rights, and freedoms are to remain unchanged for at least 50
   years.

   Under the principle of "one country, two systems" articulated in the
   Basic Law of Macau, Macau enjoys a high degree of autonomy except in
   defense and foreign affairs. Macau officials, rather than PRC
   officials, run Macau through the exercise of separate executive,
   legislative, and judicial powers. Macau maintains its own separate
   currency, customs territory, immigration and border controls, and
   police force.

Chief executive

   The chief executive is appointed by the People's Republic of China's
   central government. Election of the Chief Executive after election by
   an election committee, whose members are nominated by corporate and
   community bodies. The chief executive's cabinet comprise five policy
   secretaries. He is advised by an Executive Council that has between 7
   and 11 members. Edmund Ho Hau Wah, a community leader and former
   banker, is the first China-appointed chief executive of the Macau SAR,
   having replaced General Vasco Rocha Vieira at midnight on December 19,
   1999.
   Largo do Senado
   Enlarge
   Largo do Senado

Legislative body

   The legislative organ of the territory is the Legislative Assembly, a
   29-member body comprising 12 directly elected members, 10 appointed
   members representing functional constituencies and seven members
   appointed by the chief executive. The Legislative Assembly is
   responsible for lawmaking and like many other legislatures, it has
   power to impeach the Chief Executive. It has power to amend the method
   of electing the chief executive after 2009. The democratic
   infrastructure of Macau SAR remains powerless. The ability of the
   legislature to initiate legislation is limited, although it plays a
   role in shaping legislation. There is little public pressure for
   democratization.
   The Legislative Assembly of Macau
   Enlarge
   The Legislative Assembly of Macau

Political associations

   Political associations in the Legislative Council of Macau are mainly
   including: New Democratic Macau Association, United Citizens
   Association of Macau, Union for Development, Union for Promoting
   Progress, Alliance for the Development of Macau, New Hope, General
   Union for the Good of Macau, Convergence for Development.

Elections

   The general requirements of suffrage for direct election in Macau is an
   adult at or over 18 years of age and he or she must be a permanent
   resident in that region. For indirect election, it is only limited to
   organizations registered as "corporate voters and a 300-member Election
   Committee drawn from broad regional groupings, municipal organizations,
   and central governmental bodies.

Administrative divisions

   Macau was formerly divided into two municipalities and seven parishes.
   Each municipality was run by a municipal council (câmara municipal),
   with a supervising municipal assembly (assembleia municipal).

   When it became a SAR, the municipalities were abolished and the
   parishes were voided of administrative functions. In their place is a
   new administrative body, the Civic and Municipal Affairs Bureau
   (Portuguese: Instituto para os Assuntos Cívicos e Municipais), under
   the Secretariat for Administration and Justice (Secretaria da
   Administração e Justiça) of the SAR government. The parishes are still
   officially recognized but only on a symbolic basis.

Geography

Terrain

   Macau is 70 kilometres (43  mi) southwest of Hong Kong and 145
   kilometres (90 mi) from Guangzhou. It consists of a peninsula, and the
   islands of Taipa and Coloane. The peninsula is formed by the Zhujiang
   (Pearl River) estuary on the east and the Xijiang (West River) on the
   west. It borders the Zhuhai Special Economic Zone in mainland China.
   Macau has a generally flat terrain resulting from extensive land
   reclamation, but numerous steep hills mark the original natural land
   mass. The Macau peninsula was originally an island, but gradually a
   connecting sandbar turned into a narrow isthmus. Land reclamation in
   the 17th century made Macau into a peninsula. With a dense urban
   environment, Macau has no arable land, pastures, forest, or woodland.
   Because of this deficiency, Macau's people traditionally have looked to
   the sea for their livelihood.

Climate

   Macau is located on the northern fringe of the sub-tropical zone.
   Seasonal climate is greatly influenced by the monsoon. The average
   annual temperature of Macau is 22.3 °C. July is the hottest month, with
   average monthly temperature being 28.6 °C (mostly above 30 °C in
   reality). The coldest month is January, whose average monthly
   temperature is 14.5 °C. Located in the coastal region of south the
   People's Republic of China, Macau has ample rainfall, with average
   annual precipitation being 2,030 millimeters.

Economy

   Macau Tower at night.
   Enlarge
   Macau Tower at night.

   Macau's economy is based largely on tourism, namely gambling.

   Other chief economic activities are export-geared textile and garment
   manufacturing, banking and other financial services. The clothing
   industry has provided about three-fourths of export earnings, and the
   gaming, tourism and hospitality industry is estimated to contribute
   more than 50% of Macau's GDP, and 70% of Macau government revenue.

   From 9.1 million in 2000, arrivals to Macau has grown to 18.7 million
   in 2005, with over 50% of the arrivals coming from mainland China. This
   recent growth has been driven by gambling and related tourism. Tourists
   from Hong Kong remain numerous, representing about 30% of arrivals.
   Since the 1999 return to Chinese rule, Triad underworld violence, a
   dark spot on the economy, has virtually disappeared, to the benefit of
   the tourism sector.

   The average growth rate between 2001 and 2005 has been approximately
   10% annually. The GDP per capita in 2005 was USD $24,300. In the second
   quarter of 2006, the unemployment rate stood at 3.8%.
   Sands Macau
   Enlarge
   Sands Macau

Gambling

   With the opening of the Sands Macau, the largest casino in the world as
   measured by total number of table games, in 2004 and Wynn Macau in
   2006, gambling revenues from Macau's casinos were for the first time
   greater than those of Las Vegas (each about $6 billion), making Macau
   one of the highest-volume gambling centres in the world. Other casinos
   and hotels slated to be opened through 2009 are: The Venetian Macao
   (2007), Four Seasons (2007), MGM Grand Macau (2007), Ponte 16 (2007),
   Macau Dorsett Hotel Complex (2007), Grand Hyatt (2007), Galaxy Cotai
   Megaresort (2008), City of Dreams (2008), Oceanus (2008), Mandarin
   Oriental (2009). First Phase of Macao's Cotai Strip scheduled to open
   in 2007 includes 7 resort hotels comprising of 10,000 guest rooms. The
   $1.8 billion Venetian Macao will serve as the anchor. As a result,
   Macau's economy is growing rapidly due to gambling related tourism and
   construction from the new casino entrants.
   Banco Nacional Ultramarino
   Enlarge
   Banco Nacional Ultramarino
   Macau center
   Enlarge
   Macau centre

Offshore banking

   Amongst Bermuda, British Virgin Islands or Bahamas, Macau is one of the
   most well-known offshore financial centres and tax havens in a
   worldwide sense. Banco Nacional Ultramarino , Banco Delta Asia , Seng
   Heng Bank or Tai Fung Bank are among the most influential banks in
   Macau, to name a few.

   There are also many foreign banks registered and established in Macau
   as well, e.g. Bank of America - Macau , HSBC - Macau, etc. Macau is a
   free port and no policy of monetary control is imposed. To operate
   offshore service business is entirely feasible in Macau as related
   offshore law has been in effect since 1999. The offshore finance
   business is regulated and supervised by the Monetary Authority of
   Macao, while the regulation and supervision of the offshore non-finance
   business is mainly controlled by the Macau Trade and Investment
   Promotion Institute.

Investment

   Foreign investors from overseas who want to obtain the status of
   permanent residence in Macau should purchase fixed assets with a value
   no less than 1 million Patacas. Besides, no less than an additional
   half million Patacas should be deposited in certain appointed credit
   institutions in Macau before getting the landing papers. This
   governmental policy has successfully attracted an influx of billions of
   Pataca and foreign capital that create a positive effect in the Macau
   SAR's economy, especially in the sphere of real estate.

Transportation

   Bus in Macau.
   Enlarge
   Bus in Macau.

   In Macau visitors will find an efficient bus service, not only in the
   city but also on the islands. Visitors can look for the destinations,
   itineraries and stops in the information panels located at every bus
   stop. All the buses have air conditioning. Between Macau and Taipa
   visitors can catch buses 11, 22, 28A, 30, 33, 34 and also the airport
   bus AP1. Buses 21, 21A, 25, 26, and 26A connect Macau, Taipa and
   Coloane. There are other buses circulating around the Macau peninsula.

   There are plenty of taxis, the flagfall charge is MOP$12.00. There is
   no surcharge between Macau and Taipa island, but between Taipa and
   Coloane, a MOP$2.00 surcharge applies. Between Macau and Coloane there
   is a MOP$5.00 surcharge. Moreover there is a MOP$3.00 surcharge for
   each piece of luggage carried in the boot. In order to eliminate the
   language barrier between taxi drivers and passengers, the Tourist
   Office has provided most taxis with a destination guide which includes
   the names of the most requested destinations in Chinese, Portuguese and
   English. When used together with a map, this guide will reduce many of
   the usual misunderstandings.
   Ponte de Amizade, Hong Kong-Macau ferry terminal.
   Enlarge
   Ponte de Amizade, Hong Kong-Macau ferry terminal.

   In the past, the Macau Maritime Museum used to arrange two sailing
   vessels in which they were re-modelled into a new shape from the
   ancient one, touring the inner and outer harbours. Along the trip, the
   general lifestyle and custom of boat dwellers was introduced. Food and
   drink were occasionally provided in that trip. However, due to the land
   reclamation works in the harbour and the boat maintenance, all junk
   trips have been temporarily suspended. The exhibition building and the
   open-air café esplanade of the Maritime Museum are open as usual
   (closed on Tuesdays).

   The trishaw is immemorial and the speed of ride is pretty slow.
   Nowadays jinrikisha has not served as the tool of mass transit in Macau
   anymore. However, it is a good idea to use the jinrikisha to roam in
   particular area of Nanwan or other interesting places. There is no
   standard fee for such kind of service and thus one may need to
   negotiate first with the tricycle owner.

   Anyone who wishes to hire a car will need to be at least twenty-one
   years old, have an I.D. or passport, a valid driver's licence (or, for
   some countries, an international driving licence) and a credit card for
   deposit.

Demographics

   Calçada do Lilau.
   Enlarge
   Calçada do Lilau.

   Considered as a special administrative region or dependency, Macau is
   one of the most densely populated regions in the world.

   Macau's population is 95% Chinese, primarily Cantonese, Fujianese as
   well as some Hakka, Shanghainese and overseas Chinese immigrants from
   Southeast Asia and elsewhere. The remainder are of Portuguese or mixed
   Chinese-Portuguese ancestry, the so-called Macanese, as well as several
   thousand Filipino and Thai nationals.

   The official languages are Portuguese and Chinese.

   Residents of Macau mostly speak Cantonese natively; Portuguese,
   Mandarin, English, Fujianese, Filipino, Thai, and several other
   languages are also spoken. The Macanese language, which is generally
   known as Patuá, is a distinctive Creole that is still spoken by several
   dozen Macanese, an ethnic group of mixed Asian and Portuguese ancestry
   that accounts for about two per cent of Macau's population. (However,
   Macanese is sometimes also used in the broader sense to describe any
   permanent resident of Macau.)
   Entry into Mainland China
   Enlarge
   Entry into Mainland China

   Work force in Macau SAR is mainly composed of manufacturing 16.4%;
   construction 8.3%; wholesale and retail trade, repair, hotels and
   restaurants 27.1%; financial services, real estate, and other business
   activities 8.6%; public administration, other communities, social and
   personal services, including gaming 31.8%; transport, storage and
   communications 6.8%.

   According to the recent survey conducted by the U.S. Central
   Intelligence Agency (CIA), Macau has always been one of the longest
   life expectancy at birth in the world. The birth rate, the total
   fertility rate and the infant mortality rate as well are one of the
   lowest in the world.

   The growth of population in Macau is mainly relying on Chinese
   immigrants from mainland China and the influx of overseas workers. With
   over 503,000 people (2006 second quarter estimate) living in that
   region, Macau is now classified and upgraded as a large city.

   The nationality of people with Chinese descent living in Macau and/or
   those who are qualified to apply for MSAR passport are considered as
   Chinese. Although dual nationality is not recognized by the government
   of Macau SAR, foreign passports (including Portuguese passports) can be
   freely used as travel documentation without restrictions, regardless of
   one's nationality.

Religion and culture

   Igreja de São Agostinho.
   Enlarge
   Igreja de São Agostinho.

   According to recent census figures, of the more than 355,000 persons
   surveyed, 60.9 percent had no religious affiliation, 16.8 percent were
   Buddhist, 13.9 percent were "other" (followers of a combination of
   Buddhist, Taoist, and Confucian beliefs), 6.7 percent were Roman
   Catholic, and 1.7 percent were Protestant. The number of active Falun
   Gong practitioners declined from approximately 100 persons to
   approximately 20 after the movement was banned in mainland China in
   July 1999. There are about 100 Muslims in Macau.
   Na Tcha Temple
   Enlarge
   Na Tcha Temple

   Most Macau people believe in the Chinese Folk religion, which includes
   the faiths of Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism and the folk gods and
   goddesses (especially Kuan Yin and Matsu), like other Chinese
   communities. There are between forty and fifty temples of various sizes
   in Macau, mostly built a century or so ago, although some date back
   five-hundred years. In certain occasions one can find out that Kuan Yin
   or the images of Buddha and other gods or xoanons from the sphere of
   Taoism might be appeared at the same temple. The most famous ones are
   the Puji Temple, the A-Ma Temple and, in particular, the Lotus Temple.
   Built in 1592, the Lotus Temple has a history of over four hundred
   years. The Catholic Diocese of Macau was established on 23rd January,
   1576. The first bishop of the Catholic Diocese of Macau was D. Belchior
   Carneiro. The first Chinese bishop was Domingos Lam. The present bishop
   is D. José Lai, who is the first native-born Chinese bishop in Macau.
   About five per cent of Macau's population is Catholic.

   The Catholic Church in Macau recognizes the Pope as the head of the
   Church. A new Coadjutor Bishop for the Macau diocese was appointed by
   Vatican or Holy See in June, 2003.

   Macau was also the first station of the Protestant church for mission
   in China.

Landmarks

   Air shelter on Guia Hill.
   Enlarge
   Air shelter on Guia Hill.
     * Casino Lisboa
     * Fortaleza do Monte
     * Guia Fortress
     * Macau Fisherman's Wharf
     * Macau Tower
     * Old Protestant Cemetery
     * Ruins of Saint Paul's Cathedral

   The Historic Centre of Macau, which includes some twenty-eight historic
   monuments and eight public squares, was listed as a World Heritage Site
   by UNESCO on 15 July 2005.

Macau-related topics

   The Ruins of Saint Paul's
   Enlarge
   The Ruins of Saint Paul's
  * CCAC
  * CEPA
  * Communications
  * Crime and police
  * Cuisine
  * Education
       + List of universities
  * Events and festivals

                               * Foreign relations
                               * Gambling
                               * Gaming law
                               * Grand Prix
                               * Honours system
                               * Immigration
                               * Legal system
                                    + Macau Law
                               * Military

                                                    * Postage stamps and history
                                                    * Scout Association
                                                    * Sport
                                                    * Transportation
                                                    * MSAR passport
                                                    * 2006 Lusophony Games

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Macau"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
