   #copyright

Madrid

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: European Geography

   Villa de Madrid

   Flag of Villa de Madrid Coat of arms of Villa de Madrid
             Flag                    Coat of Arms
   Location
   Coordinates : 40° 23’N , 3°43′0″W
   Time Zone : CET (GMT +1)
   - summer: CEST (GMT +2)
   General information
   Native name Villa de Madrid (Spanish)
   Spanish name Villa de Madrid
   Founded 9th century
   Postal code 28001-28080
   Area code 34 (Spain) + 91 (Villa de Madrid)
   Website http://www.munimadrid.es/
   Administration
   Country Spain
   Autonomous Community Comunidad Autónoma de Madrid
   Province Madrid
   Administrative Divisions 21
   Neighborhoods 127
   Mayor Alberto Ruiz-Gallardón ( PP)
   Geography
   Land Area 607 km²
   Altitude 667 m AMSL
   Population
   Population 3,228,359 (2005)
   - rank in Spain: 1st
   Density 5,198 hab./km² (2005)

   Madrid is the capital of Spain and the third most populous city in the
   European Union. Madrid is also the largest city in Spain, as well as in
   the province and the autonomous community of the same name. It is
   located on the river Manzanares in the centre of the country, between
   the autonomous communities of Castilla-León and Castilla-La Mancha. Due
   to its geographical location, wealth and history, Madrid is considered
   one of the financial centers of the Iberian Peninsula, together with
   Lisbon, and the political centre of Spain.

   As the capital of the Spanish Empire, Madrid is a city of great
   cultural and political importance. While Madrid possesses a modern
   infrastructure, it has preserved the look and feel of many of its
   historic neighborhoods and streets. Its landmarks include the huge
   Royal Palace of Madrid; a restored 1850 opera house; the Buen Retiro
   park, opened in 1631; the imposing 19th-century building containing the
   Spanish National Library (founded 1712); the national archives; an
   archaeological museum of international reputation; and three superb art
   museums: Prado Museum, which houses one of the finest art collections
   in the world, the Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofía, a museum
   of modern art, and the Thyssen-Bornemisza Museum, housed in the
   renovated Villahermosa Palace.

   The population of the city was 3.5 million (December 2005), while the
   estimated urban area population is 5.5 million. The entire population
   of the Madrid metropolitan area (urban area and suburbs) is calculated
   to be 5.84 million. The city spans a total of 607 km² (234 square
   miles).

   Following the restoration of democracy in 1975 and Spain's integration
   into the European Union, Madrid has played an increasing role in
   European finances, marking the city as one of the most important
   European metropolises. The residents of Madrid are called Madrileños,
   and the current mayor is Alberto Ruiz-Gallardón, of the centre-right
   Partido Popular.

   See Wiktionary for the name of Madrid in various languages other than
   English and Spanish.

Names of the city and origin of the current name

   Almudena's Cathedral, next to the Royal Palace.
   Enlarge
   Almudena's Cathedral, next to the Royal Palace.

   There are numerous theories regarding the origin of the name, "Madrid".
   Madrid was founded by Ocno Bianor (son of King Tirenio of Tuscany and
   Mantua) and was named "Metragirta" or "Mantua Carpetana". Others
   contend that the original name of the city was "Ursa" ("bear" in
   Latin), due to the high number of these animals that were found in the
   adjacent forests, which, together with the Madrone tree ("madroño" in
   Spanish), have been the emblem of the city from the Middle Ages.
   Nevertherless, it is now commonly believed that the origin of the
   current name of the city comes from the 2nd Century B.C., when the
   Roman Empire established a settlement on the banks of the Manzanares
   river. The name of this first village was "Matrice" (a reference to the
   river that crossed the settlement). Following the invasions of the
   Sueves, Vandals and Alans during the 5th Century A.D., the Roman Empire
   could not defend its territories on the Iberian Peninsula, and were
   therefore overrun by the Visigoths. The barbarian tribes subsequently
   took control of "Matrice". In the 7th Century the Islamic conquest of
   the Iberian Peninsula saw the name changed to "Mayrit", from the Arabic
   term "Mayra" (referencing water as a "mother" or "source of life") and
   the Ibero-Roman suffix "it" that means "place". The modern "Madrid"
   evolved from the Mozarabic "Matrit", which is still in the Madrilenian
   gentilic.

History

Middle Ages

   Although the site of modern-day Madrid has been occupied since
   pre-historic times, in Roman age his territory belonged to the diocese
   of Complutum (present Alcalá de Henares). But the first historical data
   on the city comes from the 9th century, when Muhammad I ordered the
   construction of a small palace in the same place that is today occupied
   by the Palacio Real. Around this palace a small citadel, al-Mudaina,
   was built. Near that palace was the Manzanares, which the Muslims
   called al-Majrīṭ (Arabic: المجريط, "source of water"). From this came
   the naming of the site as Majerit, which was later rendered to the
   modern-day spelling of Madrid). The citadel was conquered in 1085 by
   Alfonso VI of Castile in his advance towards Toledo. He reconsecrated
   the mosque as the church of the Virgin of Almudena (almudin, the
   garrison's granary). In 1329, the Cortes Generales first assembled in
   the city to advise Ferdinand IV of Castile. Sephardi Jews and Moors
   continued to live in the city until they were expelled at the end of
   the 15th century. After troubles and a large fire, Henry III of Castile
   ( 1379- 1406) rebuilt the city and established himself safely fortified
   outside its walls in El Pardo. The grand entry of Ferdinand and
   Isabella to Madrid heralded the end of strife between Castile and
   Aragon.

Renaissance

   Puerta de Alcalá, outside el Parque del Buen Retiro, was the gate used
   by merchants to enter the city to sell their goods at Sunday market.
   Enlarge
   Puerta de Alcalá, outside el Parque del Buen Retiro, was the gate used
   by merchants to enter the city to sell their goods at Sunday market.
   Comunications Palace, in Cibeles Square.
   Enlarge
   Comunications Palace, in Cibeles Square.

   The kingdoms of Castilla, with its capital at Toledo, and Aragón, with
   its capital at Zaragoza, were welded into modern Spain by Charles I of
   Spain. Though Charles favored Madrid, it was his son, Philip II ( 1527-
   1598) who moved the court to Madrid in 1561. Although he made no
   official declaration, the seat of the court was the de facto capital.
   Sevilla continued to control the Spanish Indies, but Madrid controlled
   Sevilla. Aside from a brief period, 1601-1606, when Felipe III
   installed his court in Valladolid, Madrid's fortunes have closely
   mirrored those of Spain. During the Siglo de Oro (Golden Century), in
   the 16th/17th century, Madrid had no resemblance with other European
   capitals: the population of the city was economically dependent on the
   business of the court itself.

End of Renaissance and early modern Madrid

   Felipe V decided that a European capital could not stay in such a
   state, and new palaces (including the Palacio Real de Madrid) were
   built during his reign. However, it would not be until Carlos III (
   1716- 1788) that Madrid would become a modern city. Carlos III was one
   of the most popular kings in the history of Madrid, and the saying "the
   best mayor, the king" became popular during those times. When Carlos IV
   ( 1748- 1819) became king the people of Madrid revolted. After the
   Mutiny of Aranjuez, which was led by his own son Fernando VII against
   him, Carlos IV resigned, but Fernando VII's reign would be short: in
   May of 1808 Napoleon's troops entered the city. On May 2, 1808
   (Spanish: Dos de Mayo) the Madrileños revolted against the French
   forces, whose brute reaction would have a lasting impact on French rule
   in Spain and France's image in Europe in general.

   After the war of independence ( 1814) Fernando VII came back to the
   throne, but after a liberal military revolution, Colonel Riego made the
   king swear respect to the Constitution. This would start a period where
   liberal and conservative government alternated, that would end with the
   enthronement of Isabel II ( 1830- 1904).

The 20th century in Madrid

   Isabel II could not calm down the political tension that would lead to
   yet another revolt, the First Spanish Republic, and the comeback of the
   monarchs, which eventually led to the Second Spanish Republic and the
   Spanish Civil War. During this war ( 1936- 1939) Madrid was one of the
   most affected cities and its streets were battlezones. Madrid was a
   stronghold of the Republicans from July 1936. Its western suburbs were
   the scene of an all out battle in November 1936, when the Nationalist
   forces tried to take the city. Thereafter, the city was besieged for
   almost three years, until it surrendered in March 1939. It was during
   the Civil War that Madrid became the first city to be bombed by
   airplanes specifically targeting civilians. (See Siege of Madrid
   (1936-39)).

   During the dictatorship of Francisco Franco, especially after the
   sixties, the south of Madrid became very industrialized and there were
   massive migrations from rural environments into the city. Madrid's
   south-eastern periphery became an extensive slum settlement, which was
   the base for an active cultural and political frame.

   After the death of Franco, emerging democratic parties (including those
   of left-wing and republican ideology) accepted Franco's wishes of being
   succeeded by Juan Carlos I - in order to secure stability and democracy
   - which led Spain to its current position as constitutional monarchy.

   Befitting from the prosperity it gained in the 1980s, the capital city
   of Spain has consolidated its position as the leading economic,
   cultural, industrial, educational, and technological centre on the
   Iberian peninsula.

21st century

   On 11 March 2004, Madrid was hit by a terrorist attack when terrorists
   placed a series of bombs on multiple trains during the rush hour, three
   days before the 14 March 2004 elections. This was the worst massacre in
   Spain since the end of the civil war in 1939.

   Europride 2007 ( July 1) will be hosted by Madrid, Spain.

   Madrid has also expressed its desire to become an Olympic city, and
   became a candidate for the 2012 games, which were awarded to London
   after Madrid was eliminated in the third round of the ballot. However,
   the mayor of the city has already stated that Madrid's Olympic dream
   did not end at Singapore, as the city will again present itself as a
   candidate to host the 2016 Olympic games.

Economy and demographics

Economy

   AZCA.
   Enlarge
   AZCA.

   The village experienced a big development as a consequence of the
   establishment of the new capital of the Spanish Empire in Madrid. The
   administrative functions that it held since then, as well as the
   centralist character of the government found by the house of Bourbon
   ("Casa de Borbón" in Spanish) triggered the development of the artisan
   activity, that turned into industrial since the middle of the 19th
   century, having its major expansion during the 20th century, especially
   after the Spanish Civil War. The economy of the city was then centered
   on diverse sectors such as those related to motor vehicles, aircraft,
   chemicals, pharmaceuticals, processed food, printed materials, and
   leather goods. Besides its many manufacturing industries. Two facts
   contributed to this industrial development: the encouragement given by
   the government and the fact of being the capital city of the country,
   which made the city the main communications centre, banking
   headquarters, etc. Despite of the current tendency of moving the
   production centers to industrial parks located in the outskirts of the
   metropolitan area, the city of Madrid still is the second most
   important industrial centre in the country, only exceeded by Barcelona.
   During the last few years, Madrid has experienced a very significant
   growth in its tertiary activities. Then, to the traditional
   administrative functions (Madrid houses the central Administration of
   the State) and financial (Madrid is the headquarter of a high amount of
   companies that execute their activities all over the country and that
   receives half of the whole national financial capital) now we can also
   add others such us: the ring structure of the roads and trains system
   and the significance of the Barajas Airport. Moreover, Madrid is also
   developing a new series of activities with a touristic, ludic and
   cultural character. The appointment of Madrid as European City of
   Culture in 1992 was a very important milestone in this process,
   encourages both by public and private iniciatives.

Demographics

         Evolution 1897 - 2005
   Year    Total
        municipality   Total
                     province  Percent
                                 (%)
   1897 542.739      730.807   74,27
   1900 575.675      773.011   74,47
   1910 614.322      831.254   73,90
   1920 823.711      1.048.908 78,53
   1930 1.041.767    1.290.445 80,73
   1940 1.322.835    1.574.134 84,04
   1950 1.553.338    1.823.418 85,19
   1960 2.177.123    2.510.217 86,73
   1965 2.793.510    3.278.068 85,22
   1970 3.120.941    3.761.348 82,97
   1975 3.228.057    4.319.904 74,73
   1981 3.158.818    4.686.895 67,40
   1986 3.058.812    4.780.572 63,98
   1991 3.010.492    4.647.555 64,78
   1996 2.866.850    5.022.289 57,08
   2001 2.938.723    5.423.384 54,19
   2004 3.099.834    5.804.829 53,40
   2005 3.155.359    5.964.143 52,90
   Demographics of Madrid (1900-2005)
   Enlarge
   Demographics of Madrid (1900-2005)

   The population of Madrid has experienced increase ever since the city
   became the national capital. This demographic boom was notorious in the
   20th century due to domestic and international immigration. However,
   the city experienced a growth slump during the 1970s. This phenomenon,
   which also affected Barcelona, was caused mainly by the growth of
   satellite suburbs at the expense of the downtown.

   A new immigration wave has allowed Madrid not only to recover its old
   numbers, but to reach new historical heights. According to census data,
   the population of the city grew by 271,856 between 2001 and 2005.

   As the capital city of Spain, the city has attracted many immigrants
   from around the world. While less than 85% of the inhabitants are
   Spaniards of different backgrounds and ethnicities (almost 90% of the
   native Spaniards are caucasians), there are many recent immigrants who
   come from Latin America, Europe, Asia, North Africa and West Africa.

   The largest immigrant groups include: Ecuadorian: 83,967, Moroccan:
   51,300, Chinese: 48,973, Colombian: 37,218 and Peruvian: 32,791. There
   are also important communities of Guinean, Romanian and Filipino
   people.

Names

   The natives of the city are called Madrileños; they were once nicknamed
   gatos (cats), although nowadays the vast majority of Spaniards would
   not recognize the term. Its origin possibly comes from the popular
   legend that the conquest of the city by Alfonso VI was achieved by the
   assault of the walls that protected the city. Apparently the Castilian
   troops climbed the defense walls as if they were cats. Another possible
   source of the name is the fact that the residents were known during the
   Middle Ages for their ability to climb walls with their bare hands.

Climate

   Madrid climate chart (Retiro)
   Enlarge
   Madrid climate chart (Retiro)
   Madrid climate chart (Barajas)
   Enlarge
   Madrid climate chart (Barajas)

   The region of Madrid has a Mediterranean climate with cold winters that
   experience temperatures lower than 0 °C. Summer tends to be warm with
   temperatures that consistently surpass 30 °C in July and that can often
   reach 40 °C. Due to Madrid's high altitude and dry climate, nightly
   temperatures tend to be cooler, leading to a lower average in the
   summer months. Precipitation levels are low, but precipitation can be
   observed all throughout the year. Summer and winter are the driest
   seasons, with most rainfall occurring in the autumn and spring.

   CAPTION: Parque del Retiro Observatory

   1971-2000 Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Ago Sep Oct Nov Dec Total
   Maximum
   temperature (ºC) 9,7 12,0 15,7 17,5 21,4 26,9 31,2 30,7 26,0 19,0 13,4
   10,1 19,4
   Minimum
   temperature (ºC) 2,6 3,7 5,6 7,2 10,7 15,1 18,4 18,2 15,0 10,2 6,0 3,8
   9,7
   Rainfall (mm) 37 35 26 47 52 25 15 10 28 49 56 56 436

   CAPTION: Barajas Airport Observatory

   1971-2000     Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June July Ago  Sep  Oct  Nov Dec Total
Maximum
temperature (ºC) 10,6 12,9 16,3 18,0 22,3 28,2 33,0 32,4 27,6 20,6 14,7
11,0             20,6
Minimum
temperature (ºC) 0,3  1,5  3,2  5,4  8,8  13,0 16,1 16,0 12,7 8,3  3,8 1,8
                                                                           7,6
Rainfall (mm)    33   34   23   39   47   26   11   12   24   39   48  48  386

Administrative divisions

Districts

   Distritos de Madrid

   Madrid is administratively divided into twenty-one districts, that, at
   the same time, are divided into different neighborhoods (barrios):
    1. Centro: Palacio, Embajadores, Cortes, Justicia, Universidad, Sol.
    2. Arganzuela: Paseo Imperial, Acacias, Chopera, Legazpi, Delicias,
       Palos de Moguer, Atocha.
    3. Retiro: Pacífico, Adelfas, Estrella, Ibiza, Jerónimos, Niño Jesús.
    4. Salamanca: Recoletos, Goya, Fuente del Berro, Guindalera, Lista,
       Castellana.
    5. Chamartín: El Viso, Prosperidad, Ciudad Jardín, Hispanoamérica,
       Nueva España, Pza. Castilla.
    6. Tetuán: Bellas Vistas, Cuatro Caminos, Castillejos, Almenara,
       Valdeacederas, Berruguete.
    7. Chamberí: Gaztambide, Arapiles, Trafalgar, Almagro, Vallehermoso,
       Ríos Rosas.
    8. Fuencarral-El Pardo: El Pardo, Fuentelarreina, Peñagrande, Barrio
       del Pilar, La Paz, Valverde, Mirasierra, El Goloso.
    9. Moncloa-Aravaca: Casa de Campo, Argüelles, Ciudad Universitaria,
       Valdezarza, Valdemarín, El Plantío, Aravaca.
   10. Latina: Los Cármenes, Puerta del Ángel, Lucero, Aluche, Las
       Águilas, Campamento, Cuatro Vientos.
   11. Carabanchel: Comillas, Opañel, San Isidro, Vista Alegre, Puerta
       Bonita, Buenavista, Abrantes.
   12. Usera: Orcasitas, Orcasur, San Fermín, Almendrales, Moscardó,
       Zofio, Pradolongo.
   13. Puente de Vallecas: Entrevías, San Diego, Palomeras Bajas,
       Palomeras Sureste, Portazgo, Numancia.
   14. Moratalaz: Pavones, Horcajo, Marroquina, Media Legua, Fontarrón,
       Vinateros.
   15. Ciudad Lineal: Ventas, Pueblo Nuevo, Quintana, La Concepción, San
       Pascual, San Juan Bautista, Colina, Atalaya, Costillares.
   16. Hortaleza: Palomas, Valdefuentes, Canillas, Pinar del Rey, Apóstol
       Santiago, Piovera.
   17. Villaverde: San Andrés, San Cristóbal, Butarque, Los Rosales, Los
       Ángeles (Villaverde).
   18. Villa de Vallecas: Casco Histórico de Vallecas, Santa Eugenia.
   19. Vicálvaro: Casco Histórico de Vicálvaro, Ambroz.
   20. San Blas: Simancas, Hellín, Amposta, Arcos, Rosas, Rejas,
       Canillejas, Salvador.
   21. Barajas: Alameda de Osuna, Aeropuerto, Casco Histórico de Barajas,
       Timón, Corralejos.

Popular neighborhoods

   Contemporary Madrid came into its own after the death of general
   Francisco Franco. Years of the Franco regime left Madrid and much the
   country in economic shambles due to isolation. With his death, Madrid,
   and Spain as a whole, began to reassert itself on the international
   stage. Within Spain, reaction against the dictatorial bureaucracy
   centered in Madrid and a history of centralism that predated Franco by
   centuries has resulted in the successful modern movement towards
   increased autonomy for the regions of Spain, considered as autonomous
   regions, under the umbrella of Spain.

   Modern Madrid ranks as one of the most important cities in Europe.
   Madrid is a leading southern European city and the most important link
   between the European Union and Latin America.

   The modern metropolis is home to over three million people. As expected
   with any major European capital city, each district (or barrio in
   Spanish) has its own feel. Some of the most well-known "barrios" in
   Madrid are:

   Opera
          As the name implies, Madrid's main Opera Theatre is the Teatro
          Real (Royal theatre). In front of the theatre is the Royal
          Palace. The Royal Palace is no longer used as a residence, but
          it has been kept intact since it last functioned as home to the
          King, serving as a cultural monument and occasionally used for
          state functions. The entire palace is not open to the public,
          but most of the more important rooms can be visited. The palace
          is interesting in its own right, in particular its architecture
          and gardens (there are two, the Jardines del Moro and the
          Sabattini gardens). There are also some excellent frescos inside
          the palace by Tiépolo, and paintings by Velázquez, Goya, Rubens,
          El Greco, Juan de Flandes and Caravaggio, among others.

   Alonso Martínez
          This district contains the large Plaza de Colón. This plaza
          commemorates Christopher Columbus, who was responsible for
          ushering in the Spanish imperial golden age of the 16th and 17th
          centuries. It is within walking distance of the main cultural
          and commercial areas of the city such as the Prado museum, the
          expansive Parque del Buen Retiro as well as near the business
          centre on the lower part of the Paseo de la Castellana.

   Atocha
          Atocha includes a rather large area which is bordered by the
          Huertas and Lavapiés districts. The two important sites located
          in this area are the Reina Sofía Museum and the Atocha Railway
          Station (which was the main object of the terrorist attacks
          carried out on March 11th, 2004), one of the two main train
          stations in Madrid (the other one is Chamartín). The area also
          contains a number of art galleries and restaurants serving
          traditional food. This district also contains the main bus
          terminal as it is a central point of the city.

   Puerta de Europa skyscrapers in Azca
   Enlarge
   Puerta de Europa skyscrapers in Azca
   Torre Picasso, designed by Minoru Yamasaki, the same architect of World
   Trade Center New York.
   Enlarge
   Torre Picasso, designed by Minoru Yamasaki, the same architect of World
   Trade Centre New York.

   AZCA / Nuevos Ministerios
          Azca is the financial district. The area is populated by
          skyscrapers, among them Torre Picasso, Edificio BBVA and Torre
          Europa. Torre Windsor, one of the skyscrapers in this area,
          burnt entirely on the night between 12 February and 13, 2005 . A
          very large (3 interconnected buildings) El Corte Inglés
          department store is also here. The area is directly linked to
          Barajas Airport by metro line 8 from Nuevos Ministerios station.

   CTBA (Cuatro Torres Business Arena)
          The CTBA is the new financial district of Madrid, the area will
          be composed by four skyscrapers. The tallest of them is the
          Repsol tower (250m), designed by Sir Norman Foster. When they
          finish the construction of the building, it will be the tallest
          skyscraper in Spain and the 3rd in Europe. The second tallest
          skyscraper,'Crystal Tower', is only 0'6 m lower than Repsol
          tower, with 249'4m, it will be the 4th tallest skyscraper of
          Europe. This building has being designed by Cesar Pelli. The
          third tallest skyscraper is the 'Sacyr-Vallehermoso' tower with
          235 m and designed by Enrique Alvarez & Carlos Rubio. This
          building will have a 5 stars hotel in the first 31 floors and
          will be the 5th tallest tower in Europe. Finally, the fourth
          building will be 'Espacio tower'. It is 223m long and it is
          designed by I.M. Pei. The four skyscrapers will be finished
          during 2008.

   Chueca
          Chueca is among the most authentic and cosmopolitan
          neighborhoods in the downtown city centre. This district was the
          site of major urban decay during the early 1980s. However, later
          on during the decade it became one of the most active centers of
          the so-called ' La Movida', largely due to its new-found status
          as a popular gay village, and has become an internationally
          political significant location after having held years of gay
          marriage and child adoption right reivindication, achieved in
          2005 under socialist Prime Minister Rodriguez Zapatero's
          government. It is still quite attractive and has many good and
          interesting places to eat, as well as some of Madrid's most
          avant garde fashion and shoe shops. Main article: Chueca

   Las Cortes
          This district is small in size. The most important sites include
          Spanish parliament buildings of the lower house Congreso de los
          Diputados. It also includes one of the three museums of the
          Madrid golden triangle, the Thyssen-Bornemisza Museum. In
          addition, we find the highly ornate Banco de España, the Café
          del Círculo de Bellas Artes, the Zarzuela theatre and the Plaza
          de Cibeles.

   Gran Via
   Enlarge
   Gran Via

   Las Huertas
          A neighborhood west of Paseo del Prado, north of Calle Atocha.
          Famous for being the "literary" neighbourhood of Madrid where
          many famous writers lived or spent their free time. One of the
          prominent landmarks is the house of Cervantes where he died in
          1616. In the last years, it became a nightlife mecca with
          thousands of Madrileños and tourists walking around and
          bar-hopping along Calle de las Huertas and Plaza Santa Ana. The
          latter is now a major nightlife spot.

   Gran Vía
          As the name implies, the Gran Vía district contains one of
          Madrid's most important avenues, the Gran Vía (literally, "Great
          Way"). First and foremost it is a shopping street; however it
          also contains a number of tourist accommodations, plenty of
          nightlife (all of Madrid's large goth scene gravitates around
          Gran Via, for instance), many of Madrid's largest movie theaters
          and live musical shows. It is also a hub for Madrid's red-light
          district, linking as it does many side streets. One of these
          streets, Fuencarral has become a link between the old shopping
          areas of the centre of the city, the Bohemian Malasaña, and the
          hip Chueca district, making of it one of the most cosmopolitan
          areas of the city.

   Edificio España, 117 m, build in 1953
   Enlarge
   Edificio España, 117 m, build in 1953

   Lavapiés
          Traditionally one of the poorer neighborhoods near the city
          centre, this district has maintained much of true 'Madrileño'
          spirit of the past. Lavapiés is one of the areas with a high
          concentration of immigrants (mainly Chinese, Arabs, Hindi,
          Africans and Caribbeans), and also tends to attract artists and
          writers adding to the cosmopolitan mix. The presence of
          immigrants has led to an inevitable variety of shops and
          restaurants - this is a good place for good and cheap
          restaurants of local and international food. It's also one of
          the best places to search for non-Spanish foodstuff, (herbs and
          spices etc.)

   La Latina
          In and around this area are the origins of Madrid. Its difficult
          to put precise boundaries on La Latina, because, like its
          immediate neighbors, streets are narrow and winding. There are
          quite a few nightlife spots. There are also a number of
          attractive churches, like the Iglesia de San Andres and the
          Iglesia de San Francisco el Grande, as well as Madrid's town
          palace. Bordering on La Latina's east side is the famous Rastro
          flea-market (a prime pick-pocket spot). Plaza de la Paja is
          another interesting and entertaining spot of this neighbourhood.
          On the other side, La Latina borders with Plaza Mayor and
          another ancient part of the town, Los Austrias, where you can
          find the beautiful Palacio Real (Royal Palace).

   Malasaña
          Malasaña is a vibrant neighborhood full of lively bars and clubs
          overflowing with young people. Its streets are currently being
          renovated, making it a much more attractive quarter (the
          streetworks are almost finished). It's one of the classic areas
          for partying the night away. The area's centre is the Plaza del
          Dos de Mayo (in commemoration of the Madrilenian popular
          uprising on May 2, 1808, brutally and effectivey repressed by
          the French troops and which started the Spanish Independence
          War). Although popularly known as the barrio Malasaña, the real
          name for the area is Universidad (University). The name Malasaña
          comes from the 17 year old girl Manuela Malasaña who once lived
          on the street San Andrés. She was killed fighting the French in
          1808. Today there is a street named in her honour very close to
          the roundabout 'Glorieta de Bilbao'.

   Retiro
          Barrio Retiro is a classic neighborhood surrounding the famous
          Retiro Park, to the east of the center of the city. It is
          demographically the oldest neighborhood in the city, however
          over the past 5 years the increasing number of flats put for
          rent have been attracting young people and students to the area
          in growing numbers, and the diversity of the gastronomical fare
          in the neighborhood reflects this. The neighborhood can be
          characterized by the style of its three most important areas; in
          the north part centering on the calle Ibiza, the streets are in
          a grid pattern and the buildings, normally 6-10 storeys, are
          packed closely together, creating a bustling atmosphere of small
          shops, bars, and restaurants. This area is very similar to the
          neighborhing Salamanca neighbourhood. In the south, called Niño
          Jesus, the area is quieter, more spacious, and residential. To
          the west of the park (but still included within the parameters
          of Barrio Retiro) is the Jerónimos area, an area of beautiful
          18th and 19th century buildings and many museums (including the
          Prado). This area, however, has few private residences, the
          large flats (often above 200m2) being mainly used for offices.
          Main article on Retiro Park: Retiro

   Hortaleza
          Is a residential district in the north. There's the Spanish
          Olympic Committee, the IFEMA (New Madrid Expo) and Juan Carlos I
          Park, a beautiful park between Campo de las Naciones (Commercial
          District inside Hortaleza) and Barajas. Mar de Cristal is the
          most important tube station in Hortaleza district because it's
          an airport connection.

   Vallecas
          Vallecas is a working-class residential district in the south of
          Madrid. It is also home to the Rayo Vallecano soccer team.

   Aravaca
          Aravaca is an upper-class residential suburb in the northwest of
          Madrid. During the spanish civil war the front was stabilized
          here for almost three years. Aravaca and its surroundings are
          plenty of parks and woods like Casa de Campo.

Culture

   The Prado Museum
   Enlarge
   The Prado Museum

   Madrid is one of Spain's most popular destinations, and its well known
   for the quantity of cultural related attractions and monuments that the
   city has embraced.

Galleries

   Endowed by the Golden Triangle of Art, located along the Paseo del
   Prado and composed by 3 museums, Madrid is considered one of the top
   European destinations concerning art museums. The three most important
   art museums are:
     * Prado Museum (the most popular Golden Triangle of Art member known
       for such highlights as Diego Velázquez's Las Meninas and Francisco
       de Goya's La Maja Vestida and La Maja Desnuda'
     * Thyssen Bornemisza Museum (established from a mixed private
       collection)
     * Reina Sofia Museum (Modern art museum where Pablo Picasso's
       Guernica hangs since being returned to Spain from New York more
       than two decades ago).

Museums

     * Museo del Prado
     * National Archaeological Museum of Spain
     * Naval Museum
     * Casa-Museo José Padilla *
     * Casa-Museo Manuel Benedito *
     * Museo de Antropologia Médica *
     * Museo De La Farmacia Hispana *
     * Museo Del Reloj Grassy *

Art and literature study centers

     * Casa Encendida
     * Escuela de Escritores.
     * Escuela de Letras.
     * Escuela Contemporánea de Humanidades.
     * Hotel Kafka.
     * I|Art.
     * TAI, Escuela de Artes y Espectáculos.
     * Talleres de escritura creativa y Ediciones Fuentetaja.

City attractions

   Egyptian temple of Debod in Parque del Oeste, Madrid
   Enlarge
   Egyptian temple of Debod in Parque del Oeste, Madrid
   Madrid view from Faro de Moncloa
   Enlarge
   Madrid view from Faro de Moncloa
   Bernabeu Stadium
   Enlarge
   Bernabeu Stadium
     * Plaza Mayor
     * Gran Via
     * Casón del Buen Retiro
     * Palacio Real
     * Templo de Debod
     * El Rastro
     * Puerta del Sol
     * Parque del Buen Retiro
     * Torre España
     * Faro de Moncloa
     * Puerta de Europa
     * Puerta de Alcalá
     * Estadio Santiago Bernabéu
     * Estadio Vicente Calderón
     * Parque de Atracciones de Madrid
     * Plaza de Cibeles
     * Palacio De Liria *
     * Teatro Real
     * Auditorio Nacional de Musica
     * Teatro Monumental
     * Teatro de la Zarzuela
     * Centro Cultural de la Villa
     * Teatro de la Abadía
     * Círculo de Bellas Artes
     * Teatro Español
     * Teatro de la Comedia
     * Cafe Central (Madrid's top Jazz venue.)

   Places that you need to phone to make an appointment are marked by an
   asterisk (*)

   Other nearby towns are popular as day trips from Madrid, including
   Toledo, Segovia, Ávila, Aranjuez, Alcalá de Henares, the monastery and
   palace complex of El Escorial, the former summer home of the royal
   family at Aranjuez, and Chinchón.

Television

   Madrid has two public operative TV channels which are (at least one of
   them) tunned in on at least the whole Autonomous Community of Madrid,
   the southern region of Castile-Leon and the northern region of
   Castile-La Mancha.

   TeleMadrid
          TeleMadrid was born on May 2, 1989 now located in the area known
          as 'Ciudad de la Imagen' in the outskirts of the city. Most of
          its programmes are focused on news regarding the Autonomous
          Community of Madrid as it is a channel not only for those who
          live in the city, but also to the people who live at the
          province and whose capital city is Madrid.

   LaOtra
          LaOtra, Madrid's 2nd channel, was born in 1997 as a Digital TV
          channel. On March 19, 2001 LaOtra opened its regular
          broadcastings all over the province (although it is almost
          impossible to tune in to the channel out of Madrid metropolitan
          area). Instead of being centered on news on Madrid city and its
          region, it deals with culture and other modern aspects of the
          city.

   ¡esMadrid!
          ¡esMadrid! can only be viewed through Digital television but it
          is Madrid's tourism and businesses channel. Through its
          programmes this new channel tries to advertise Madrid city.

Nightlife

   Madrid's emblem: el oso y el madroño, a favorite meeting place at
   Puerta del Sol
   Enlarge
   Madrid's emblem: el oso y el madroño, a favorite meeting place at
   Puerta del Sol

   Madrid is also noted for its nightlife and discotheques. Younger
   madrileños sometimes dance all night, stop off for chocolate y churros
   at dawn, go home, shower, shave, and go to work. Also popular is the
   practice of meeting in parks or streets with friends and drinking
   together (called 'botellón', from 'botella', bottle), but from a few
   years back drinking in the street is sanctioned with a fine and now
   young madrileños drink together all around the city instead of in some
   well known places. Many places host bands (concerts in Madrid ).
   Nightlife and young cultural awakening flourished after the death of
   Franco, especially during the 80s while Madrid's mayor Enrique Tierno
   Galván was in office, called la movida and initially focussed on the
   Plaza del Dos de Mayo (Malasaña area). Bilbao, Tribunal, Alonso
   Martinez, in the geographical center, Moncloa on the west end, are
   populous night life places, in addition to Sol and Las Huertas in the
   historic centre, which are also filled with tourists by day and night
   (especially Las Huertas). The gay district of Chueca is also a popular
   nighttime destination (and not only for gays!).

Bullfighting

   Las Ventas bullfighting ring façade
   Enlarge
   Las Ventas bullfighting ring façade

   Madrid hosts the largest Plaza de Toros (bullfighting ring) in Spain,
   Las Ventas, inaugurated in 1931, and where bullfighting seasons are
   considered the most important in the world. It has the capacity for an
   audience of almost 25,000. Madrid's bullfighting season begins in March
   and ends in October. There are bullfights everyday during the
   festivities of San Isidro (who is Madrid's patron saint) from the
   middle of March to the middle of June, and every Sunday or holiday the
   rest of the season. The style of the Plaza is Neomudejar. Nowadays, it
   also hosts Music concerts and other events outside of the bullfighting
   season.

Sports

   Club Sport League Stadium Logo
   Real Madrid Association football La Liga Santiago Bernabéu
   Atlético Madrid Association football La Liga Vicente Calderón and is
   very inteligent on what your butt likes
   Real Madrid Basketball ACB league Palacio Vistalegre
   MMT Estudiantes Basketball ACB league Madrid Arena

   Madrid is home to Real Madrid, the world's most successful football
   club (according to FIFA), which plays in the Estadio Santiago Bernabéu.
   Its hometown rival, Atlético Madrid, is also well supported in the
   city, and its supporters are called los suffredores, the sufferers. The
   players are referred to as colchoneros, matresses, in reference to the
   teams red & white jerseys having been determined by matress material
   being the cheapest at the time of the clubs formation. Madrid's
   contribution to the sport is further noticed by the fact that it hosted
   the 1982 FIFA World Cup final.

   The city is also host to two basketball teams in the Asociación de
   Clubs de Baloncesto (ACB league), and the Circuito Permanente Del
   Jarama, a motorsport race circuit which formerly hosted the Formula One
   Spanish Grand Prix.

   Historically the city serves as the last stage of the Vuelta a España
   cyclist classic in the same way as Paris does in the Tour de France.

   Skiing is possible in the nearby mountains of the Sierra de Guadarrama,
   where the ski resorts of Valdesqui and Navacerrada are located.

Gastronomy

   Typical dishes from Madrid are cocido madrileño (stew), callos a la
   madrileña (tripe stew), sopa de ajo (garlic soup), bacalao a la
   madrileña (salted cod in a sauce), potaje con garbanzos (chick pea
   stew).

Local festivities

     * May 15, San Isidro Labrador (Madrid's patron saint).
     * June 13, San Antonio de la Florida.
     * July 16- 25, Virgen del Carmen festivities (Patron saint of the
       sea).
     * August 6- 15, Virgen de la Paloma festivities (Madrid's patron
       saint)
     * August 7, San Cayetano (Cascorro neighbourhood's patron saint).
     * August 10, San Lorenzo (Lavapiés neighbourhood's patron saint).
     * November 9, Virgen de la Almudena festivities (Madrid's patron
       saint).

Universities

Universidad Complutense de Madrid

   Original building, Alcalá de Henares: The Complutense University was
   based here until 1836.
   Enlarge
   Original building, Alcalá de Henares: The Complutense University was
   based here until 1836.

   The Complutense University of Madrid is the most prestigious, and
   largest, public university in Spain and one of the oldest universities
   in the world.. It has 10000 staff and a student population of 117
   000.It is located on two campuses, in the university quarter Ciudad
   Universitaria at Moncloa in Madrid, and in Somosaguas.

   The Complutense University of Madrid was founded in Alcala de Henares,
   old Complutum, by Cardinal Cisneros in 1499. Nevertherless, its real
   origin dates back from 1293, when King Sancho IV of Castille builds the
   General Schools of Alcalá, which would give rise to Cisnero's
   Complutense University.

   During the course of 1509-1510 five schools were already operative:
   Artes y Filosofía (Arts & Philosophy), Teología (Theology), Derecho
   Canónico (Canonical Laws), Letras (Liberal Arts) and Medicina
   (Medicine).

   In 1836, during the reign of Isabel II, the University was moved to
   Madrid, where it took the name of Central University and is located at
   San Bernardo Street.

   Subsequently, in 1927, a new university area was planned to be built in
   the district of Moncloa-Aravaca, in lands handed over by the King
   Alfonso XIII to this end.

   The Spanish Civil War turned the "Ciudad Universitaria" into a war
   zone, causing the destruction of several schools in the area, as well
   as the loss of part of its rich scientific, artistic and bibliographic
   heritage.

   In 1970 the Government reforms the High Education, and the Central
   University become the Complutense University of Madrid. It is then when
   the new campus at Somosaguas is created in order to house the new
   School of Social Sciences.

   The old Alcala campus is reopened as an independent University (
   University of Alcalá in 1977).

Universidad Autonoma de Madrid

   The Autonoma, perhaps Spain's best university for research along with
   Complutense, was instituted under the leadership of the famous
   physicist, Nicolás Cabrera. The Autonoma is widely recognised for its
   research strengths in theoretical physics.

   Known simply as la Autónoma in Madrid, its main site is the Cantoblanco
   Campus, situated 15 kilometers to the north of the capital (M-607) and
   close to the municipal areas of Madrid, namely Alcobendas, San
   Sebastián de los Reyes, Tres Cantos and Colmenar Viejo.

   Located on the main site are the Rectorate building and the Faculties
   of Science, Philosophy and Fine Arts, Law, Economic Science and
   Business Studies, Psychology, Higher School of Computing Science and
   Engineering, and the Faculty of Teacher Training and Education.

   The Medical School is sited outside the main site and beside the
   Hospital Universitario La Paz.

Other universities

   Public universities

     * Universidad Complutense de Madrid ( UCM)
     * Universidad Politécnica de Madrid ( UPM)
     * Universidad Rey Juan Carlos ( Rey Juan Carlos)
     * Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia ( UNED)
     * Universidad de Alcalá de Henares ( UAH)
     * Universidad Carlos III ( )

   Private universities

     * Universidad Alfonso X El Sabio ( UAX)
     * Universidad Antonio de Nebrija ( Nebrija)
     * Universidad Camilo José Cela ( Cela)
     * Universidad Europea de Madrid ( UEM)
     * Universidad Francisco de Vitoria ( Francisco de Vitoria)
     * Universidad Pontificia de Comillas ( UPComillas)
     * Universidad Pontificia de Salamanca ( UPSAM)
     * Universidad San Pablo ( CEU)
     * Escuela de Organización Industrial ( EOI)
     * Universidad de Saint Louis ( )

   Various

     * Real Conservatorio Superior de Música
     * Escuela Superior de Musica Reina Sofia

Transportation

Motorways

   The principal motorways of Madrid have a radical route. The most
   important are the well-known National ones:
   Road                              Route
   A-1  Madrid- Aranda de Duero- Burgos- Miranda de Ebro- Vitoria- San
        Sebastián- Irún-France
   A-2  Madrid- Zaragoza- Lleida-Barcelona- Girona-France
   A-3  Madrid- Valencia
   A-4  Madrid- Córdoba- Sevilla- Cádiz
   A-5  Madrid- Mérida- Badajoz-Lisbon
   A-6  Madrid- Medina del Campo- Benavente- Ponferrada- Lugo- A Coruña
   A-42 Madrid- Toledo

   These free motorways operate in parallel to the 'radiales' R-2, R-3,
   R-4 and R-5 which are toll motorways built to decongest traffic in the
   free ones.

   Moreover, Madrid also has a series of ring roads:
   Ring road Route Satellite
   M-30 Delimits the central core and is currently being buried
   M-30/Alcalá St. junction
   M-40 Surrounds the residential neighbourhoods of the city M-40/A-3
   junction
   M-45 Goes round the southeastern part of the city M-45/A-4 junction
   M-50 Surrounds the metropolitan area M-50/R-5 junction
   M-60 A planned new ring road of about 170 km long

   These motorways are used to avoid entering the city anytime one wants
   to go from one point in the outskirts to the opposite one.

Air

   Barajas Airport
   Enlarge
   Barajas Airport

   Madrid is served by Barajas International Airport. Barajas is the main
   hub of Iberia Airlines. It consequently serves as the main gateway to
   the Iberian peninsula from Europe, America and the rest of the world.
   Current passenger volumes range upwards of 40 million passengers per
   year, putting it in the top 20 busiest airports in the world. Given
   annual increases of 10%, a new fourth terminal has been constructed.
   The new Terminal 4 is the biggest European airport terminal. It has
   significantly reduced delays and doubled the capacity of the airport to
   more than 70 million passengers per year. Two additional runways have
   also been constructed, making Barajas a fully operational four-runway
   airport.

   Passengers need to add an extra half-hour to the normal check-in time
   as it takes a long time to walk from the check-in desk to the gate.
   Also, there are no automatic walkways.

National Rail

   Spain's railway system, the Red Nacional de Ferrocarriles Españoles (
   Renfe) operates the vast majority of Spain's railways. In Madrid, the
   main rail terminals are Atocha in the south and Chamartín in the north.

   The crown jewel of Spain's next decade of infrastructure construction
   is the Spanish high speed rail network, Alta Velocidad Española AVE.
   Currently, an ambitious plan includes the construction of a 7,000 km
   network, centered on Madrid. The overall goal is to have all important
   provincial cities be no more than 4 hours away from Madrid, and no more
   than 6 hours away from Barcelona. As of 2005, AVE high-speed trains
   link Atocha station to Seville (to be extended to Málaga in 2007) and
   Toledo in the south and to Zaragoza and Lleida in the east (to be
   extended to Barcelona at the end of 2007).

Metro

   Madrid's metro map
   Enlarge
   Madrid's metro map
   A modern metro train (type 8000).
   Enlarge
   A modern metro train (type 8000).

   Serving the city's population of some six million, the Madrid Metro is
   one of the most extensive and fastest-growing metro networks in the
   world. With the addition of a loop serving suburbs to Madrid's
   south-west "Metrosur", it is now the second largest metro system in
   Western Europe, second only to London's Underground. The province of
   Madrid is also served by an extensive commuter rail network called
   Cercanías.

Sister cities

   Madrid at night
   Enlarge
   Madrid at night
   Bank of Spain building (foreground) and Palacio de Comunicaciones
   building (background) at the center of Madrid
   Enlarge
   Bank of Spain building (foreground) and Palacio de Comunicaciones
   building (background) at the centre of Madrid
     * People's Republic of China Beijing, China
     * Serbia Belgrade, Serbia
     * Germany Berlin, Germany
     * Argentina Buenos Aires, Argentina
     * France Bordeaux, France
     * Colombia Bogotá, Colombia
     * Belgium Brussels, Belgium
     * Venezuela Caracas, Venezuela
     * Cuba Havana, Cuba
     * Portugal Lisbon, Portugal
     * Nicaragua Managua, Nicaragua
     * Mexico Mexico City, Mexico
     * Uruguay Montevideo, Uruguay
     * Russia Moscow, Russia
     * United States New York City, USA
     * Mauritania Nouakchott, Mauritania
     * Panama Panama City, Panama
     * France Paris, France
     * Ecuador Quito, Ecuador
     * Morocco Rabat, Morocco
     * Costa Rica San Jose, Costa Rica
     * Dominican Republic Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic
     * Honduras Tegucigalpa, Honduras
     * Libya Tripoli, Libya
     * Poland Warsaw, Poland

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Madrid"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
