   #copyright

Malawi

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Countries;
Countries

   SOS Children works in Malawi. For more information see SOS Children in
   Malawi, Africa
                             Dziko la Malaŵi
   Republic of Malawi

   Flag of Malawi Coat of arms of Malawi
   Flag           Coat of arms
   Motto: Unity and Freedom
   Anthem: Mlungu dalitsani Malawi  ( Chichewa)
   "Oh God Bless Our Land of Malawi"
   Location of Malawi
           Capital          Lilongwe
                            13°57′S 33°42′E
         Largest city       Blantyre
      Official languages    English (official)
                            Chichewa (national)
   Government               Multi-party democracy
    - President             Bingu wa Mutharika
         Independence       from the UK
    - Independence declared July 6, 1964
    - Republic              July 6, 1966
                                   Area
    - Total                 118,484 km² ( 99th)
                            45,747 sq mi
    - Water (%)             20.6%
                                Population
    - July 2005 estimate    12,884,000 ( 69th)
    - 1998 census           9,933,868
    - Density               109/km² ( 91st)
                            282/sq mi
          GDP ( PPP)        2005 estimate
    - Total                 $7.67 billion ( 143rd)
    - Per capita            $596 ( 181st)
         HDI  (2004)        0.400 (low) ( 166th)
           Currency         Kwacha (D) ( MWK)
          Time zone         CAT ( UTC+2)
    - Summer ( DST)         not observed ( UTC+2)
         Internet TLD       .mw
         Calling code       +265
   ^1 Estimates for this country explicitly take into account the effects
   of excess mortality due to AIDS; this can result in lower life
   expectancy, higher infant mortality and death rates, lower population
   and growth rates, and changes in the distribution of population by age
   and sex than would otherwise be expected.

   The Republic of Malawi ( IPA: [məˈlɑːwi] or [malaβi]; formerly
   Nyasaland) is a democratic, densely populated country located in
   southeastern Africa. It has Zambia to the north-west, Tanzania to the
   north, and Mozambique surrounding it on the east, south, and west. The
   origin of the name Malawi remains unclear; it is held to be either
   derived from that of southern tribes, or noting the "glitter of the sun
   rising across the lake" (as seen in its flag).

History

   The earliest inhabitants of the area were Khoisan hunter-gatherers.
   They were largely replaced by Bantu tribes during Bantu migrations. The
   first significant Western contact was the arrival of David Livingstone
   along the north shore of Lake Malawi in 1859, and subsequently Scottish
   Presbyterian churches establishing missions. In 1883, a consul of the
   British Government was accredited to the "Kings and Chiefs of Central
   Africa," and in 1891, the British established the British Central
   Africa Protectorate, by 1907, the Nyasaland Protectorate. Although the
   British remained in control during the first half of the 1900s, this
   period was marked by a number of unsuccessful Malawian attempts to
   obtain independence. During the 1950s, pressure for independence
   increased when Nyasaland was joined with Northern and Southern Rhodesia
   in 1953 to form the Central African Federation. In July 1958, Dr.
   Hastings Kamuzu Banda returned to the country after a long absence. He
   assumed leadership of the NAC, which later became the Malawi Congress
   Party (MCP). In 1959, Banda was sent to Gwelo Prison in Southern
   Rhodesia (now Gweru) for his political activities but was released in
   1960 to participate in a constitutional conference in London.

   On April 15, 1961, the MCP won an overwhelming victory in elections for
   a new Legislative Council. In a second constitutional conference in
   London in November 1962, the British Government agreed to give
   Nyasaland self-governing status the following year. This announcement
   sealed the fate of the Central African Federation, which lost its
   reason for existence with an independent Nyasaland. Banda became Prime
   Minister on February 1, 1963, although the British still controlled
   Malawi's financial, security, and judicial systems. A new constitution
   took effect in May 1963, providing for virtually complete internal
   self-government. The Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland was dissolved
   on December 31, 1963, and Malawi became a fully independent member of
   the British Commonwealth on July 6, 1964. Two years later, Malawi
   became a republic with Dr. Banda as its first President, and was also
   declared a one-party state. In 1970 Banda was declared President for
   life of the MCP, and in 1971 Banda consolidated his power and was named
   President for Life of Malawi itself.

   However, increasing domestic unrest and pressure from Malawian churches
   and from the international community led to a referendum in which the
   Malawian people were asked to vote for a new form of government. On
   June 14, 1993, the people of Malawi voted overwhelmingly in favour of
   multi-party democracy. Free and fair national elections were held on
   May 17, 1994. Bakili Muluzi, leader of the United Democratic Front
   (UDF), was elected President in those elections. The UDF won 82 of the
   177 seats in the National Assembly and formed a coalition government
   with the Alliance for Democracy (AFORD). That coalition disbanded in
   June 1996, but some of its members remained in the government. Malawi's
   newly written constitution (1995) eliminated special powers previously
   reserved for the Malawi Congress Party. Accelerated economic
   liberalization and structural reform accompanied the political
   transition.

   Malawi saw its first transition between democratically elected
   presidents in May 2004, when the UDF’s presidential candidate Bingu wa
   Mutharika defeated MCP candidate John Tembo and Gwanda Chakuamba, who
   was backed by a grouping of opposition parties. Through the politicking
   of party chairperson and former President Bakili Muluzi, the party
   successfully secured a majority by forming a "government of national
   unity" with several opposition parties.

Politics

   For almost thirty years, the government of Malawi and the Malawi
   Congress Party were one. When Malawi was declared a republic in 1966,
   the country was formally declared a one-party state. Under Banda, all
   citizens had to be members of the party. This situation changed in a
   1993 referendum, which instituted a multiparty system. In the country's
   first democratic elections, Banda and the MCP were soundly defeated.

   Under the 1995 constitution, the president, who is both chief of state
   and head of the government, is chosen through universal direct suffrage
   every five years. Malawi has a vice president who is elected with the
   president. The president has the option of appointing a second vice
   president, who must be from a different political party. The members of
   the presidentially appointed cabinet can be drawn from either within or
   outside of the legislature. Malawi's National Assembly has 193 seats,
   all directly elected to serve 5-year terms. The constitution also
   provides for a second chamber, a Senate of 80 seats, but to date no
   action has been taken to create the Senate. The Senate is intended to
   provide representation for traditional leaders and the different
   geographical districts, as well as various special interest groups,
   such as women, youth, and the disabled.

   The constitution provides for an independent judiciary. Malawi's
   judicial system, based on the English model, is made up of magisterial
   lower courts, a High Court, and a Supreme Court of Appeal. Local
   government is carried out in 27 districts within three regions
   administered by regional administrators and district commissioners who
   are appointed by the central government. Local elections, the first in
   the multi-party era, took place in on November 21, 2000. The UDF party
   won 70% of the seats in this election.

   The third multiparty presidential and parliamentary elections,
   originally planned for May 18, 2004 were postponed by two days
   following a High Court appeal by the main opposition Mgwirizano (Unity)
   coalition. The run-up to the poll was overshadowed by opposition claims
   of irregularities in the voters' roll. European Union and Commonwealth
   observers said although voting passed peacefully, they were concerned
   about "serious inadequacies" in the poll.

Administrative divisions

   Malawi is divided into three regions (the Northern, Central and
   Southern regions), which are further divided into twenty-seven
   districts, which in turn are further divided into 137 traditional
   authorities and 68 sub-chief[dom?]s. The districts are:
     * Balaka
     * Blantyre
     * Chikwawa
     * Chiradzulu
     * Chitipa
     * Dedza
     * Dowa

                   * Karonga
                   * Kasungu
                   * Likoma
                   * Lilongwe
                   * Machinga
                   * Mangochi
                   * Mchinji

                               * Mulanje
                               * Mwanza
                               * Mzimba
                               * Nkhata Bay
                               * Nkhotakota
                               * Nsanje
                               * Ntcheu

                                             * Ntchisi
                                             * Phalombe
                                             * Rumphi
                                             * Salima
                                             * Thyolo
                                             * Zomba

Geography

   Map of Malawi
   Satellite image of Malawi, generated from raster graphics data supplied
   by The Map Library
   Enlarge
   Satellite image of Malawi, generated from raster graphics data supplied
   by The Map Library
   Mulanje Mountain in Malawi
   Enlarge
   Mulanje Mountain in Malawi

   Malawi is situated in southeastern Africa. It has the Great Rift Valley
   running through the country from north to south. In this deep trough
   lies Lake Malawi (also called Lake Nyasa), the third-largest lake in
   Africa, making about 20% of Malawi's area. The Shire River flows from
   the south end of the lake and joins the Zambezi River 400 km (250  mi)
   farther south in Mozambique. East and west of the Rift Valley are high
   plateaus, generally between 900 and 1,200 m (3,000–4,000 ft) above sea
   level. The Nyika Uplands rise as high as 2,600 m (8,500 ft) in the
   north; south of the lake lie the Shire Highlands, with an elevation of
   600–1,600 m (2,000–5,000 ft), rising to Mts. Zomba and Mulanje, 2,130
   and 3,048 m (7,000 and 10,000 ft). In the extreme south, the elevation
   is only 60–90 m (200–300 ft) above sea level.

   Malawi is one of Sub-Saharan Africa's most densely populated countries.
   Lilongwe, Malawi's capital since 1971, has a population which exceeds
   400,000. All government ministries and the Parliament are located in
   Lilongwe. Blantyre remains Malawi's major commercial centre and largest
   city, having grown from an estimated 109,000 inhabitants in 1966 to
   nearly 500,000 in 1998. Malawi's President resides in Lilongwe. The
   Supreme Court is seated in Blantyre.

   Malawi's climate is subtropical. A rainy season runs from November
   through April. There is little to no rainfall throughout most of the
   country from May to October. It is hot and humid from October to April
   along the lake and in the Lower Shire Valley. Lilongwe is also hot and
   humid during these months, albeit far less than in the south. The rest
   of the country is warm during those months. From June through August,
   the lake areas and far south are comfortably warm, but the rest of
   Malawi can be chilly at night, with temperatures ranging from 5 °–14 °C
   (41°–57°F).

   Lake Malawi is sometimes called the Calendar Lake as it is about 365
   miles long and 52 miles wide.

   Malawi has five national parks: Cape Maclear; Kasungu; Lengwe; Liwonde;
   and Nyika.

Economy

   Malawi is a landlocked, densely populated country. Its economy is
   heavily dependent on agriculture. Malawi has few exploitable mineral
   resources. Its three most important export crops are (in order)
   tobacco, tea and sugar. Malawi's president recently urged farmers to
   consider growing other crops, such as cotton ( ), as an alternative to
   the country's principal crop, tobacco, as cigarette consumption in the
   West continues to decline. Traditionally Malawi has been
   self-sufficient in its staple food, maize, and during the 1980s
   exported substantial quantities to its drought-stricken neighbors.
   Agriculture represents 38.6% of the GDP, accounts for over 80% of the
   labor force, and represents about 80% of all exports. Nearly 90% of the
   population engages in subsistence farming. Smallholder farmers produce
   a variety of crops, including maize (corn), beans, rice, cassava,
   tobacco, and groundnuts ( peanuts).The agricultural sector contributes
   about 63.7% of total income for the rural population, 65% of
   manufacturing sector’s raw materials, and approximately 87% of total
   employment. Financial wealth is generally concentrated in the hands of
   a small elite. Malawi's manufacturing industries are situated around
   the city of Blantyre.

   Malawi's economic reliance on the export of agricultural commodities
   renders it particularly vulnerable to external shocks such as declining
   terms of trade and drought. High transport costs, which can comprise
   over 30% of its total import bill, constitute a serious impediment to
   economic development and trade. Malawi must import all its fuel
   products. Paucity of skilled labor; difficulty in obtaining expatriate
   employment permits; bureaucratic red tape; corruption; and inadequate
   and deteriorating road, electricity, water, and telecommunications
   infrastructure further hinder economic development in Malawi. However,
   recent government initiatives targeting improvements in the road
   infrastructure, together with private sector participation in railroad
   and telecommunications, have begun to render the investment environment
   more attractive.

   Malawi has undertaken economic structural adjustment programs supported
   by the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and other
   donors since 1981. Broad reform objectives include stimulation of
   private sector activity and participation through the elimination of
   price controls and industrial licensing, liberalization of trade and
   foreign exchange, rationalization of taxes, privatization of
   state-owned enterprises, and civil service reform. Malawi qualifies for
   Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) debt relief.

   As of late May 2004, the IMF program (begun in 2000) was canceled and a
   Staff-Monitored Program (SMP) was implemented. In the wake of questions
   about fiscal credibility, the SMP’s goal is to give Malawi’s
   newly-elected government the chance to establish a track record of
   fiscal discipline.

   Real GDP increased by an estimated 3.9% in 2004, from 4.3% in 2003 and
   2.4% in 2002. Inflation has been largely under control since 2003,
   averaging 10% in that year and 11.1% (est.) in 2004. Discount and
   commercial lending rates also declined from 40%-45% in 2003 to 25% in
   early 2004. The Kwacha slid from 90 to 101 against the U.S. dollar in
   mid-2003 and was at 108 to the U.S. dollar at the end of 2004.

   Malawi has bilateral trade agreements with its two major trading
   partners, South Africa and Zimbabwe, both of which allow duty-free
   entry of Malawian products into their countries.

Humanitarian situation

   Life expectancy in Malawi is now as low as 36.5 years; five years lower
   than it was 50 years ago. This drop is due to the population's
   impoverishment, which is constituted by many factors, including:
     * insufficient nutrition
     * poor access to medical treatment
     * low income (the mean per capita income in Malawi is less than $1
       per day)

     * insufficient school education
     * spread of HIV/AIDS
     * government economic restrictions

Health

   Child mortality is 103/1,000. There are more than a million orphans,
   700,000 of whom became orphans when their parents died of AIDS.

   According to Malawi government estimates, 14.2% of the population are
   HIV-positive, and 90,000 deaths in 2003 were due to AIDS. Unofficial
   estimates based on private hospital entries give a HIV infection
   percentage of 30%.

Nutrition

   Malawi's staple food is maize but like other countries in Southern
   Africa, Malawi has repeatedly been affected by famines since 2002, when
   food was scarce for almost one third of the population. In 2003, 30
   percent of the population were affected.

   According to a FAO report from June 2005, 4.22 million inhabitants of
   Malawi, ¼ of the population, would not have enough food in 2005 to
   survive. In the south of the country, the rate of the population
   affected will be between 55 and 76 per cent. In the end of November
   2005, the first famine deaths were recorded.

   These repeated famines are caused by different factors including:
     * widespread monocultures
     * poor distribution of fertilizers
     * droughts
     * government corruption and restrictions on economic freedom

     * widespread AIDS epidemic
     * bilharzia
     * malaria

   Some relief organisations, such as the Community of Sant'Egidio,
   Catholic Relief Services and other local and international
   organisations try to respond to the famine by distributing food
   parcels. The government also had a starter pack farm input programme
   for maize seed and fertilizer. The scheme was however subject to gross
   abuses and sometimes the poorest people did not receive any of the
   items that were purportedly earmarked for them. This programme was
   discontinued by the Bingu Wa Muntharika administration, which instead
   subsidised fertilizer for the local subsistence farmers.

Foreign relations

   Malawi has continued the pro-Western foreign policy established by
   former President Banda. It maintains excellent diplomatic relations
   with principal Western countries. Malawi's close relations with South
   Africa throughout the apartheid era strained its relations with other
   African nations. Following the collapse of apartheid in 1994, Malawi
   developed, and currently maintains, strong diplomatic relations with
   all African countries.

   Between 1985 and 1995, Malawi accommodated more than a million refugees
   from Mozambique. The refugee crisis placed a substantial strain on
   Malawi's government but also drew significant inflows of international
   assistance. The accommodation and eventual repatriation of the
   Mozambicans is considered a major success by international
   organizations. In 1996, Malawi received a number of Rwandan and
   Congolese refugees seeking asylum. The government did not turn away
   refugees, but it did invoke the principle of "first country of asylum."
   Under this principle, refugees who requested asylum in another country
   first, or who had the opportunity to do so, would not subsequently be
   granted asylum in Malawi. There were no reports of the forcible
   repatriation of refugees.

   Important bilateral donors, in addition to the U.S., include Canada,
   Libya, Germany, Iceland, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Finland,
   Sweden, Taiwan, and the United Kingdom. Multilateral donors include the
   World Bank, the IMF, the European Union, the African Development Bank,
   and the United Nations organizations.

   Malawi is a member of the following international organizations: UN and
   some of its specialized and related agencies (i.e. UNCTAD, UNESCO,
   UNIDO), IMF, World Bank, Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
   (MIGA), World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), Berne
   Convention, Universal Copyright Convention, African Union, Lome
   Convention, African Development Bank (AFDB), Southern African
   Development Community (SADC), the Common Market for Eastern and
   Southern Africa (COMESA), Nonaligned Movement, G-77, and the World
   Health Organization (WHO).

   Malawi is also a member of the International Criminal Court with a
   Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the US-military (as
   covered under Article 98).

Demographics

   Man in Malawi
   Enlarge
   Man in Malawi

   Malawi derives its name from the Maravi, a Bantu people who came from
   the southern Congo basin circa 1400. On reaching the area north of Lake
   Malawi, the Maravi divided. One branch, the ancestors of the
   present-day Chewas, moved south to the west bank of the lake. The
   other, the ancestors of the Nyanjas, moved down the east bank to the
   southern part of the country. By 1500, the two divisions of the tribe
   had established a kingdom stretching from north of the present-day city
   of Nkhotakota to the Zambezi River in the south, and from Lake Malawi
   in the east, to the Luangwa River in Zambia in the west.

   Migrations and tribal conflicts precluded the formation of a cohesive
   Malawian society until the turn of the 20th century. In more recent
   years, ethnic and tribal distinctions have diminished, although
   regional distinctions and rivalries persist. Despite some clear
   differences, no significant friction currently exists between tribal
   groups, and the concept of a Malawian nationality has begun to take
   hold. Predominantly a rural people, Malawians are generally
   traditionalist, which includes nonviolence.

   The Chewas constitute 90% of the population of the central region; the
   Nyanja tribe predominates in the south and the Tumbuka in the north. In
   addition, significant numbers of the Tongas live in the north;
   Ngonis—an offshoot of the Zulus who came from South Africa in the early
   1800s—live in the lower northern and lower central regions; and the
   Yao, who are mostly Muslim, live along the southeastern border with
   Mozambique. Bantus of other tribes came from Mozambique as refugees.

   Europeans and Asians also live here. Most Europeans are British and
   Portuguese from Mozambique, and Asians are mostly Indians.

Geographic locale

   Flag of Tanzania  Tanzania
   Flag of Zambia  Zambia North
   West    Flag of Malawi  Malawi     East
   South
   Flag of Mozambique  Mozambique

   Countries of Southern Africa

   Angola • Botswana • Lesotho • Madagascar • Malawi • Mauritius •
   Mozambique • Namibia • South Africa • Swaziland • Zambia • Zimbabwe
   Countries of Africa

   Sovereign states: Algeria • Angola • Benin • Botswana • Burkina Faso •
   Burundi • Cameroon • Cape Verde • Central African Republic • Chad •
   Democratic Republic of the Congo • Republic of the Congo • Comoros •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Djibouti • Egypt ^1 • Equatorial Guinea • Eritrea •
   Ethiopia • France ^2 • Gabon • The Gambia • Ghana • Guinea-Bissau •
   Guinea • Kenya • Lesotho • Liberia • Libya • Madagascar • Malawi • Mali
   • Mauritania • Mauritius • Morocco • Mozambique • Namibia • Niger •
   Nigeria • Portugal ^2 • Rwanda • Senegal • Seychelles • Sierra Leone •
   Somalia • South Africa • Spain ^2 • Sudan • Swaziland • São Tomé and
   Príncipe • Tanzania • Togo • Tunisia • Uganda • Yemen ^3 • Zambia •
   Zimbabwe

   Dependencies: British Indian Ocean Territory (UK) • French Southern
   Territories (France) • Mayotte (France) • Réunion (France) • Saint
   Helena ^4 (UK)

   Unrecognized countries: Somaliland • Western Sahara •

   ^1  Partly in Asia. ^2  Mostly in Europe. ^3  Mostly in Asia.
   ^4 Includes the dependencies of Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha.
   Flag of the SADC    Member states of the Southern African Development
   Community

   Angola • Botswana • Democratic Republic of the Congo • Lesotho •
   Madagascar • Malawi • Mauritius • Mozambique • Namibia • Seychelles •
   South Africa • Swaziland • Tanzania • Zambia • Zimbabwe
   Member states of the African Union

   Algeria • Angola • Benin • Botswana • Burkina Faso • Burundi •
   Cameroon • Cape Verde • Central African Republic • Chad • Comoros •
   Democratic Republic of the Congo • Republic of the Congo •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Djibouti • Egypt • Eritrea • Ethiopia •
   Equatorial Guinea • Gabon • The Gambia • Ghana • Guinea •
   Guinea-Bissau • Kenya • Lesotho • Liberia • Libya • Madagascar •
   Malawi • Mali • Mauritania • Mauritius • Mozambique • Namibia • Niger •
   Nigeria • Rwanda • São Tomé and Príncipe • Senegal • Seychelles •
   Sierra Leone • Somalia • South Africa • Sudan • Swaziland • Tanzania •
   Togo • Tunisia • Uganda • Western Sahara  (SADR) • Zambia • Zimbabwe
   Niger-Congo-speaking nations
   Kordofanian

   Flag of Sudan  Sudan
   Mande

   Flag of The Gambia  The Gambia • Flag of Guinea  Guinea • Flag of
   Guinea-Bissau  Guinea-Bissau • Flag of Mali  Mali • Flag of Mauritania
    Mauritania • Flag of Senegal  Senegal • Flag of Sierra Leone  Sierra
   Leone
   Atlantic-Congo

   Atlantic

   Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Burkina Faso  Burkina Faso • Flag of
   Cameroon  Cameroon • Flag of Central African Republic  Central African
   Republic • Flag of Chad  Chad • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire •
   Flag of The Gambia  The Gambia • Flag of Guinea  Guinea • Flag of
   Guinea-Bissau  Guinea-Bissau • Flag of Liberia  Liberia • Flag of Mali
    Mali • Flag of Mauritania  Mauritania • Flag of Niger  Niger • Flag of
   Senegal  Senegal • Flag of Sierra Leone  Sierra Leone • Flag of Sudan
   Sudan • Flag of Togo  Togo

   Ijoid: Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria - Dogon: Flag of Mali  Mali
   Volta-Congo

   Senufo: Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire •
   Flag of Mali  Mali

   Gur: Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Burkina Faso  Burkina Faso • Flag
   of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire • Flag of Ghana  Ghana • Flag of Mali
   Mali • Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria • Flag of Togo  Togo

   Adamawa-Ubangi: Flag of Cameroon  Cameroon • Flag of Central African
   Republic  Central African Republic • Flag of Chad  Chad • Flag of
   Nigeria  Nigeria

   Kru: Flag of Burkina Faso  Burkina Faso • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte
   d'Ivoire • Flag of Liberia  Liberia

   Kwa: Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire • Flag
   of Ghana  Ghana • Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria • Flag of Togo  Togo
   Benue-Congo

   Bantu

   Flag of Angola  Angola • Flag of Botswana  Botswana • Flag of Burundi
   Burundi • Flag of Cameroon  Cameroon • Flag of Democratic Republic of
   the Congo  Democratic Republic of the Congo • Flag of Republic of the
   Congo  Republic of the Congo • Flag of Equatorial Guinea  Equatorial
   Guinea • Flag of Gabon  Gabon • Flag of Kenya  Kenya • Flag of Nigeria
    Nigeria • Flag of Malawi  Malawi • Flag of Mozambique  Mozambique •
   Flag of Namibia  Namibia • Flag of Rwanda  Rwanda • Flag of Somalia
   Somalia • Flag of South Africa  South Africa • Flag of Swaziland
   Swaziland • Flag of Tanzania  Tanzania • Flag of Uganda  Uganda • Flag
   of Zambia  Zambia • Flag of Zimbabwe  Zimbabwe

   Yoruba and Igbo: Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria

   Bold text
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malawi"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
