   #copyright

Malta

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; European
Countries

                           Ir-Repubblika ta' Malta
   Republic of Malta

   Flag of Malta Coat of arms of Malta
   Flag          Coat of arms
   Motto: none
   Anthem: L-Innu Malti
   Location of Malta
            Capital          Valletta
                             35°48′N 14°28′E
         Largest city        Birkirkara
      Official languages     Maltese, English
   Government                Republic
    - President              Edward Fenech Adami
    - Prime Minister         Lawrence Gonzi
         Independence
    - From United Kingdom    September 21, 1964
    - Republic               December 13, 1974
        Accession to EU      May 1, 2004
                                    Area
    - Total                  316 km² ( 185th)
                             121 sq mi
    - Water (%)              0.001
                                 Population
    - November 2005 estimate 404,039 ( 166th)
    - 2005 census            404,039¹
    - Density                1,282/km² ( 4th)
                             3,339/sq mi
          GDP ( PPP)         2005 estimate
    - Total                  $7.574 billion ( 144th)
    - Per capita             $19,302 ( 37th)
         GDP (nominal)       2005 estimate
    - Total                  US$5.369 billion (Lm 1.936 billion) ( 120th)
    - Per capita             $13,683 (Lm4,927) ( 35th)
          HDI  (2004)        0.875 (high) ( 32nd)
           Currency          Maltese lira (Lm)
                             (Due to adopt the euro in January 2008) ( MTL)
           Time zone         CET ( UTC+1)
    - Summer ( DST)          CEST ( UTC+2)
         Internet TLD        .mt ^2
         Calling code        +356
   ^1 Total population includes foreign residents. Maltese residents
   population estimate at end 2004 was 389,769. All official population
   data provided by the NSO .
   ^2also .eu, shared with other European Union member states.

   Malta, officially the Republic of Malta, (also Malta GC) is a small and
   densely populated island nation consisting of an archipelago of seven
   islands in the middle of the Mediterranean Sea. Malta lies directly
   south of Sicily, east of Tunisia and north of Libya. The country's
   official languages are Maltese and English. Roman Catholicism is the
   most practised religion. The strategically located islands constituting
   the Maltese nation have been ruled by various powers and fought over
   for centuries. Malta has been a member state of the European Union
   since May 1, 2004, and it is currently the smallest EU country in both
   population and area. Malta is the only nation in the world that has
   collectively been awarded the George Cross for conspicuous gallantry,
   and its flag bears a replica of that award.

History

   Malta has been inhabited since around 5200 BC. A significant
   prehistoric Neolithic culture marked by Megalithic structures existed
   on the islands during its pre-history, predating the Pyramids of Giza
   by a millennium. Phoenicians colonized the islands around 1000 BC,
   using them as an outpost from which they expanded sea explorations and
   trade in the Mediterranean.
   Ħaġar Qim Temples, Qrendi, Malta.
   Enlarge
   Ħaġar Qim Temples, Qrendi, Malta.

   The islands later came under the control of Carthage ( 400 BC) and then
   of Rome ( 218 BC). The islands prospered under Roman rule, during which
   time they were considered a Municipium and a Foederata Civitas. Many
   Roman antiquities still exist, testifying to the close link between the
   Maltese inhabitants and the people of Rome. In AD 60, the islands were
   visited by Saint Paul, who is said to have been shipwrecked on the
   shores of the aptly-named " Saint Paul's Bay".

   After a period of Byzantine rule (4th to 9th century) and a probable
   sack by the Vandals, the islands were conquered by the Arabs in AD 870.
   The Arabs, who generally tolerated the population's Christianity,
   introduced the cultivation of citrus fruits and cotton, and irrigation
   systems. Arab influence can be seen most prominently in the modern
   Maltese language, which also contains significant Romance influences,
   and is written in a variety of the Latin alphabet.

   The period of Arab rule lasted until 1091, when the islands were taken
   by the Sicilian Normans. Subsequent rulers included the Angevine, the
   Hohenstaufen, and the Aragonese (1283). The Maltese nobility was
   established during this period; some of it dating back to 1400. About
   32 noble titles remain in use today, of which the oldest is "Barons of
   Djar il Bniet and Buqana".

   In 1530, the islands were given by Spain to the Order of Knights of the
   Hospital of St John of Jerusalem in perpetual lease. (The Kingdom of
   Aragon had owned the islands as part of their Mediterranean empire for
   some time). These knights, a military religious order now known as the
   " Knights of Malta", had been driven out of Rhodes by the Ottoman
   Empire in 1522. They withstood a full-blown siege by the Ottoman Turks
   in 1565. The Turks, at that time, were considered to be a great power.
   After this they decided to increase the fortifications, particularly in
   the inner-harbour area, where the new city of Valletta, named after
   Jean Parisot de la Valette, was built.

   Their reign ended when Malta was captured by Napoleon en route to his
   expedition of Egypt during the French Revolutionary Wars in 1798. As a
   ruse, Napoleon asked for safe harbour to resupply his ships, and then
   turned his guns against his hosts once safely inside Valletta. The
   Grandmaster, knew that he could only allow a few ships at a time to
   enter the harbour, due to the Treaty of Trent. Grand Master Ferdinand
   von Hompesch zu Bolheim capitulated, and Napoleon stayed in Malta for a
   few days, during which he systematically looted the movable assets of
   the Order, and established an administration controlled by his
   nominees. He then sailed for Egypt, leaving a substantial garrison in
   Malta. The occupying French forces were unpopular, however, due
   particularly to their negative attitude towards religion. The financial
   reforms and the religious reforms did not go down well with the
   citizens. Furthermore, the French were arrogant and snobbish in their
   attitude towards the Maltese. The Maltese rebelled against them, and
   the French were forced behind the fortifications. Great Britain, along
   with the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, sent munitions and aid to the
   rebels. Britain also sent her navy, which instigated a blockade of the
   islands. The isolated French forces, under General Claude-Henri
   Belgrand de Vaubois, surrendered in 1800, and the island became a
   British protectorate, being presented by several Maltese leaders to Sir
   Alexander Ball.
   Fortifications of the Grand Harbor, Valletta.
   Enlarge
   Fortifications of the Grand Harbour, Valletta.

   In 1814, as part of the Treaty of Paris, Malta officially became a part
   of the British Empire, and was used as a shipping way-station and fleet
   headquarters. Malta's position half-way between Gibraltar and the Suez
   Canal proved to be its main asset during these years, and it was
   considered to be a most important stop on the way to India. In the
   1930s, due to Malta's cultural and geographical proximity to Italy, the
   British Mediterranean Fleet was moved to Alexandria. Malta played an
   important role during World War II, owing to its vicinity to Axis
   shipping lanes. The bravery of the Maltese people in their long
   struggle against enemy attack moved H.M. King George VI to award the
   George Cross to Malta on a collective basis on 15 April 1942, "to bear
   witness to a heroism and devotion that will long be famous in history".
   A replica of the George Cross now appears in the upper hoist corner of
   the Flag of Malta, outlined in red.

   After the war, and after a short period of political instability due to
   the Malta Labour Party's unsuccessful attempt at 'Integration with
   Britain', Malta was granted independence on September 21, 1964 (
   Independence Day). Under its 1964 constitution, Malta initially
   retained Queen Elizabeth II as Queen of Malta, with a Governor-General
   exercising executive authority on her behalf. On December 13, 1974 (
   Republic Day), however, it became a republic within the Commonwealth,
   with the President as head of state. A defence agreement signed soon
   after independence (and re-negotiated in 1972) expired on March 31,
   1979 ( Freedom Day) when the British military forces were withdrawn.
   Malta joined the European Union on May 1, 2004. It intends to join the
   Eurozone in 2008.

Politics

   Dr. Edward Fenech Adami has been the President of Malta since 2004.
   Enlarge
   Dr. Edward Fenech Adami has been the President of Malta since 2004.

   Malta is a republic, whose parliamentary system and public
   administration is closely modelled on the Westminster system. The
   unicameral House of Representatives, known in Maltese as "Il-Kamra
   tar-Rappreżentanti", is elected by direct universal suffrage through
   single transferable vote every five years, unless the House is
   dissolved earlier by the President on advice of the Prime Minister. The
   House of Representatives is made up of 65 Members of Parliament.
   However, where a party wins an absolute majority of votes, but does not
   have a majority of seats, that party is given additional seats to
   ensure a parliamentary majority. The Constitution of Malta provides
   that the President appoint as Prime Minister the member of the House
   who is best able to command a (governing) majority in the House.

   The President of the Republic is elected every five years by the House
   of Representatives. The role of the president as head of state is
   largely ceremonial.

   The main political parties are the Nationalist Party, which is a
   Christian democratic party, and the Malta Labour Party, which is a
   social democratic party.

   The Nationalist Party is currently at the helm of the government, the
   Prime Minister being Dr. Lawrence Gonzi. The Malta Labour Party, led by
   Dr. Alfred Sant, is in the opposition.

   There are three other party with no parliamentary seats:
     * Alternattiva Demokratika, which is a Green Party.
     * Imperium Europa, which promotes White Nationalism and
       Libertarianism.
     * Alpha Liberal Democratic Party, which is a liberal reformist party.

Geography

   Map of Malta
   Enlarge
   Map of Malta

   Malta is an archipelago in the central Mediterranean Sea, some 93 km
   south of Sicily. Only the three largest islands Malta Island (Malta),
   Gozo (Għawdex), and Comino (Kemmuna) are inhabited. The smaller
   islands, such as Filfla, Cominotto and the Islands of St. Paul are
   uninhabited. Numerous bays along the indented coastline of the islands
   provide good harbours. The landscape is characterised by low hills with
   terraced fields. The highest point is at Ta' Dmejrek on Malta Island at
   253 metres (830  ft) near Dingli. Although there are some small rivers
   at times of high rainfall, there are no permanent rivers or lakes on
   Malta.

   The Malta Channel to the north separates Malta from the island of
   Sicily, the largest Italian isle.
   Satellite image of Malta.
   Enlarge
   Satellite image of Malta.

   The local climate is Mediterranean temperate climate with mild, rainy
   winters and hot, dry summers. There is no real thermal dormant season
   for plants, although plant growth can be checked briefly by abnormal
   cold in winter (patches of ground frost may occur in inland locales),
   and summer heat and aridity may cause vegetation to wilt. Effectively
   there are only two seasons, which makes the islands attractive for
   tourists especially during the drier months. Water supply poses a
   problem on Malta, as the summer is both rainless and also the time of
   greatest water use, and the winter rainfall often falls as heavy
   showers and runs off to the sea rather than soaking into the ground.

   Contrary to popular belief, the south of Malta is not Europe's most
   southern point, that being the Greek island of Gavdos.

Local councils

   Since 1993, Malta has been subdivided into sixty-eight local councils
   or "localities". These form the most basic form of local government.
   There are no intermediate levels between local government and national
   government. A list of them is below:

   Local Councils of Malta Flag of Malta
                                  Malta Island
   Attard | Balzan | Birgu (Vittoriosa) | Birkirkara | Birżebbuġa | Bormla
   (Cospicua) | Dingli | Fgura | Floriana | Gudja | Gżira | Għargħur |
   Għaxaq | Ħamrun | Iklin | Isla (Senglea) | Kalkara | Kirkop | Lija |
   Luqa | Marsa | Marsaskala | Marsaxlokk | Mdina | Mellieħa | Mġarr |
   Mosta | Mqabba | Msida | Mtarfa | Naxxar | Paola | Pembroke | Pietà |
   Qormi | Qrendi | Rabat | Safi | San Ġiljan (St. Julian's) | Santa
   Luċija | San Pawl il-Baħar (St. Paul's Bay) | San Ġwann | Santa Venera
   | Siġġiewi | Sliema | Swieqi | Ta' Xbiex | Tarxien | Valletta | Xgħajra
   | Żabbar | Żebbuġ | Żejtun | Żurrieq
                                  Gozo Island
   Fontana | Għajnsielem | Għarb | Għasri | Kerċem | Munxar | Nadur | Qala
   | Rabat (Victoria) | San Lawrenz | Sannat | Xagħra | Xewkija | Żebbuġ

Economy

   Valletta Harbour
   Enlarge
   Valletta Harbour
   A Maltese worker producing system components for wireless
   communication.
   Enlarge
   A Maltese worker producing system components for wireless
   communication.

   Until 1800, Malta had very few industries except the cotton, tobacco,
   and shipyards industry. The dockyard was later used by the British for
   military purposes. At times of war, Malta's economy prospered due to
   its strategic location. This could be seen during the Crimean War of
   1854. This did not only benefit those who had a military role, but also
   the craftsmen.

   In 1869, the opening of the Suez Canal benefited Malta's economy
   greatly as there was a massive increase in the shipping which entered
   in the port. Entrepot trade saw many ships stopping at Malta's docks
   for refuelling, this brought great benefits to the population.

   By the end of the 19th century, the economy began declining and by the
   1940s, Malta's economy was in serious crisis. This was partially due to
   the longer range of newer merchant ships which required less frequent
   refuelling stops.

   Nowadays, Malta’s major resources are limestone, a favourable
   geographic location, and a productive labour force. Malta produces only
   about 20% of its food needs, has limited freshwater supplies, and has
   no domestic energy sources. The economy is dependent on foreign trade
   (serving as a freight trans-shipment point), manufacturing (especially
   electronics and textiles), and tourism. Tourism infrastructure has
   increased dramatically over the years and a number of quality hotels
   are present on the island.

   Malta has recently privatised some state-controlled firms and
   liberalised markets in order to prepare for membership in the European
   Union, which it joined on May 1, 2004. Malta and Tunisia are currently
   discussing the commercial exploitation of the continental shelf between
   their countries, particularly for petroleum exploration.

   The Maltese government entered ERM II in May 2005, and is intending to
   adopt the euro as the country's currency on 1 January 2008.

   Although Malta is now a member of the European Union, it is not a
   member of the Schengen Treaty yet. It is currently adopting Schengen
   regulations with the goal to be finished by 2007.

Demographics

   Some Maltese at a local fish market.
   Enlarge
   Some Maltese at a local fish market.

Population

   A census of population and housing is held every ten years. The last
   census was held over three weeks in November 2005 and managed to
   enumerate an estimated 95% of the population. A preliminary report was
   issued in April 2006, and results were weighted to an estimate for 100%
   of the population.

   The Maltese people are descended from mixed French, Italian, English,
   Arab, Spanish, and Greek peoples.

   The resident population of Malta, which includes foreigners residing in
   Malta for at least a year, as at 27 November 2005 was estimated at
   404,039 of whom 200,715 (49.7%) were males and 203,324 (50.3%) were
   females. Of these, 17.1 per cent were aged 14 and under, 68.2 per cent
   were within the 15–64 age bracket whilst the remaining 13.7 per cent
   were 65 years and over. Malta's population density of 1,282 per square
   kilometre (3,322/ sq mi) is by far the highest in the EU, and one of
   the highest in the world. The only census year showing a fall in
   population was that of 1967, with a 1.7% total decrease, attributable
   to a substantial number of Maltese residents who emigrated. The
   Maltese-resident population for 2004 was estimated to make up 97.0% of
   the total resident population. Figures for 2005 are still unavailable.

   Through all the censuses since 1842 there was always a slightly higher
   female-to-male ratio. Closest to reaching equality were 1901 and 1911
   censuses. The highest female-to-male ratio was reached in 1957
   (1088:1000), and since the ratio has been constantly dropping. The 2005
   census showed a 1013:1000 female-to-male ratio.

   Population growth has slowed down, from +9.5% between the 1985 and 1995
   censuses, to +6.9% between the 1995 and 2005 censuses (a yearly average
   of +0.7%). The birth rate stood at 3860 (a decrease of 21.8% from the
   1995 census) and the death rate stood at 3025. Thus, there was a
   natural population increase of 835 (compared to +888 for 2004, of which
   over a hundred were foreign residents).

   The population's age composition is similar to the age structure
   prevalent in the EU. Since 1967 there was observed a trend indicating
   an aging population, and is expected to continue in the foreseeable
   future. Malta's old-age-dependency-ratio rose from 17.2% in 1995 to
   19.8% in 2005, reasonably lower than the EU's 24.9% average. In fact,
   31.5% of the Maltese population is aged under 25 (compared to the EU's
   29.1%); but the 50-64 age group consistutes 20.3% of the population,
   significantly higher than the EU's 17.9%. In conclusion, Malta's
   old-age-dependency-ratio is expected to continue rising steadily in the
   coming years.

   Maltese legislation recognizes both civil and Canonic marriages.
   Annulments by the ecclesiastic and civil courts are unrelated and are
   not necessarily both granted. There is no divorce legislation and
   abortion within Maltese territory is illegal. A person has to be 16 to
   marry. The number of brides aged under 25 decreased from 1471 in 1997
   to 766 in 2005; while the number of grooms under 25 decreased from 823
   to 311. There is a constant trend that females are more likely than
   males to marry very young. In 2005, brides aged 16 to 19 were 51 while
   grooms were 8.

Languages and religion

   The national language of Malta is Maltese. The Maltese alphabet is
   based on the Latin alphabet, but uses the diacritically altered letters
   ż, also found in Polish, as well as the letters ċ, ġ and ħ, which are
   unique to Maltese. The official languages are English and Maltese.
   Italian, French and German are also widely spoken and taught in
   secondary schools, though the latter two less so.

   Roman Catholicism is the religion of approximately 98% of the
   population (CIA World Factbook, 2006). See Roman Catholicism in Malta.

Migration

   Maltese laws for immigration generally follow EU legislation. Therefore
   EU nationals require neither a visa nor a passport (an ID card or an
   expired passport are enough) to enter the country. Citizens of a number
   of other countries are also not required to apply for a visa and
   require only a valid passport when residing in Malta for up to three
   months. Visas for other nationalities are valid for one month.
   Immigrants are required to apply for a work permit. This exception to
   EU law was agreed upon before accession to safeguard the Maltese labour
   market, the growth of which is reaching saturation . In practice
   though, all work permits to EU nationals are granted, and currently
   this exercise is only used to monitor the labour market for any needed
   intervention.

   The estimated net inflow (using data for 2002 to 2004) was of 1,913
   persons yearly. Over the last 10 years, Malta accepted back a yearly
   average of 425 returning emigrants.

   During 2005, a total of 1,800 immigrants reached Malta illegally. Given
   Malta's high population density, the impact of this figure on Malta is
   equivalent to that of an arrival of 369,000 illegal immigrants in
   Germany and other large EU member states. In the first half of 2006,
   967 illegal immigrants arrived in Malta – almost double the 473 who
   arrived in the same period in 2005. The reason for such high numbers is
   due to the fact that Malta is the southernmost tip of the European
   Union and is therefore in the front line when dealing with the heavy
   northward migration of immigrants from Africa. Another factor
   contributing to the problem is Malta's approximately 250,000 square
   kilometres of open sea search and rescue region.

   Though Malta has historically been generous, just and humane in
   welcoming illegal immigrants, increase in violence has been spotted
   during the past years. In January 2005, asylum seekers detained the
   camp of Safi have been beaten by the soldiers of the Armed Forces of
   Malta. Another situation is the developping of anti-immigrant movements
   like Imperium Europa or ANR.

   Around 45 % of illegal immigrants landed in Malta have been granted
   refugee (5%) or protected humanitarian status (40%), which is the
   highest rate of acceptance in the EU. A White Paper suggesting the
   grant of Maltese citizenship to refugees resident in Malta for over ten
   years was issued in 2005. Historically Malta gave refuge (and assisted
   in their resettlement) to just about eight hundred East African Asians
   who had been expelled from Uganda by Idi Amin and to just under a
   thousand Iraqis fleeing from Saddam Hussein's regime.

   Presently the problem of illegal immigration has increased, with severe
   strains on Malta's health, employment and social services, its internal
   security and public order, its social fabric and on the labour market.
   Detention costs for the first half of 2006 alone cost Lm320,423
   (€746,385). In 2005, Malta sought EU aid in relation to reception of
   illegal immigrants, repatriation of those denied refugee status,
   resettlement of refugees into EU countries, and maritime security. In
   December 2005, the European Council adopted The Global Approach to
   Migration: Priority Actions focusing on Africa and the Mediterranean;
   but the deployment of said actions has been limited to the western
   Mediterranean, thus putting further pressure on the central
   Mediterranean route for illegal immigration which Malta forms part of.
   Political tension started developing as the EU persistently ignored
   Malta's precarious situation: member states party to the
   legally-binding Cotonou Agreement continued not to fulfill their
   obligations and East African countries, from which most central
   Mediterranean illegal immigration originates, were excluded from the
   Euro-African Conference on Migration and Development held 10-11 July
   2006 in Tripoli).

Education

   Education is compulsory between the ages of 5 and 16 years. While the
   state provides education free of charge, the Church and the private
   sector run a number of schools in Malta and Gozo. Most of the teachers'
   salary in Church schools is paid by the state. Education in Malta is
   based on the British Model.

   The first years of education in Malta are done in Reception. Attendance
   is up to 5 years and not compulsory. Compulsory education starts at the
   age of 6 with primary education. Primary education lasts for 6 years.
   Following public examinations, students enter secondary education.
   Following a five-year course preparing for the "Secondary Education
   Certificate" (SEC), equivalent to the British General Certificate of
   Secondary Education (GCSE), students sit for final examinations
   (results are used in the school-leaving certificate), and in general
   also sit for the SEC examinations. SEC examinations require students to
   be aged 16 and over, or to have a school-leaving certificate. Students
   who have repeated years are therefore able to apportion their SEC
   examinations over the last two years at school.
   Students during the Graduation Ceremony at the University of Malta
   Enlarge
   Students during the Graduation Ceremony at the University of Malta

   Once compulsory secondary education ends, students may enter either in
   a vocational college such as MCAST or a Sixth Form. Sixth forms provide
   a two-year course leading to the "Matriculation Certificate", which is
   the equivalent of the UK Advanced Level Examinations and Advanced
   Subsidiary Examinations. For students unsuccessful in their SEC
   examinations, there is the option of attending a Higher Secondary
   school, a sort of safety net to give students the possibility to catch
   up, where any core subjects (mathematics, English language, Maltese,
   and a natural science) previously failed are again taught at ordinary
   level in preparation for SEC examinations, while also teaching
   intermediate and advanced level subjects. Students may also choose to
   attend specialised private institutions leading to diplomas and degrees
   of foreign examination bodies in careers such as IT ( London
   University), Networking ( CISCO), Accountancy ( ACCA) and Banking.

   Tertiary education at diploma, undergraduate and postgraduate level is
   mainly provided by the University of Malta (UoM). Qualifications from
   the UoM are fully recognised internationally after its conversion to
   using the European ECTS credits system. Admission requires a minimum
   overall C grade in the Matriculation Certificate and passes at ordinary
   level of the core subjects. Special course requirements are mostly
   based on single-subject results in the Matriculation Certificate. Some
   of the qualifications obtained from private institutions are also
   recognised. Full-time attendance by Maltese citizens is free-of-charge,
   while part-time (evening) attendance is not.

   The Employment and Training Corporation (ETC) satisfies one of its dual
   roles by offering training for adults of any age and experience. The
   University of Malta offers similar courses and also gives the option of
   entering normal full-/part-time courses as a mature student - persons
   aged 23 and over are exempted from satisfying the University entry
   requirements, though they still have to satisfy any special course
   requirements.

   The adult literacy rate is 92.8%.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malta"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
