   #copyright

Mango

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Food and agriculture;
Plants

                   iMango
   Immature Black Mango fruit
   Immature Black Mango fruit
         Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Plantae
   Phylum:  Magnoliophyta
   Class:   Magnoliopsida
   Order:   Sapindales
   Family:  Anacardiaceae
   Genus:   Mangifera
            L.

                                   Species

   About 35 species, including:
   Mangifera altissima
   Mangifera applanata
   Mangifera caesia
   Mangifera camptosperma
   Mangifera casturi
   Mangifera decandra
   Mangifera foetida
   Mangifera gedebe
   Mangifera griffithii
   Mangifera indica
   Mangifera kemanga
   Mangifera laurina
   Mangifera longipes
   Mangifera macrocarpa
   Mangifera mekongensis
   Mangifera odorata
   Mangifera pajang
   Mangifera pentandra
   Mangifera persiciformis
   Mangifera quadrifida
   Mangifera siamensis
   Mangifera similis
   Mangifera swintonioides
   Mangifera sylvatica
   Mangifera torquenda
   Mangifera zeylanica
   Mango tree with flowers
   Enlarge
   Mango tree with flowers

   The mango (plural mangos or mangoes) is a tropical fruit of the Mango
   tree. Mangoes belong to the genus Mangifera which consists of about 35
   species of tropical fruiting trees in the flowering plant family
   Anacardiaceae. No one knows the exact origins of the mango but most
   believe that it is native to the Southern and Southeast Asian continent
   including Eastern India, Burma, and Bangladesh after fossil records
   were found there dating back 25 to 30 million years. Reference to
   mangos as the "food of the gods" can be found in the Hindu Vedas.

Etymology

   The name of the fruit comes from the Tamil word maanga^ , or the
   Malayalam word manga^ , and popularised by the Portuguese after their
   Indian exploration, hence the word 'manga' in Portuguese.

Description

   Mango flowers
   Enlarge
   Mango flowers

   Mangos are large trees, reaching 35-40 m in height, with a crown radius
   of 10 m. The leaves are evergreen, alternate, simple, 15-35 cm long and
   6-16 cm broad; when young they are orange-pink, rapidly changing to a
   dark glossy red, then dark green as they mature. The flowers are
   produced in terminal panicles 10-40 cm long; each flower is small and
   white with five petals 5-10 mm long, with a mild sweet odour suggestive
   of lily of the valley. After the flowers finish, the fruit takes from
   three to six months to ripen.

   The mango fruit is a drupe; when mature, it hangs from the tree on long
   stems. They are variable in size, from 10-25 cm long and 7-12 cm
   diameter, and may weigh up to 2.5 kg. The ripe fruit is variably
   coloured yellow, orange and red, reddest on the side facing the sun and
   yellow where shaded; green usually indicates that the fruit is not yet
   ripe, but this depends on the cultivar. When ripe, the unpeeled fruit
   gives off a distinctive resinous slightly sweet smell. In the centre of
   the fruit is a single flat, oblong seed (as big as a large stone) that
   can be fibrous or hairless on the surface, depending on cultivar.
   Inside the shell, which is 1-2 mm thick, is a paper-thin lining
   covering a single seed, 4-7 cm long, 3-4 cm wide, 1 cm thick.

Cultivation and uses

   The mango is now widely cultivated as a fruit tree in frost-free
   tropical and subtropical climates throughout the Indian subcontinent,
   North, South and Central America, the Caribbean, south and central
   Africa, Australia and Southeast Asia. It is easily cultivated and there
   are now more than 1,000 cultivars, ranging from the turpentine mango
   (from the strong taste of turpentine, which according to the Oxford
   Companion to Food some varieties actually contain) to the huevos de
   toro ("bull's balls", from the shape and size). The mango is reputed to
   be the most commonly eaten fresh fruit worldwide. Mangos also readily
   naturalize in tropical climates. Some lowland forests in the Hawaiian
   Islands are dominated by introduced mangos and it is a common backyard
   fruit tree in South Florida where it has also escaped from cultivation.

   The mango is a popular fruit with people around the world. However,
   many mango farmers receive a low price for their produce. This has led
   to mangoes being available as a ' fair trade' item in some countries.

Usage as food

   The fruit flesh of a ripe mango contains about 15% sugar, up to 1%
   protein, and significant amounts of vitamins A, B and C. The taste of
   the fruit is very sweet, with some cultivars having a slight acidic
   tang. The texture of the flesh varies markedly between different
   cultivars; some have quite a soft and pulpy texture similar to an
   over-ripe plum, while others have a firmer flesh much like that of a
   cantaloupe or avocado, and in some cultivars the flesh can contain
   fibrous material. Mangoes are very juicy; the sweet taste and high
   water content make them refreshing to eat, though somewhat messy.

   Mangoes are widely used in chutney, which in the West is often very
   sweet, but in the Indian subcontinent is usually sharpened with hot
   chilis or limes. In India, ripe mango is often cut into thin layers,
   desiccated , folded, and then cut and sold as bars that are very chewy.
   These bars, known as amavat in Hindi, are similar to dried guava fruit
   bars available in Colombia. Many people like to eat unripe mangoes with
   salt (which are extremely sour; much more than lemon), and in regions
   where food is hotter, with salt and chili.

   In the Philippines, unripe mango is eaten with bagoong, fermented
   minute shrimp paste which comes in sweet, salty and spicy flavours.
   Dried strips of sweet, ripe mangoes have also gained popularity both
   inside and outside the country, with those produced in Cebu making it
   to export markets around the world.

   Mango is also used to make juices, both in ripe and unripe form. Pieces
   of fruit can be mashed and used in ice cream; they can be substituted
   for peaches in a peach (now mango) pie; or put in a blender with milk,
   a little sugar, and crushed ice for a refreshing beverage. A more
   traditional Indian drink is mango lassi, which is similar, but uses a
   mixture of yoghurt and milk as the base, and is sometimes flavoured
   with salt or cardamom. In Thailand and other South East Asian
   countries, sweet glutinous rice is flavoured with coconut then served
   with sliced mango on top as a dessert.

   Dried unripe mango used as a spice in India is known as amchur
   (sometimes spelled amchoor). Am is a Hindi word for Mango and amchoor
   is nothing but powder or extract of Mango.

   Note: The Sweet Bell Pepper ( capsicum) was once known as mango in
   parts of the midwestern United States Merriam-Webster Dictionary
   Definition. With the advent of fresh fruit importers exposing
   individuals to the tropical fruit, the colloquial use of this
   alternative name for the Sweet Bell Pepper has become archaic, although
   occasionally midwestern menus will still offer stuffed mangoes as an
   entree.

Medicinal properties

   The mango is in the same family as poison ivy and contains urushiol,
   though much less than poison ivy. Some people get dermatitis from
   touching mango peel or sap. Persons showing an allergic reaction after
   handling a mango can usually enjoy the fruit if someone else first
   removes the skin. The leaves are toxic to cattle.

Cultural context

   Mango leaves are used to decorate the entrance of a household amongst
   Hindus. Mango leaves are also used in Indian prayers ( poojas) to
   propitiate the Gods. The mango is also a common motif in Indian
   textiles, known as the paisley design.

Production and consumption

   A mango cut using the "hedgehog" method
   Enlarge
   A mango cut using the "hedgehog" method
   Top 12 Mango Producers - 2005
   (hectares)
   India India                      1,600,000
   People's Republic of China China   433,600
   Thailand Thailand                  285,000
   Indonesia Indonesia                273,440
   Mexico Mexico                      173,837
   Philippines Philippines            160,000
   Pakistan Pakistan                  151,500
   Nigeria Nigeria                    125,000
   Guinea Guinea                       82,000
   Brazil Brazil                       68,000
   Vietnam Vietnam                     53,000
   Bangladesh Bangladesh               51,000
   World Total                      3,870,200
   Source:
   UN Food & Agriculture Organisation (FAO)

   As of 2005 India was the largest producer, with an area of 16,000 km²
   with an annual production of 10.8 million tonnes, which accounted for
   57.18% of the total world production. The state of Maharashtra in
   western India has the most conducive climate conditions to produce the
   most renowned variety of this fruit, the Hapoos mango. The earlier
   Portuguese explorers took to calling it Aphoos and later, Alphonso.
   Farmers in the entire coastal Konkan belt cultivate the Hapoos mango,
   which fetches them substantial profits. The Ratnagiri and Devgad Hapoos
   from Maharashtra jointly take place of pride as the finest amongst all
   types of mangoes produced. Otherwise, the state of Uttar Pradesh
   dominates the mango production in the North, and it is considered the
   most important fruit in central and eastern part of the state, from
   Lucknow to Varanasi, which also produce some fine varieties. In
   southern India, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka states are major producers
   of mangoes and specialize in making a variety of mango pickles. These
   pickles are very spicy. It is almost an essential food in Andhra
   families, where mango pickle production is a household activity in
   summer.

   Generally, once ripe, mangoes are quite juicy and can be very messy to
   eat. However, those exported to temperate regions are, like most
   tropical fruit, picked under-ripe. Although they are ethylene producers
   and ripen in transit, they do not have the same juiciness or flavour as
   the fresh fruit. A ripe mango will have an orange-yellow or reddish
   skin. To allow a mango to continue to ripen after purchase, it should
   be stored in a cool, dark place, but not in a refrigerator as this will
   slow the ripening process.
   A woman selling mangoes in Venezuela
   Enlarge
   A woman selling mangoes in Venezuela
   Native green mangoes from the Philippines
   Enlarge
   Native green mangoes from the Philippines
   Mangoes for sale
   Enlarge
   Mangoes for sale

   Ripe mangoes are extremely popular throughout Latin America. In Mexico,
   sliced mango is eaten with chili powder and/or salt. Street vendors
   sometimes sell whole mangoes on a stick, dipped in the chili-salt
   mixture. In Indonesia, green mango is sold by street vendors with sugar
   and salt and/or chili. Green mango may be used in the sour salad called
   rujak in Indonesia, and rojak in Malaysia and Singapore. In Guatemala,
   Ecuador, Nicaragua and Honduras, small, green mangoes are popular; they
   have a sharp, brisk flavour like a Granny Smith apple. Vendors sell
   slices of peeled green mango on the streets of these countries, often
   served with salt. In Hawai'i it is common to pickle green mango slices.

Cultivars

   Many hundred named mango cultivars exist. In mango orchards, several
   cultivars are often intermixed to improve cross-pollination. In
   Maharashtra, the most common cultivar is ' Alphonso' (locally called
   'Aphoos'). 'Alphonso' is known as the King of Mangoes due to the
   popular opinion among many in India that it is the best cultivar
   available. The best 'Alphonso' mangos are reputed to come from the town
   of Ratnagiri and Devgad in Maharashtra. In Uttar Pradesh, ' Dasheri'
   from Lucknow is famous for its aroma, and is so tasty that even the
   skin can be eaten. 'Langada' from Varanasi in eastern UP is another
   variety which is extremely sought after for its fine flavour and aroma.
   ' Banganapalli' (also called 'Banesha' or 'Began Phali') of Andhra
   Pradesh is one of the most sought after cultivar. Maldah is one of the
   most sought after cultivar in Bihar. Notably, cultivars which excel in
   one climate fail to achieve their potential in other climates. Thus the
   cultivar 'Julie', a Jamaican favourite, and 'Alphonso' have never found
   great success in South Florida, Israel or Australia.

   Currently, the world market is dominated by the cultivar 'Tommy
   Atkins'- a seedling of 'Haden' which first fruited in 1940 in Southern
   Florida, USA. Despite being initially rejected commercially by Florida
   researchers, 'Tommy Atkins' quickly became an export favourite
   worldwide. For example, 80% of mangos in UK supermarkets are ' Tommy
   Atkins'. The success of 'Tommy Atkins' comes despite its fiberous flesh
   and fair taste. Despite this, growers world-wide have embraced the
   cultivar for its exceptional production and disease resistant, the
   shelf-life of its fruit, their transportability as well as their size
   and beautiful colour. 'Tommy Atkins' is predominant in the USA as well,
   although other cultivars, such 'Kent', 'Keitt', the Haitian grown
   'Madame Francis' and the Mexican grown 'Champagne' are widely
   available.

   In urban areas of southern Florida, small gardens, or lack thereof,
   have fueled the desire for dwarf Mango trees. The Fairchild Tropical
   Botanic Garden has led the charge for the "condo mango" by identifying
   cultivars which can be productive while maintained at a height below
   2-2.5 m .

   A list of additional leading cultivars can be found at the cultivar
   list link in the external links below.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mango"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
