   #copyright

Manila

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Asia

   CAPTION: City of Manila

   Official seal of City of Manila
   Location
   Map of Metro Manila showing the location of Manila
   Map of Metro Manila showing the location of Manila
   Government
   Region National Capital Region
   Province —
   District 1st to 6th districts of Manila
   Barangays 897
   Income class: 1st class city; highly urbanized
   Mayor Lito L. Atienza, Jr. ( LP)
   Founded June 24, 1571
   Cityhood June 10, 1574
   Official Website www.manila.gov.ph
   Physical characteristics
   Area 38.55 km²
   Population

        Total ( 2000)       Density
   1,581,082
   41,014/ km²
   Coordinates 14°35' N 121° E

   The City of Manila ( Filipino: Lungsod ng Maynila), or simply Manila,
   is the capital of the Philippines. The city is located on the eastern
   shore of Manila Bay on Luzon, the country's largest island.

   Manila is the hub of a thriving metropolitan area home to over 10
   million people. The Metro Manila area also known as the National
   Capital Region (NCR), of which the City of Manila is a part, is a much
   bigger metropolis consisting of 17 cities and municipalities. This
   article discusses the city itself; see Metro Manila for the article on
   the metropolis.

   Manila is the second most populous city proper in the Philippines, with
   more than 1.5 million inhabitants. Only nearby Quezon City, the
   country's former capital, is more populous. It is currently included in
   the roster of global cities of the world.

   Manila got its name from may nilad, Tagalog for "there is nilad," in
   reference to the flowering mangrove plant that grew on the marshy
   shores of the bay. In the 16th century, Manila (then Maynilad) grew
   from a Muslim settlement on the banks of the Pasig River into the seat
   of the colonial government of Spain when it controlled the Philippine
   Islands for over three centuries from 1565 to 1898. Beginning in 1898,
   the United States occupied and controlled the city and the Philippine
   archipelago until 1946. During World War II, much of the city was
   destroyed. The Metropolitan Manila region was enacted as an independent
   entity in 1975. Today, the city and the metropolis thrive as an
   important cultural and economic centre. However, overpopulation,
   traffic congestion, pollution, and crime challenge the city.

   Manila has been classified as a "Gamma" global city by the
   Globalization and World Cities Study Group and Network.

The city

   Malate and Ermita skyline
   Enlarge
   Malate and Ermita skyline

   Manila lies at the mouth of the Pasig River on the eastern shores of
   Manila Bay, which is on the western side of Luzon. It lies about 950
   kilometers southeast of Hong Kong and 2,400 kilometers northeast of
   Singapore. The river bisects the city in the middle. Almost all of the
   city sits on top of centuries of prehistoric alluvial deposits built by
   the waters of the Pasig River and on some land reclaimed from Manila
   Bay. The layout of the city was haphazardly planned during Spanish Era
   as a set of communities surrounding the original Spanish Era walled
   city of Manila, called Intramuros. Intramuros is one of the oldest
   walled cities in the far east. During the American Period, some
   semblance of city planning using the architectural designs by Daniel
   Burnham, was done on the portions of the city south of the Pasig River.

   Manila is bordered by several municipalities and cities in Metro
   Manila: Navotas and Caloocan City to the north, Quezon City to the
   northeast, San Juan and Mandaluyong City to the east, Makati City to
   the southeast, and Pasay City to the south.

City seal

   The Seal of Manila depicts the words Lungsod ng Maynila and Pilipinas,
   Filipino for City of Manila and Philippines, in a circle around a
   shield. The circle also contains six yellow stars representing the
   city's six congressional districts. The shield, in the shape of
   pre-colonial people's shield, depicts the city's nickname Pearl of the
   Orient on top; a sea lion in the middle, in reference to the city's
   Spanish influences; and the waves of the Pasig River and Manila Bay in
   the bottom portion. The colors of the seal mirror that of the Flag of
   the Philippines.

Districts

   The city is divided into sixteen (16) districts. Only one district was
   not an original town - Port Area. Seven (7) districts are located north
   of the Pasig River and eight (8) are in the south. San Andres Bukid was
   previously part of Santa Ana, Paco, and what used to Singalong, while
   Santa Mesa was once a part of Sampaloc.

   North of Pasig River
     * Binondo
     * Quiapo
     * Sampaloc
     * San Miguel
     * Santa Cruz
     * Santa Mesa
     * Tondo

                       South of Pasig River
                         * Ermita
                         * Intramuros
                         * Malate
                         * Paco
                         * Pandacan
                         * Port Area
                         * San Andres Bukid
                         * Sta. Ana

   All of these districts, with the exception of Port Area, have their own
   churches, and several of these districts have achieved recognition in
   their own right. Intramuros being the old and original enclave of
   Manila is a historical site. The district of Binondo is the city's
   Chinatown. Tondo is the densest in terms of population, the largest in
   land area and also with the highest poverty level. The districts of
   Ermita and Malate are well-known and popular with tourists, having many
   bars, restaurants, five-star hotels, and shopping malls while the
   districts of San Miguel and Pandacan hosts the official residence of
   the President of the country, Malacañang Palace.

Parks and open areas

   Directly south of Intramuros lies Rizal Park, the country's most
   significant park. Also known as Luneta (Spanish term for "crescent or
   moon") and previously as Bagumbayan, the 60 hectare Rizal Park sits on
   the site where José Rizal, the country's national hero, was executed by
   the Spaniards on charges of subversion. A monument stands in his honour
   where Rizal's remains were buried. The big flagpole west of the Rizal
   Monument is Kilometer Zero for road distances on the island of Luzon
   and the rest of the country.

   Other attractions in Rizal Park include the Chinese and Japanese
   Gardens, the Department of Tourism building, the National Museum of the
   Filipino People, The National Library of the Philippines, the
   Planetarium, the Orchidarium and Butterfly Pavilion, an open-air
   auditorium for cultural performances, a relief map of the Philippines,
   a fountain area, a children's lagoon, a chess plaza, a light and sound
   presentation, and the Quirino Grandstand.

   Another famous open space in Manila is the Baywalk. This promenade lies
   in front of the Manila Bay where one can experience one of the most
   breathtaking sunsets of the world. Coconut trees, giant kaleidoscopic
   lamp posts, al fresco cafès and restaurants, and live acoustic bands
   dot this two-kilometer stretch of ample space beside Roxas Boulevard.

   Aside from Rizal Park, Manila has very few other open public spaces.
   Rajah Sulayman Park, Manila Boardwalk, Liwasang Bonifacio, Plaza
   Miranda, Paco Park, Remedios Circle, Manila Zoological and Botanical
   Garden, Plaza Balagtas and the Malacañang Garden are some of the other
   parks in the city. In 2005, Mayor Joselito Atienza opened the Pandacan
   Linear Park, a strip of land that served as a buffer zone between the
   oil depot and the residential-commercial properties in Pandacan and
   could be found along the banks of the Pasig River. In the northern most
   part of the city lies the three cemeteries of Loyola, Chinese, and
   Manila North Green Park, the largest public cemetery in Metropolitan
   Manila.

People

Demographics

Ethnic groups

   The original settlers of Manila were the Tagalogs. Throughout the
   centuries, there has been a constant migration of Visayans, Bicolanos,
   Ilocanos, Maranaos, Chinese and Spaniards. There are also Americans,
   Arabs, Indonesians, Indians, and Koreans in Manila. Intermarriage
   between ethnic groups is not uncommon in the Philippines.

   There are 3 distinct local ethnic groups in Manila. The natives (darker
   skinned), the Chinese, and the Spanish. The Chinese and Spanish groups,
   companies and families control most political and financial
   institutions.

Population density

   With a population of 1,581,082 and a land area of 38.55 km², it has the
   highest population density of any major city in the world with 41,014
   people/km² (with district 6 being the most dense with 68,266, followed
   by the first two districts (Tondo) with 64,936 and 64,710,
   respectively, and district 5 being the least dense with 19,235). A
   million more transients are added during daytime as students and
   workers come to the city.
   Aerial view of Manila with the South Luzon Expressway in the
   foreground.
   Enlarge
   Aerial view of Manila with the South Luzon Expressway in the
   foreground.

   Manila's population density dwarfs that of Paris (20,164 inhabitants
   per km²), Shanghai (16,364 people/km², with its most dense district of
   Nanshi's 56,785 density), Buenos Aires (2,179 people/km², with its most
   dense inner suburb Lanus' 10,444 density), Tokyo (10,087 people/km²),
   Mexico City (11,700 people/km²), and Istanbul (1,878 people/km², with
   its most dense district Fatih's 48,173 density).

Languages

   The main language is Tagalog, the lingua franca of the Metro Manila
   region. In addition, many Manileños are proficient in English, which
   attracts English students, and this fuels a call centre industry.

Religion

Roman Catholicism

   Manila is the seat of the Archdiocese of Manila and the Primate of the
   Philippines. Being the seat of the Spanish colonial government in past
   centuries, it has been used as the base of numerous Roman Catholic
   missions to the Philippines. Among the religious orders that have gone
   to the Philippines include the Dominicans, the Jesuits, the
   Franciscans, and the Augustinians (which includes the Augustinian
   Recollects).

   Intramuros is currently the seat of the Archdiocese of Manila, the
   oldest archdiocese in the country. The archdiocese's offices is located
   in the Manila Cathedral (Basilica Minore de la Nuestra Señora de la
   Immaculada Concepcion) in Intramuros.

   Other notable churches and cathedrals in the city include Catédral de
   San Agustin in Intramuros, a UN World Heritage Site is a favorite
   wedding place of notable people and one of two fully air-conditioned
   churches in the city; Quiapo Church, also known as the Basilica Minore
   del Nazareno Negro, site of the annual January Black Nazarene
   procession; Binondo Church, also known as Basilica Minore de St.
   Lorenzo Ruiz; Malate Church ( Nuestra Señora de Remedios); and San
   Sebastian Church or the Basilica Minore de San Sebastian, the only
   all-steel church in Gothic style in Asia. Many of the other districts
   of Manila have their own notable churches.

Other faiths

   There are many Buddhist and Taoist temples built by the Chinese
   community in Manila. The Quiapo district is home to a sizable Muslim
   population in Manila, and The Golden Mosque is located there. In Ermita
   is a large Hindu temple for the Indian population, while on U.N.
   Avenue, there is a Sikh Temple. In Malate, along Quirino Avenue, there
   once was a synagogue for the small Jewish community in the Philippines.
   (See Jews in the Philippines.)

Education and culture

   Colegio de San Juan de Letran
   Enlarge
   Colegio de San Juan de Letran
   De La Salle University-Manila
   Enlarge
   De La Salle University-Manila
   De La Salle-College of Saint Benilde
   Enlarge
   De La Salle-College of Saint Benilde
   Mapua Institute of Technology
   Enlarge
   Mapua Institute of Technology
   Pamantasan ng Lungsod ng Maynila
   Enlarge
   Pamantasan ng Lungsod ng Maynila
   University of Santo Tomas
   Enlarge
   University of Santo Tomas

   Manila is home to majority of the colleges and universities in Metro
   Manila. The University Belt or U-Belt, informally located in the
   districts of Malate, Ermita, Intramuros, Paco, San Miquel, Quiapo, and
   Sampaloc is the colloquial term for the high number of institutions of
   higher education that are located in the city. Among them are private
   school De La Salle University-Manila, all-girl school St. Scholastica's
   College and the state-owned University of the Philippines, Manila at
   Ermita, the private schools Far Eastern University, University of Santo
   Tomas and University of the East in Sampaloc, previously all-girl
   school Centro Escolar University and all-boy school San Beda College
   along Mendiola, private school Colegio de San Juan de Letran, technical
   school Mapua Institute of Technology, and the city-owned Pamantasan ng
   Lungsod ng Maynila at Intramuros, and the state-owned Polytechnic
   University of the Philippines in Santa Mesa.

   The National Museum of the Philippines, where the Spoliarium of Juan
   Luna is housed, the Metropolitan Museum, the Museong Pambata
   (Children's Museum), as well as the National Library is also in Manila,
   located within Rizal Park.

Educational institutions

     * Adamson University
     * Centro Escolar University
     * Chinese General Hospital College of Nursing and Liberal Arts
     * Colegio de San Juan de Letran
     * De La Salle-College of Saint Benilde
     * De La Salle University-Manila
     * Emilio Aguinaldo College
     * Esteban Abada High School
     * Far Eastern University
     * FEATI University
     * Lyceum of the Philippines University
     * Manila Science High School
     * Manuel L. Quezon University
     * Mapua Institute of Technology
     * National College of Business and Arts
     * National University
     * Pamantasan ng Lungsod ng Maynila
     * Philippine Christian University
     * Philippine Normal University
     * Philippine School of Business Administration
     * Polytechnic University of the Philippines
     * San Beda College
     * San Sebastian College - Recoletos
     * St. Joseph's School - Pandacan
     * St. Scholastica's College
     * Technological University of the Philippines
     * Universidad de Manila
     * University of Manila
     * University of Santo Tomas
     * University of the East
     * University of the Philippines, Manila

Economy

Commerce

   Every district in the city with the exception of Port Area has its own
   public market, locally called the pamilihang bayan. Public markets are
   often divided into two, the dry goods section and the wet goods
   section. Commerce in these public markets is lively, especially in the
   early morning. Under the urban renewal program of the incumbent
   administration, some of the public markets had been refurbished and
   given a fresher look, like the Sta. Ana public market. It is one of the
   more advanced markets in the city featuring a modern 2-story building
   with an escalator.

   The tropical climate in Manila plus the facilities of its world-class
   malls continue to attract Filipinos to the shopping malls. Modern
   shopping malls dot the city especially in the areas of Malate and
   Ermita. SM City Manila, part of the country's largest chain of malls,
   stands behind the Manila City Hall, while the original SM Department
   store still operates in Carriedo in Sta. Cruz while another called SM
   Centrepoint is located north east of the city in Sta. Mesa close to the
   Quezon City-San Juan boundary. One of the popular malls that lies at
   the heart of Manila is Robinson's Place Ermita. In the southern part of
   the city in Malate district is Harrison Plaza, one of the city's oldest
   shopping malls.

   For the adventurous shoppers, you may venture beyond the hotel/shopping
   complex package and combine other interesting destinations for cheap
   buys such as in Divisoria and Quiapo districts. Bargaining is the major
   part of your shopping experience when you pass by on these areas, as it
   sells goods at rock-bottom prices. In Divisoria, there is already a
   shopping mall that caters to the adventurous shoppers. Tutuban Center
   in Divisoria gives a little comfort to the shoppers as it offers
   air-conditioned mall, but the price of the goods here is still very
   similar to the goods bought outside. In Quiapo, one unique spot is the
   marketplace under the bridge. It sells indigenous Filipino crafts and
   delicacies. Raon Centre is famous for its cheap electronic products.
   Though through the changing times, department stores began sprouting
   the Quiapo area, but still the flea market of Quiapo is still vibrant
   and very much popular among the average Filipinos. Photo and video
   enthusiasts looking for cheap equipment can proceed to R. Hidalgo
   street in the Quiapo district.

Manufacturing

   Manila connects manufacturing facilities with design and sales
   departments, giving key stakeholders insight into how fluctuations in
   manufacturing capacity and demand impact them. It can also be used to
   connect decision-makers at different facilities. For instance, plant
   managers at a major auto manufacturer use a Manila site to post issues,
   troubleshoot problems, and hold discussions.

Transportation

Air

   Ninoy Aquino International Airport (NAIA) outside the city proper
   serves Manila and the metro area, over 30 airlines provide daily
   service to over 26 cities and 19 countries worldwide. Approximately 14
   million travellers use NAIA a year straining what was originally a
   domestic airport built in the 1930s. A second airport, the Terminal 2
   or the Centennial Terminal was opened in October 1999. The
   International flag-carrier Philippine Airlines now uses this terminal
   solely for both its domestic and international and while all other
   international flights use NAIA Air Philippines is in the transition to
   the newer Terminal alongside PAL. A third airport T3 had been near
   completed until a controversy had been discovered by the current Arroyo
   administration that prompted a series of investigations and
   international court battle with the builders and the Philippine govt.
   Its considered as another "white elephant" project that is costing
   millions of money of the people.

   The main carrier is the Philippine Airlines which has the most
   extensive network in the Philippines. Followed by the newly repackaged
   Cebu Pacific Airlines that uses all A320 aircraft and promotes online
   booking being the truly first Budget airline in the country. Air
   Philippines, a subsidiary of Philippine Airlines uses the old planes of
   the latter for certain routes and competes with Cebu Pacific on the
   budget market. Some 48-seater planes used by Asian Spirit, Sea Air are
   some of the little airlines in the city of Manila.

   Another alternative point of embarkation and disembarkation is the
   DMIA, Diosdado Macapagal International airport in Clark. As of October
   2006, flights from Singapore, Hong Kong, Macau, Seoul, Kota Kinabalu,
   Kuala Lumpur and chartered flights from Shanghai, Taipei uses this
   small airport because of its cheaper landing and parking fee. A
   mediocre shuttle system serves Clark and Manila.

Roads

   The main roads of Metro Manila are organized around a set of radial and
   circumferential roads that radiate and circle in and around Manila
   proper. Roxas Boulevard, easily the most well-known of Manila's
   streets, line the southern shores of Manila with Manila Bay. The
   boulevard is part of the Radial Road 1 that leads south to the province
   of Cavite. Another well-known radial road is España Boulevard (part of
   Radial Road 7) that starts in Quiapo and ends at the Welcome Rotunda
   along the border with Quezon City. Pres. Sergio Osmeña Sr. Highway,
   part of the South Luzon Expressway or Radial Road 3 is the most
   important highway linking Manila with the provinces of southern Luzon.

   The most common types of public transportation are buses and the
   jeepney. Tricycles are used for short distances. Pedicabs are bicycles
   attached with sidecars, where the drivers uses foot pedals to propel
   the vehicle.
     * Claro M. Recto Avenue
     * Escolta
     * España Boulevard
     * Mendiola Street
     * Rizal Avenue
     * Roxas Boulevard
     * Taft Avenue
     * Quezon Boulevard

Bridges

   There are eight (8) major bridge spans in Manila, more than half of the
   number of bridges that connects the north and south banks of the Pasig
   River in Metro Manila. There are two (2) rail bridges that crosses the
   river, the Light Rail Transit 1 and the Philippine National Railways
   track. The bridges listed below are in a west to east order, with the
   first bridge Del Pan, nearest to the mouth of the Pasig River into
   Manila Bay.
     * Roxas bridge - formerly called Del Pan (Tondo to Port Area)
     * Jones bridge (Binondo to Ermita)
     * McArthur bridge (Santa Cruz to Ermita)
     * LRT 1 (Carriedo station to Central station)
     * Quezon bridge (Quiapo to Ermita)

     * Ayala bridge (San Miguel to Ermita)
     * Mabini bridge - formerly called Nagtahan bridge (Santa Mesa to
       Pandacan)
     * Philippine National Railways (Santa Mesa station to Pandacan
       station)
     * Padre Zamora bridge (Santa Mesa to Pandacan)
     * Lambingan bridge (Sta. Ana)

Rail transport

   Manila is the hub of a railway system on Luzon. The main terminal of
   the Philippine National Railways is in the Tondo district. Railways
   extend from this terminal north to the city of San Fernando in Pampanga
   and south to Legazpi City in Albay, though only the southern railway is
   currently in operation.

   Manila is also serviced by the Manila Light Rail Transit System along
   the length of Taft Avenue (R-2) and Rizal Avenue (R-9). A second line
   runs along Ramon Magsaysay Blvd (R-6) from Santa Cruz, through Quezon
   City, up to Santolan in Pasig City.

   These are the major rail systems, with their station within Manila:
     * LRT 1: R. Papa, J. Abad Santos, Blumentritt, Tayuman, Bambang, D.
       Jose, Carriedo, Central Station, UN Ave., P. Gil, Quirino Ave, and
       Vito Cruz
     * LRT 2: C.M. Recto, Legarda, Pureza and V. Mapa
     * PNR: Vito Cruz, Herran, Pandacan, Sta. Mesa, España, Laong Laan,
       Blumentritt and Tutuban.

Seaports and piers

   The City of Manila is the chief seaport of the Philippines. North
   Harbor and South Harbour experience busy periods during long holidays
   such as Holy Week, All Saints Day and the Christmas holidays.

Communication

Postal Service

   The Philippines central office for its postal service now called
   PhilPost and it is located at the foot of the Jones Bridge. The main
   office is housed in a huge art deco style building designed with huge
   columns at front, built during the American colonial period. The
   building houses the Philippine Postal Bank and the main mail
   sorting-distribution operations of the country.

Print & Publication

   Among the Philippines major newspaper publications, both in broadsheet
   and in tabloid format established their editorial, publication offices
   and printing presses at the Port Area. Among the publications based in
   Manila include the country's oldest newspaper, The Manila Times, The
   Manila Bulletin and it's sister tabloid "Balita," The Philippine Star,
   The Manila Standard-Today, The Daily Tribune and others.

News Agencies

   The city serves as host to a number of news and information offices,
   agencies or services that includes the Office of the Press Secretary
   and Radio-TV Malacañang or RTVM (the close-in news team of Philippine
   Presidents) located at the Malacañang Palace grounds.

   The National Press Club's building office is located at the foot of the
   Jones bridge across the Post Office building and it houses the
   International Press Centre or IPC, a government agency tasked to
   accredit and grant working permits for visiting foreign agencies.

   Manila is also home to the prestigious and exclusive organization of
   journalists called, "Samahang Plaridel," whose members include some of
   the prominent publishers, editors, reporters of the country.

   The Associated Press, Japan's NHK and Fuji TV, and London-based Global
   Radio News, Ltd. made Manila as its base of newsgathering operations in
   the Philippines.

Utilities

Electricity & Water

   Manila's source of electricity is part of the central franchise service
   area of the Manila Electric Company or Meralco. Water supply for the
   city is supplied by the Maynilad Water Services, except for portions of
   the district of Sta. Ana which is serviced by the Manila Water.

Telephone & Cable TV

   The city's telecommunications infrastructure (landlines) are provided
   by PLDT, Eastern Telecoms, Bayantel and cellular service providers
   Smart Communications, Globe Telecom and Sun Cellular cover the city.
   Cable television access is provided by Sky Cable and Global Destiny.

Internet Service Providers

   Internet Digital Subscriber Line or DSL coverage is provided by PLDT,
   and Eastern Telecoms, cable internet is serviced by Sky Cable's ZPDee
   brand and by Global Destiny. Wireless broadband is provided by Smart
   Communications. Availability of services from among the listed
   providers vary in the various districts of Manila, except in Malate and
   Ermita where all providers are available.

Government

   Like all cities of the Philippines, Manila is governed by a mayor who
   heads the executive department of the city. The current mayor for the
   2004-2007 term is Joselito L. Atienza, Jr., who has been re-elected for
   his third term in the 2004 elections. The city mayor is restricted for
   three consecutive terms (nine years), although he can be elected again
   after an interruption of one term.

   Danilo B. Lacuna, the city's incumbent vice-mayor heads the legislative
   arm which is composed of the elected city councilors, six from each of
   the city's six congressional districts.

   The city is divided into 897 barangays, which are the smallest unit of
   local government in the Philippines. Each barangay has its own
   chairperson and councilors. For administrative convenience, all the
   barangays in Manila are grouped into 100 zones and which are further
   grouped into 16 administrative districts. These zones and districts
   have no form of local government.

   The city further has six representatives popularly elected to the House
   of Representatives, the lower legislative branch of the Philippines.
   Each representative represents one of the six congressional districts
   of Manila.

Places of interest

   Map of Manila (click for larger version)
   Enlarge
   Map of Manila (click for larger version)
   Manila City Hall
   Enlarge
   Manila City Hall
   The Main Building (Tanghalang Pambansa) of the Cultural Center of the
   Philippines
   Enlarge
   The Main Building (Tanghalang Pambansa) of the Cultural Centre of the
   Philippines

General landmarks

     * Apolinario Mabini Shrine
     * Chinatown (Binondo district)
     * Embassy of the United States of America
     * Ermita and Malate Districts, a place for Bohemian night life
     * Fort Santiago
     * Intramuros, the walled city built by the Spaniards, originally
       considered to be the City of Manila
     * Malacañang Palace, the official residence of the President of the
       Philippines
     * Manila Baywalk
     * Manila Boardwalk
     * Manila City Hall
     * Manila Yacht Club
     * Manila Zoological and Botanical Garden ( Manila Zoo)
     * Metropolitan Theatre
     * Museo Pambata
     * National Library of the Philippines
     * National Museum
     * Paco Park, the location of the hit Paco Park Presents
     * Plaza Miranda
     * Quirino Grandstand
     * Rajah Sulayman Park
     * Remedios Circle
     * Rizal Park, also known as Luneta
     * The Manila Hotel
     * The Supreme Court of the Philippines
     * University Belt Area
     * Victims of Martial Law Memorial Wall - Bonifacio Shrine (near City
       Hall)

Malls and shopping centers

     * 168 Shopping Mall
     * Divisoria Flea Market
     * Ever Gotesco Manila Plaza (Recto)
     * Harrison Plaza (SM Harrison; Shopwise; Rustan's)
     * Isetann Department Store (Recto and Quiapo)
     * Palengke or Pamilihan sa ilalim ng tulay (literally means "a
       marketplace under the bridge), a centre for indigenous Filipino
       products
     * Quiapo Bargain Centre, home of endless bargain goods
     * Robinson's Place - Manila
     * SM City Manila
     * SM City San Lazaro
     * SM Department Store Quiapo
     * Tutuban Centre (Cluster Building, Centermall & Primeblock)

Hospitals

     * Chinese General Hospital and Medical Centre (Private - Blumetritt
       St., Santa Cruz)
     * Dr. Jose Fabella Memorial Hospital (Lope de Vega, Santa Cruz)
     * Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Hospital (Rizal Ave., Manila)
     * Gat Andres Bonifacio Memorial Medical Centre
     * Hospital of the Infant Jesus (Private - Laong Laan St., Sampaloc)
     * Manila Doctor's Hospital (Private - UN Ave., Ermita)
     * Manila Medical Centre (Private - Gen. Luna St., Ermita)
     * Mary Chiles General Hospital (Private - Gastambide St., Sampaloc)

     * Mary Johnston Hospital (Private - Juan Nolasco St., Tondo)
     * Ospital ng Maynila (Roxas Blvd., Malate)
     * Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital (Private - Sanchez St., Santa Mesa)
     * Philippine General Hospital (Taft Ave., Ermita)
     * San Lazaro Hospital (Quiricada, Santa Cruz)
     * Sto. Tomas University Hospital (Private - España, Sampaloc)
     * Tondo Medical Centre (Balut, Tondo)

Hotels

     * Admiral Hotel
     * Aloha Hotel
     * Bayview Hotel
     * City Garden
     * Executive Plaza
     * Grand Boulevard Hotel
     * Manila Diamond Hotel

                              * Manila Pavillion
                              * Hyatt Hotel and Casino - Manila
                              * Palm Plaza Hotel
                              * Pan Pacific Plaza
                              * The Manila Hotel
                              * Sheraton Hotel

Places of worship

     * Archdiocesan Shrine of St. Jude Thaddeus
     * Basilica Minore de San Lorenzo Ruiz (Binondo Church)
     * Basilica Minore de San Sebastian (San Sebastian Church), the only
       all-steel church in Gothic style in Asia
     * Basilica Minore de la Immaculada Concepcion ( Manila Cathedral)
     * Basilica Minore del Nazareno Negro (Quiapo Church)
     * Buddhist Temple (Malate, Manila)
     * Cathedral of the Child Jesus - Iglesia Filipina Independiente (
       Aglipayan)
     * Chinese Temple (Binondo, Manila)
     * Mosque del Globo de Oro (Quiapo, Manila)
     * Hindu Temple (Paco, Manila)
     * Iglesia de la Parroquia de Santo Niño (Pandacan, Manila)
     * Iglesia de Santa Cruz
     * Nuestra Señora de Guia Church (Ermita Church)
     * Nuestra Señora de Remedios Church (Malate Church)
     * Parroquia de San Fernando de Dilao (Paco, Manila)
     * San Agustin Church

Sporting venues

     * Rizal Memorial Sports Complex (RMSC)
     * San Andres Gym (foremrly Mail and More Arena, the home of the
       Manila MetroStars.)

Museums

     * Bahay Tsinoy
     * Intramuros Light and Sound Museum
     * Museo ng Maynila (Museum of Manila)
     * National Museum of the Filipino People
     * Museo Pambata (Children's Museum)
     * Parish of the Our Lady of the Abandoned - Sta. Ana (pre-Spanish
       artifacts)
     * The Museum - De La Salle University-Manila
     * UST Museum of Arts and Sciences

Cemeteries

     * Chinese Cemetery
     * La Loma Cemetery
     * Manila American Cemetery and Memorial
     * Manila North Cemetery

History

Pre-Spanish times

   Gate of Fuerza de Santiago.
   Enlarge
   Gate of Fuerza de Santiago.

   Manila began as a Muslim settlement at the mouth of the Pasig River
   along the shores of Manila Bay. The name came from the term maynilad,
   literally "there is nilad." Nilad is a white-flowered mangrove plant
   that grew in abundance in the area.

   In the mid-16th century, the area of present-day Manila was governed by
   three rajahs, or Muslim community leaders. They were Rajah Sulayman and
   Rajah Matanda who ruled the communities south of the Pasig, and Rajah
   Lakandula who ruled the community north of the river. Manila was then
   the northernmost Muslim sultanate in the islands. It held ties with the
   sultanates of Brunei, Sulu, and Ternate in Cavite.

Spanish rule

   In 1570, a Spanish expedition ordered by the conquistador Miguel López
   de Legazpi demanded the conquest of Manila. His second in command,
   Martín de Goiti departed from Cebu and arrived in Manila. The Muslim
   Tagalogs welcomed the foreigners, but Goiti had other plans. The
   Spanish force of 300 soldiers marched through Manila and a battle was
   fought with the heavily armed Spaniards quickly defeating the native
   settlements. Legazpi and his men followed the next year and made a
   peace pact with the three rajahs and organized a city council
   consisting of two mayors, 12 councilors, and a secretary. A walled city
   known as Intramuros, at the southern banks of Pasig River was built to
   protect the Spanish colonizers. On June 10, 1574, King Philip II of
   Spain gave Manila the title of Insigne y Siempre Leal Ciudad
   ("Distinguished and Ever Loyal City").

   In 1595, Manila was proclaimed as the capital of the Philippine Islands
   and became a centre of trans-Pacific trade for more than three
   centuries. For example, the famous Manila galleons sailed between
   Manila and the port of Acapulco in today's Mexico. These Manila
   galleons carried silver and other precious metals from the New World to
   Manila to purchase goods and raw materials from throughout Asia — for
   example, spices transshipped from the Spice Islands to the south, and
   porcelain, ivory, lacquerware and processed silk cloth from China and
   Southeast Asia. Some of these Asian goods were used in Mexico, however,
   most of the cargo was transhipped across Mexico for delivery to Spain,
   to be sold in European markets.

British occupation

   There was a brief British occupation of Manila from 1762-1764 as a
   result of the Seven Years' War, which was fought between France and
   England. Spain became a British enemy when it sided with France due to
   ties between their royal families. The British Occupation was confined
   to Manila and Cavite while Simón de Anda y Salazar, acting as a de
   facto Spanish governor general, kept the countryside for Spain with the
   help of Filipino soldiers. The Indian soldiers known as Sepoys, who
   came with the British, deserted in droves and settled in Cainta, Rizal,
   and explains the uniquely Indian features of generations of Cainta
   residents. French mercenaries who came with the British also settled in
   various locations around Manila.

U.S. occupation

   U.S. Troops invaded Manila in 1898 and waged war with the Spaniards and
   Filipinos in the Spanish-American War and the Philippine-American War.
   Following the defeat of Spain, U.S. forces took control of the city and
   the islands. In the Treaty of Paris in 1898, Spain handed over the
   Philippines to the United States of America for US$ 20,000,000 and
   ending 377 years of Spanish rule in the islands.

   The headquarters for USAFFE were located here as were the U.S. 31st
   Infantry Regiment and the U.S. 808th Military Police Company. The
   headquarters and bulk of the Philippine Division was located just to
   the south, at Fort William McKinley. The headquarters for the Far East
   Air Force was on the outskirts of town, at Nielson Field. Nearby, at
   Nichols Field was the U.S. 20th Air Base Group. A battalion of the U.S.
   12th Quartermaster Regiment was located in the port area and training
   was conducted there for quartermasters of the Philippine Army.

   There were 6 airfields, for the Far East Air Force, within 130 km of
   Manila, notably Clark, Nichols, and Nielson fields. All U.S. military
   and airforce bases was closed down in 1992.
   Escolta Street, Manila. stereoptical view, 1899
   Enlarge
   Escolta Street, Manila. stereoptical view, 1899

World War II

   American combat units were ordered to withdraw from the city and all
   military installations removed on December 30, 1941, Manila was
   declared an open city by President Manuel L. Quezon, to spare the city
   from death and destruction. Quezon issued a decree enlarging the safe
   zone to include outlying areas of Manila as safe zones, establishing
   the new administrative jurisdiction called Greater Manila.

   The post of mayor of Greater Manila was given to Quezon's former
   Executive Secretary, Jorge B. Vargas. On the evening of New Year's Day
   of 1942, a Japanese courier delivered notice to Vargas that Japanese
   forces already bivouacked at Parañaque would enter Greater Manila the
   following day. From 9AM to 10AM of January 2, Japanese imperial forces
   marched into the City of Manila.

   Vargas was tasked to hand over to the new authorities Greater Manila
   and present the remaining Filipino leaders to Japanese authorities.
   Vargas and the Filipino leaders present were asked to choose three
   options; (1) a purely Japanese military administration, (2) a
   dictatorial government run by a Filipino under Gen. Artemio Ricarte who
   went on self-exile to Japan after the Filipino-American war, or (3) a
   government by commission selected by Filipinos. Vargas and the local
   leaders chose the third option and established the Philippine Executive
   Commission to manage initially Greater Manila, and was later expanded
   to cover the whole Philippines.

   Vargas assumed the position, chairman of the Philippine Executive
   Commission and appointed to the post of Mayor of Greater Manila in
   1942, Leon G. Guinto Sr., a Secretary of Labor under the Philippine
   Commonwealth administration of President Manuel L. Quezon. Guinto held
   the position of Mayor of Greater Manila until the liberation of the
   city.

   Under Guinto's war-time administration, the City of Manila that was
   expanded to Greater Manila included districts such as; "Bagumbayan"
   means New Town (South of Manila), "Bagumpanahon" means New Era
   (Sampaloc, Quiapo, San Miguel and Santa Cruz), "Bagumbuhay" means New
   Life (Tondo), "Bagong Diwa" means New Order (Binondo & San Nicholas),
   the then newly established Quezon City was collapsed and divided into
   two districts, while the municipalities of Caloocan, Las Piñas,
   Malabon, Makati, Mandaluyong, Navotas, Parañaque, Pasay, and San Juan
   became districts of Manila.

   On February 5, 1944 American General Douglas MacArthur fulfilled a
   promise to return to the Philippines (see Battle of Leyte). From
   February 3 to March 3, after the climactic battle at Intramuros ended,
   the thoroughly devastated city of Manila was officially liberated.
   Allied troops did not reach the city in time to prevent the Manila
   Massacre though. Ironically, the carpet bombing and relentless shelling
   by the Americans killed many more than the fleeing Japanese.

Manila and security

   Manila has been subject to militant attacks. The metropolis have been
   targeted twice by groups Moro Islamic Liberation Front and Abu Sayyaf.
   In addition, Al-Qaida cells have been discovered in the metropolis.

   Project Bojinka, which was a large-scale attack being planned in late
   1994 and early 1995, was being planned in Manila. The project was
   abandoned after the night of January 6, 1995 and the morning of January
   7, when an apartment fire led investigators to a laptop computer
   containing the plans.

Sister cities

   Manila has four sister cities, as designated by Sister Cities
   International, Inc. (SCI):
     * United States Sacramento, California, USA
     * United States San Francisco, California, USA
     * United States Maui County, Hawaii, USA
     * United States Honolulu City and County, Hawaii, USA

   Other sister cities include:
     * United States Santa Barbara, California
     * Canada Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada
     * Republic of China Taipei, Taiwan
     * India Bombay, India

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manila"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
