   #copyright

Map projection

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: General Geography

   The Mercator projection shows courses of constant bearing as straight
   lines. While common, scholars advise against using it for reference
   maps of the world because it drastically inflates the high latitudes.
   The Mercator projection shows courses of constant bearing as straight
   lines. While common, scholars advise against using it for reference
   maps of the world because it drastically inflates the high latitudes.

   A map projection is any method used in cartography (mapmaking) to
   represent the two-dimensional curved surface of the earth or other body
   on a plane. The term " projection" here refers to any function defined
   on the earth's surface and with values on the plane, and not
   necessarily a geometric projection.

   Flat maps could not exist without map projections. Flat maps can be
   more useful than globes in many situations: they are more compact and
   easier to store; they readily accommodate an enormous range of scales;
   they are viewed easily on computer displays; they can facilitate
   measuring properties of the terrain being mapped; they can show larger
   portions of the earth's surface at once; and they are cheaper to
   produce and transport. These useful traits of flat maps motivate the
   development of map projections.

Metric properties of maps

   An Albers projection shows areas accurately, but distorts shapes.
   An Albers projection shows areas accurately, but distorts shapes.

   Many properties can be measured on the earth's surface independently of
   its geography. Some of these properties are:
     * Area
     * Shape
     * Direction
     * Bearing
     * Distance
     * Scale

   Map projections can be constructed to preserve one or some of these
   properties, though not all of them simultaneously. Each projection
   preserves or compromises or approximates basic metric properties in
   different ways. The purpose of the map, then, determines which
   projection should form the base for the map. Since many purposes exist
   for maps, so do many projections exist upon which to construct them.

   Another major concern that drives the choice of a projection is the
   compatibility of data sets. Data sets are geographic information. As
   such, their collection depends on the chosen model of the earth.
   Different models assign slightly different coordinates to the same
   location, so it is important that the model be known and that chosen
   projection is compatible with that model. On small areas (large scale)
   data compatibility issues are more important since metric distortions
   are minimal at this level. In very large areas (small scale), on the
   other hand, distortion is a more important factor to consider.

Construction of a map projection

   The creation of a map projection involves three steps:
    1. Selection of a model for the shape of the earth or planetary body
       (usually choosing between a sphere or ellipsoid)
    2. Transformation of geographic coordinates ( longitude and latitude)
       to plane coordinates (eastings and northings or x,y)
    3. Reduction of the scale (it does not matter in what order the second
       and third steps are performed)

   Because the real earth's shape is irregular, information is lost in the
   first step, in which an approximating, regular model is chosen.
   Reducing the scale may be considered to be part of transforming
   geographic coordinates to plane coordinates.

   Most map projections, both practically and theoretically, are not
   "projections" in any physical sense. Rather, they depend on
   mathematical formulae that have no direct physical interpretation.
   However, in understanding the concept of a map projection it is helpful
   to think of a globe with a light source placed at some definite point
   with respect to it, projecting features of the globe onto a surface.
   The following discussion of developable surfaces is based on that
   concept.

Choosing a projection surface

   A Miller cylindrical projection maps the globe onto a cylinder.
   A Miller cylindrical projection maps the globe onto a cylinder.

   A surface that can be unfolded or unrolled into a flat plane or sheet
   without stretching, tearing or shrinking is called a ' developable
   surface'. The cylinder, cone and of course the plane are all
   developable surfaces. Unfortunately, the sphere and ellipsoid are not
   developable surfaces. Any projection that attempts to project a sphere
   (or an ellipsoid) on a flat sheet will have to distort the image
   (similar to the impossibility of making a flat sheet from an orange
   peel).

   One way of describing a projection is describing a projection from the
   earth's surface to a cylinder or cone. Together with the simple second
   step of unrolling the cylinder (or cone) into a plane, we have the full
   projection. While the first step inevitably distorts some properties of
   the globe, the developable surface may then be unfolded without further
   distortion.

Orientation of the projection

   This transverse Mercator projection is mathematically the same as a
   standard Mercator, but oriented around a different axis.
   This transverse Mercator projection is mathematically the same as a
   standard Mercator, but oriented around a different axis.

   Once a choice is made between projecting onto a cylinder, cone, or
   plane, the orientation of the shape must be chosen. The orientation is
   how the shape is placed with respect to the globe. The orientation of
   the projection surface can be normal (inline with the earth's axis),
   transverse (at right angles to the earth's axis) or oblique (any angle
   in between). These surfaces may also be either tangent or secant to the
   spherical or ellipsoidal globe. Tangent means the surface touches but
   does not slice through the globe; secant means the surface does slice
   through the globe. Insofar as preserving metric properties go, it is
   never advantageous to move the developable surface away from contact
   with the globe, so that practice is not discussed here.

Scale

   A globe is the only way to represent the earth with the same scale
   throughout the entire map surface and in all directions. For a flat map
   this is not even possible across an area of any extent.

   Thus, on a flat map, properties of constant scale are always limited.

   Possible properties are:
     * The scale depends on location, but not on direction; this is
       equivalent with preservation of angles: conformal map
     * For a given latitude and direction, the scale is the same
       everywhere; this applies for any cylindrical projection
     * Combination of the two: the scale depends on latitude only, not on
       longitude or direction; this applies for the Mercator projection

Choosing a model for the shape of the Earth

   Projection construction is also affected by how the shape of the earth
   is approximated. In the following discussion on projection categories,
   a sphere is assumed. However, the Earth is not exactly spherical but is
   closer in shape to an oblate ellipsoid, a shape which bulges around the
   equator. Selecting a model for a shape of the earth involves choosing
   between the advantages and disadvantages of a sphere versus an
   ellipsoid. Spherical models are useful for small-scale maps such as
   world atlases and globes, since the error at that scale is not usually
   noticeable or important enough to justify using the more complicated
   ellipsoid. The ellipsoidal model is commonly used to construct
   topographic maps and for other large and medium scale maps that need to
   accurately depict the land surface.

   A third model of the shape of the earth is called a geoid, which is a
   complex and more or less accurate representation of the global mean sea
   level surface that is obtained through a combination of terrestrial and
   satellite gravity measurements. This model is not used for mapping due
   to its complexity but is instead used for control purposes in the
   construction of geographic datums. (In geodesy, plural of "datum" is
   "datums," rather than "data".) A geoid is used to construct a datum by
   adding irregularities to the ellipsoid in order to better match the
   Earth's actual shape (it takes into account the large scale features in
   the Earth's gravity field associated with mantle convection patterns,
   as well as the gravity signatures of very large geomorphic features
   such as mountain ranges, plateaus and plains). Historically, datums
   have been based on ellipsoids that best represent the geoid within the
   region the datum is intended to map. Each ellipsoid has a distinct
   major and minor axis. Different controls (modifications) are added to
   the ellipsoid in order to construct the datum, which is specialized for
   a specific geographic regions (such as the North American Datum). A few
   modern datums, such as WGS84 (the one used in the Global Positioning
   System GPS), are optimized to represent the entire earth as well as
   possible with a single ellipsoid, at the expense of some accuracy in
   smaller regions.

Classification

   A fundamental projection classification is based on type of projection
   surface onto which the globe is conceptually projected. The projections
   are described in terms of placing a gigantic surface in contact with
   the earth, followed by an implied scaling operation. These surfaces are
   cylindrical (e.g., Mercator), conic (e.g., Albers), and azimuthal or
   plane (e.g., stereographic). Many mathematical projections, however, do
   not neatly fit into any of these three conceptual projection methods.
   Hence other peer categories have been described in the literature, such
   as pseudoconic (meridians are arcs of circles), pseudocylindrical
   (meridians are straight lines), pseudoazimuthal, retroazimuthal, and
   polyconic.

   Another way to classify projections is through the properties they
   retain. Some of the more common categories are:
     * Direction preserving, called azimuthal (but only possible from the
       central point)
     * Locally shape-preserving, called conformal or orthomorphic
     * Area-preserving, called equal-area or equiareal or equivalent or
       authalic
     * Distance preserving - equidistant (preserving distances between one
       or two points and every other point)
     * Shortest-route preserving - gnomonic projection

   NOTE: It is impossible to construct a map projection that is both
   equal-area and conformal.

Projections by surface

Cylindrical

   The space-oblique Mercator projection was developed by the USGS for use
   in Landsat images.
   The space-oblique Mercator projection was developed by the USGS for use
   in Landsat images.

   The term "cylindrical projection" is used to refer to any projection in
   which meridians are mapped to equally spaced vertical lines and circles
   of latitude (parallels) are mapped to horizontal lines (or, mutatis
   mutandis, more generally, radial lines from a fixed point are mapped to
   equally spaced parallel lines and concentric circles around it are
   mapped to perpendicular lines).

   The mapping of meridians to vertical lines can be visualized by
   imagining a cylinder (of which the axis coincides with the Earth's axis
   of rotation) wrapped around the Earth and then projecting onto the
   cylinder, and subsequently unfolding the cylinder.

   Unavoidably, all cylindrical projections have an east-west stretching
   away from the equator by a factor equal to the secant of the latitude,
   compared with the scale at the equator. The various cylindrical
   projections can be described in terms of the north-south stretching:
     * North-south stretching is equal to the east-west stretching
       (secant(L)): The east-west scale matches the north-south-scale:
       conformal cylindrical or Mercator; this distorts areas excessively
       in high latitudes (see also transverse Mercator).
     * North-south stretching growing rapidly with latitude, even faster
       than east-west stretching (secant(L))^2: The cylindric perspective
       (= central cylindrical) projection; unsuitable because distortion
       is even worse than in the Mercator projection.
     * North-south stretching grows with latitude, but less quickly than
       the east-west stretching: such as the Miller cylindrical projection
       (secant(L*4/5)).
     * North-south distances neither stretched nor compressed (1):
       equidistant cylindrical or plate carrée.
     * North-south compression precisely the reciprocal of east-west
       stretching (cos(L)): equal-area cylindrical (with many named
       specializations such as Gall-Peters or Gall orthographic, Behrmann,
       and Lambert cylindrical equal-area). This divides north-south
       distances by a factor equal to the secant of the latitude,
       preserving area but heavily distorting shapes.

   In the first case (Mercator), the east-west scale always equals the
   north-south scale. In the second case (central cylindrical), the
   north-south scale exceeds the east-west scale everywhere away from the
   equator. Each remaining case has a pair of identical latitudes of
   opposite sign (or else the equator) at which the east-west scale
   matches the north-south-scale.

   Cylindrical projections map the whole Earth as a finite rectangle,
   except in the first two cases, where the rectangle stretches infinitely
   tall while retaining constant width.

Pseudocylindrical

   A sinusoidal projection shows relative sizes accurately, but grossly
   distorts shapes. Distortion can be reduced by "interrupting" the map.
   A sinusoidal projection shows relative sizes accurately, but grossly
   distorts shapes. Distortion can be reduced by "interrupting" the map.

   Pseudocylindrical projections represent the central meridian and each
   parallel as a straight line segment, but not the other meridians,
   except for the Collignon projection, which in its most common forms
   represents all meridians as straight lines from the poles to the
   equators as straight line segments. Each pseudocylindrical projection
   represents a point on the Earth along the straight line representing
   its parallel, at a distance which is a function of its difference in
   longitude from the central meridian.
     * Sinusoidal: the north-south scale is the same everywhere at the
       central meridian, and the east-west scale is throughout the map the
       same as that; correspondingly, on the map, as in reality, the
       length of each parallel is proportional to the cosine of the
       latitude. Thus the shape of the map for the whole earth is the area
       between two symmetric rotated cosine curves .

   The true distance between two points on the same meridian corresponds
   to the distance on the map between the two parallels, which is smaller
   than the distance between the two points on the map; the meridians
   drawn on the map help the user realizing the distortion and mentally
   compensating for it
     * Mollweide
     * Goode homolosine
     * Eckert IV

     * Eckert VI

     * Collignon

Hybrid

   The HEALPix projection combines an equal-area cylindrical projection in
   equatorial regions with the Collignon projection in polar areas.

Conical

     * Equidistant conic
     * Lambert conformal conic
     * Albers conic

Pseudoconical

     * Bonne
     * Werner cordiform designates a pole and a meridian; distances from
       the pole are preserved, as are distances from the meridian (which
       is straight) along the parallels
     * Continuous American polyconic

Azimuthal (projections onto a plane)

   An azimuthal projection shows distances and directions accurately from
   the center point, but distorts shapes and sizes elsewhere.
   An azimuthal projection shows distances and directions accurately from
   the centre point, but distorts shapes and sizes elsewhere.

   Azimuthal projections have the property that directions from a central
   point are preserved (and hence, great circles through the central point
   are represented by straight lines on the map). Usually these
   projections also have radial symmetry in the scales and hence in the
   distortions: map distances from the central point are computed by a
   function r(d) of the true distance d, independent of the angle;
   correspondingly, circles with the central point as center are mapped
   into circles which have as centre the central point on the map.

   The mapping of radial lines can be visualized by imagining a plane
   tangent to the Earth, with the central point as tangent point.

   The radial scale is r'(d) and the transverse scale r(d)/(R sin(d/R))
   where R is the radius of the Earth.

   Some azimuthal projections are true perspective projections; that is,
   they can be constructed mechanically, projecting the surface of the
   Earth by extending lines from a points of perspective (along an
   infinite line through the tangent point and the tangent point's
   antipode) onto the plane:
     * Gnomonic displays great circles as straight lines. Can be
       constructed by using a point of perspective at the centre of the
       Earth. r(d) = c tan(d/R); a hemisphere already requires an infinite
       map ,
     * _ _ _ _ projection can be constructed by using a point of
       perspective outside the earth. Photographs of Earth (such as those
       from the ISS) give this perspective.
     * Orthographic maps each point on the earth to the closest point on
       the plane. Can be constructed from a point of perspective an
       infinite distance from the tangent point; r(d) = c sin(d/R) . Can
       display up to a hemisphere on a finite circle. Photographs of Earth
       from far enough away, such as the Moon, give this perspective.
     * Azimuthal conformal projection is the same as stereographic. It can
       be constructed by using the tangent point's antipode as the point
       of perspective. r(d) = c tan(d/2R); the scale is
       c/(2R cos^2(d/2R)). Can display nearly the entire sphere on a
       finite circle. The full sphere requires an infinite map.

   Other azimuthal projections are not true perspective projections:
     * Azimuthal equidistant: r(d) = cd; it is used by amateur radio
       operators to know the direction to point their antennas toward a
       point and see the distance to it. Distance from the tangent point
       on the map is proportional to surface distance on the earth (; for
       the case where the tangent point is the North Pole, see the flag of
       the United Nations)
     * Lambert azimuthal equal-area. Distance from the tangent point on
       the map is proportional to straight-line distance through the
       earth: r(d) = c sin(d/2R)
     * Logarithmic azimuthal is constructed so that each point's distance
       from the centre of the map is the logarithm of its distance from
       the tangent point on the Earth. Works well with cognitive maps.
       r(d) = c ln(d/d[0]); locations closer than at a distance equal to
       the constant d[0] are not shown (, figure 6-5)

Projections by preservation of a metric property

   A stereographic projection is conformal and perspective but not equal
   area or equidistant.
   A stereographic projection is conformal and perspective but not equal
   area or equidistant.

Conformal

   Conformal map projections preserve angles locally:
     * Mercator - rhumb lines are represented by straight segments
     * Stereographic - shape of circles is conserved
     * Roussilhe
     * Lambert conformal conic
     * Quincuncial map

Equal-area

   These projections preserve area:
     * Gall orthographic (also known as Gall-Peters, or Peters,
       projection)

     * Albers conic
     * Lambert azimuthal equal-area
     * Mollweide
     * Hammer
     * Briesemeister
     * Sinusoidal
     * Werner
     * Bonne
     * Bottomley
     * Goode's homolosine
     * Hobo-Dyer
     * Collignon
     * HEALPix

Equidistant

   These preserve distance from some standard point or line:
     * Plate carrée - north-south scale is constant
     * Equirectangular - equal distance between all latitudes and
       longitudes.
     * Azimuthal equidistant - radial scale with respect to the central
       point is constant
     * Equidistant conic
     * sinusoidal - east-west scale is constant and corresponds to
       distances between parallels (but the north-south scale away from
       the central meridian is larger due to the obliqueness of the
       meridians)
     * Werner cordiform distances from the North Pole are correct as are
       the curved distance on parallels
     * Soldner
     * Two-point equidistant

Gnomonic

   The Gnomonic projection is thought to be the oldest map projection,
   developed by Thales in the 6th century BC
   The Gnomonic projection is thought to be the oldest map projection,
   developed by Thales in the 6th century BC

   Great circles are displayed as straight lines:
     * Gnomonic projection

Retroazimuthal

   Direction to a fixed location B (the bearing at the starting location A
   of the shortest route) corresponds to the direction on the map from A
   to B:
     * Littrow - the only conformal retroazimuthal projection
     * Hammer retroazimuthal - also preserves distance from the central
       point
     * Craig retroazimuthal aka Mecca or Qibla - also has vertical
       meridians

Compromise projections

   The Robinson projection was adopted by National Geographic Magazine in
   1988 but abandoned by them in about 1997 for the Winkel Tripel.
   The Robinson projection was adopted by National Geographic Magazine in
   1988 but abandoned by them in about 1997 for the Winkel Tripel.

   Compromise projections give up the idea of perfectly preserving metric
   properties, seeking instead to strike a balance between distortions, or
   to simply make things "look right". Most of these types of projections
   distort shape in the polar regions more than at the equator:
     * Robinson
     * van der Grinten
     * Miller cylindrical
     * Winkel Tripel

Other noteworthy projections

     * Buckminster Fuller's Dymaxion
     * Chamberlin trimetric
     * The French cartographer Oronce Fine developed a heart-shaped
       projection in the sixteenth century

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Map_projection"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
