   #copyright

Marc Pugh

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Sports and games people

   Marc Pugh
               Personal information
   Full name      Marc Pugh
   Date of birth  April 2, 1987
   Place of birth Bacup, England
   Nickname       Pughy
   Position       Midfielder
                 Club information
   Current club   Bury
                    Youth clubs
   2003- 2006     Burnley F.C.
                Professional clubs*
   Years          Club               Apps (goals)
   2005-2006
   2006-          Kidderminster(loan)
                  Bury               7 (1)
                                     10 (1)

   * Professional club appearances and goals
   counted for the domestic league only and
   correct as of 20:52, 26 September 2006 (UTC).

   Marc Pugh (born Bacup, England on April 2, 1987) is a professional
   English footballer currently playing for Bury F.C in the English
   Football League 2. He plays mainly as an attacking midfielder but can
   play as a striker and on the wing. He has represented England in the
   North-West of England team and attended the All Saints High School in
   Rossendale.

Playing Career

Youth

   His footballing career began at the Football League Championship side
   Burnley F.C where at a young age, he started as a Centre of Excellence
   player, and gradually worked his way up through the ranks to become a
   footballing apprentice. He began as a first year apprentice which
   involved both playing for the youth and reserve teams and taking a
   'Modern Apprenticeship In Sporting Excellence' at college. This was
   spread out over three years and by the second year the club would
   either take them on as 3rd year apprentices or release them. Due to
   Marc's great goalscoring record (which led him to be named on the first
   team bench) they decided to keep him on for a third year.

   As a 3rd year apprentice he scored 15 goals for the club's reserve and
   youth team. This led to him to be sent out on loan to Kidderminster
   Harriers, a Nationwide Conference team, for real footballing
   experience. Whilst at the Harriers, he scored one goal and made 10
   appearances. Also, during a match he did a smart piece of skill which
   involved flicking the ball over an opponents head with his heel, then
   crossing the ball in for a teammate to score. The move was featured on
   Soccer AM's showboating section as showboat of the week. Also, during a
   reserve match, Marc had to play in goal after reserve keeper Mark
   Crossley was sent off. The Harriers lost the game 7-1, but Marc had a
   good game in the goal. As a result, he is high in the list of stand-in
   goalkeepers during matches.

   During the course of the season, Marc learned that he would not get a
   professional contract at Burnley, and would be released at the end of
   the season. This was partly due to the fact that both Chris McCann and
   Kyle Lafferty had both already received first team contracts and they
   were only 2nd year apprentices.

Professional Career

   Having just been released from Burnley, Marc started looking for a new
   club, and was eventually offered a place at League Two side Bury FC. At
   the time of Marc's arrival at Bury, the threat of relegation loomed
   over the club. On top of this, the club had lost several good players
   to Preston (including David Nugent and Simon Whaley). As a result,
   Bury's season had slumped and they were entangled in a relegation
   battle. Pugh ended up playing six games in the 05/06 season for the
   club (including 3 as a sub) and scored his first goal in the 1-1 draw
   against Lincoln City. As a result of his good performances (and helped
   by the fact that Bury had survived relegation), Bury manager Chris
   Casper offered him a one year deal at Gigg Lane; his first professional
   contract. Pugh will no doubt be looking forward to a more stable season
   in 06/07 in what will be his first professional season and will want to
   put in some good performances in order to gain a longer contract. His
   squad number is 31 for Bury in the 06/07 season as it was for the six
   games he had at the end of the season.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marc_Pugh"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
