   #copyright

Marginated Tortoise

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Insects, Reptiles and
Fish

               iMarginated Tortoise
   Testudo marginata sarda
   Testudo marginata sarda

                             Conservation status

   Least concern (LR/lc)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Animalia
   Phylum:   Chordata
   Class:    Sauropsida
   Order:    Testudines
   Suborder: Cryptodira
   Family:   Testudinidae
   Genus:    Testudo
   Species:  T. marginata

                                Binomial name

   Testudo marginata
   Schoepf, 1789

   The Marginated Tortoise (Testudo marginata) is the largest European
   tortoise, reaching a weight of up to 5  kg (11  pounds) and a length of
   35  cm (14  inches). Its shell is oblong and has a notable thickness
   around the middle of the body. The posterior end of the shell has a
   saw-like formation, flanged outward like a bell. The carapace of adult
   specimens is almost completely black, with yellow highlights. The
   ventral shell is lighter coloured and has pairs of triangular markings
   with the points facing the rear of the animal. The front sides of the
   limbs are covered with large scales. In old female specimens, the rear
   flaps of the underside of the plastron are somewhat moveable. The tail
   is notable for a lengthwise marking and for an undivided carapace over
   the tail. Males have a longer tail, which is thicker at the base than
   the females. Their underside is more strongly indented. Males are also
   often larger than the females. The females lay their hard-shelled
   spherical eggs in the soil in May and June.

Habitat and feeding habits

   Close up of forearms and head, showing the particularly large scales.
   Enlarge
   Close up of forearms and head, showing the particularly large scales.

   The natural range of the Marginated Tortoise is southern Greece, from
   the Peloponnesus to Mount Olympus. They are also found in isolated
   zones of the Balkans and Italy, with a somewhat broader range in
   northeastern Sardinia.

   The Marginated Tortoise lives in more mountainous regions than Herman's
   Tortoise (Testudo hermanni). It can be found in elevations as high as
   1,600  m (5,250  feet). The black colour of the carapace is helpful for
   survival in this environment, as it allows the tortoise to absorb a
   great deal of heat in a short time, helping it maintain its body
   temperature. Similarly, the lighter colored underside slows the
   radiation of body heat into the cold ground. Early in the morning,
   Marginated Tortoises bask in the sun to raise their body temperature,
   and then search for food. After feeding, the tortoises return to their
   shelters in the hot midday hours, leaving them again in the late
   afternoon.

   Marginated Tortoises' food source consists primarily of plants from
   their native Mediterranean region. In captivity, the primary foodstuffs
   are dandelions, clover, salad leaves such as rocket or watercress, and
   also leaves from bean, radish, and crowfoot plants. Sometimes even
   grass and hay will be eaten, along with fruits. Lettuce will be eagerly
   devoured, but owing to its low nutrient value should not generally be
   given. They are primarily herbivorous, but they need a small amount of
   animal protein in their diet, particularly in the case of babies and
   egg-laying mothers. This protein is generally provided by earthworms
   and snails.

Subspecies and related species

   T. marginata marginata (left) and T. marginata sarda (right).
   Enlarge
   T. marginata marginata (left) and T. marginata sarda (right).
   Greek and Sardinian shape of the carapace.
   Enlarge
   Greek and Sardinian shape of the carapace.

   The primary subspecies of Testudo marginata is Testudo marginata
   marginata (Schoepf, 1789), described above. Two additional varieties
   are generally mentioned in connection with the marginated tortoise.
   Testudo marginata sarda (Mayer, 1992) is a separate population in
   Sardinia. This subspecies has less strongly bent tiles in the posterior
   of the carapace, and the posterior of the carapace is almost smooth
   compared with the saw-like Testudo marginata marginata.

   A particularly small variation of the marginated tortoise was
   discovered in the southwestern part of the Pelopponesus. However, the
   Dwarf Marginated Tortoise is not a subspecies, but rather a related
   species in the same genus (Testudo weissingeri, Bour, 1996).

   Testudo marginata is also closely related to the Greek Tortoise or
   Spur-thighed Tortoise (Testudo graeca). Both have very similar bodily
   characteristics, for example, an oblong carapace, large scales on the
   front legs, large covering for the head and cone-like scales on the
   upper thigh, undivided tail covering, moveable stomach plates, and lack
   of a tail spike. Presumably, Testudo marginata evolved from Testudo
   graeca as a population more suited for life in the mountainous regions.
   Evidence in favour of this is the wide geographical region and the
   extremely large number of subspecies of Testudo graeca, including a
   subspecies in Turkey with strongly bent carapace tiles, like the
   Marginated Tortoise. Testudo marginata on the other hand, despite the
   two subspecies, presents a much more unified appearance, which points
   toward an earlier appearance in evolutionary history. In captivity, the
   two species often cross-breed.

Mating and reproduction

   Immediately after waking from hibernation the mating instinct starts
   up. The males follow the females with great interest, encircling them,
   biting them on the limbs, ramming them, and trying to mount them.
   During copulation, the male opens his mouth, showing his red tongue and
   making loud cries. The tone of the copulation cry is almost sobbing
   with long, deep tones, in contrast to Testudo hermanni, in which there
   is a much higher-toned peeping noise.

   During mating, the female stands still and holds her head to the side,
   looking up to see the opened mouth of the male. It appears that the red
   tongue serves a signalling function. The female moves her head from
   left to right in the same rhythm as the male's cries.

   Afterwards the female seeks out an adequate location to lay her eggs.
   Once such a place is found, the female stands still, propping both
   front legs firmly against the ground. Then she digs out a hole with her
   hind legs, alternating between left and right, beginning with simply
   scratching the ground but eventually moving large quantities of soil
   which are piled up beside the hole. The depth of the hole is determined
   by the length of her hind legs. If the ground is too hard to dig, the
   female releases water from her anal gland to soften it.

   Once the hole is dug egg laying begins. Each egg is gently rolled back
   into the hole. After the last egg the female immediately begins
   refilling the hole, again using her hind legs. Finally, she stamps the
   opening closed with her feet so that the ground regains its natural
   hardness. Larger animals may lay eggs as many as three times per
   summer, with about 15 eggs per clutch.

   Two marginated tortoises mating.

                                   Building a nest.

                                                   Burrow for eggs.

Incubation and hatching

   A Marginated Tortoise emerges into the world.
   Enlarge
   A Marginated Tortoise emerges into the world.

   The incubation period averages about 100 days under natural conditions,
   which is relatively short among tortoises. Many tropical tortoises have
   incubation periods of up to 200 days. The relatively short time is an
   adaptation to the subtropical Mediterranean climate, where the summers
   are not as long. In an incubator, this time is notably shorter: with an
   incubation temperature of 31.5 °C (89 °F) the eggs will begin hatching
   after 60 days.

   Unlike bird eggs, the yolk and albumen of reptile eggs are not
   separated by a membrane. After a few days, the heavy yolk components
   sink to the bottom of the egg. On top of this floats the embryonal
   disk, surrounded by albumen. For this reason the tortoise eggs cannot
   be turned after the yolk settles without damaging or killing the
   embryo.

   It is possible to see with the naked eye if the eggs are developing
   healthily. Freshly laid eggs have a gray-white colour. Shortly
   thereafter, a bright white spot forms on the uppermost point of the
   egg. This spot gradually grows until the entire egg is bright white.

   After the embryo has developed fully in the egg, the young animal
   breaks the shell with its egg tooth from inside, creates a small
   opening, and for the first time fill its lungs with air. Afterwards, it
   pulls back into the egg and works on the shell with its beak until it
   opens completely. In nature, the animal remains below ground for the
   first two weeks. Here it is safe from predators yet is still able to
   grow, as it is nourished by the yolk sac. The young animals lead
   cautious and secretive lives, normally remaining in the shade. They
   avoid full sunlight because of the great danger of overheating.

   Marginated Tortoises grow very rapidly. In an ideal biotope, or with
   good handling, they gain 100–500  g (4–17  oz) yearly. This quick rate
   of growth lasts throughout their youth. After the twentieth year of
   life, further growth is minimal. They may live to between 100 and 140
   years, according to the best estimates of scientists.

   Free at last

               Testudo marginata young

                                      Egg shells with skins

                                                           Terrarium.

In captivity

   The tell-tale tail. The carapace protecting the tail is not divided, as
   in most tortoises.
   Enlarge
   The tell-tale tail. The carapace protecting the tail is not divided, as
   in most tortoises.

In a terrarium

   Tortoises can thrive in captivity if the owner understands their needs
   well. A heat lamp is attached to the tortoise's table, directed in such
   a way that the 60- watt reflector bulb is some 15–20 cm (6–8 in) from
   the floor of the table, which is covered with about 5 cm of substraite,
   loam based soil and play sand. When the lamp is turned on in the
   morning, the animals emerge from the ground, bask in the light to warm
   themselves, and begin to eat. They should be fed several times a day
   with clover, dandelions and garden weeds (check first as a few are
   harmful. Some owners give pellet food occasionally, these should be
   avoided, only feed your tortoise what they would naturally eat in the
   wild, their digestive systems do not cope well with protein, of which
   there is a lot in pellet foods. The animals also require ultraviolet
   light, thus they should be allowed to bask in the sunlight daily, but
   for only a short period of time. In the summer, they can be taken
   outdoors for this purpose, in the winter if not hybernated they need
   access to UVB light every day. Care must be taken to avoid allowing the
   tortoise to overheat (use a digital thermometer to keep a check).

Outdoors

   The oblong marking at the tail is a characteristic of this tortoise
   living on the edge of the marsh.
   Enlarge
   The oblong marking at the tail is a characteristic of this tortoise
   living on the edge of the marsh.

   In temperate zones, Marginated Tortoises can be kept outside from
   approximately mid-March to October. Their pen should be in the sunniest
   place in the garden, preferably close to the house. It is important to
   provide a wooden house where they can get into the shade. They should
   be provided enough gravel that they can completely bury themselves when
   needed.

   The animals will leave the house in the morning, warm themselves, and
   eat. Afterwards, they return to the house. In the late afternoon, they
   will reemerge from their shelter. Tortoises do not need as much
   sunlight as many assume is required for a reptile. By October, they
   will take longer and longer pauses during the day. At this point, they
   should be transferred into a roomy crate filled with dry leaves and
   kept in a cool room. With a temperature under 10 °C (50 °F), they will
   hibernate until mid-March, though younger animals will awaken much
   earlier.

Gallery

   Testudo marginata

   A male T. marginata marginata, identified by the long tail with broad
   base.

   A female T. marginata with a broad-edged carapace. The cloacal opening
   is visible on the tail.

   Halfbreed with father T. m. and mother T. g.

   T. marginata sarda

   A young T. marginata on its back

   Greek Tortoise
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marginated_Tortoise"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
