   #copyright

Marjoram

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Food and agriculture;
Plants

                    iMarjoram

                             Conservation status

   Secure
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Plantae
   Division: Magnoliophyta
   Class:    Magnoliopsida
   Order:    Lamiales
   Family:   Lamiaceae
   Genus:    Origanum
   Species:  O. majorana

                                Binomial name

   Origanum majorana
   L.

   Marjoram ( Origanum majorana, Lamiaceae) is a cold-sensitive perennial
   herb or undershrub with sweet pine and citrus flavours. It is also
   called Sweet Marjoram or Knotted Marjoram and Majorana hortensis.

   The name marjoram ( Old French majorane, Medieval Latin majorana) is
   not connected with the word "major".

   Marjoram is cultivated for its aromatic leaves, either green or dry,
   for culinary purposes; the tops are cut as the plants begin to flower
   and are dried slowly in the shade. It is often used in herb
   combinations such as Herbes de Provence and Za'atar.

Related species

   Oregano (Origanum vulgare, sometimes listed with Marjoram as Origanum
   majorana) is also called Wild Marjoram. It is a perennial common in
   southern Europe in dry copses and on hedge-banks, with many stout stems
   30-80 cm high, bearing short-stalked somewhat ovate leaves and clusters
   of purple flowers. It has a stronger flavor and a more penetrating
   quality.

   Pot Marjoram or Cretan Oregano (Origanum onites) has similar uses to
   marjoram.
   Bottle of Majoram spice

   Hardy Marjoram or Italian marjoram is a cross of marjoram with oregano
   that is much more resistant to cold, but is slightly less sweet.

   Origanum pulchellum, Showy Marjoram or Showy Oregano.

   ( Catalan marduix; Spanish mejorana)

Surname

   Marjoram is a surname.


                              Herbs and spices
     Herbs Basil · Bay leaf · Boldo · Borage · Chervil · Chives ·
        Coriander leaf (cilantro) · Curry leaf · Dill · Epazote ·
   Eryngium foetidum (long coriander) · Fennel · Holy basil · Houttuynia
               cordata · Hyssop · Lavender · Lemon grass ·
   Limnophila aromatica (rice paddy herb) · Lovage · Marjoram · Mint ·
Oregano · Parsley · Perilla · Rosemary · Rue · Sage · Savory · Sorrel ·
        Stevia · Tarragon · Thyme · Vietnamese coriander (rau ram)
    Spices African pepper · Ajwain (bishop's weed) · Allspice · Amchur
  (mango powder) · Anise · Asafoetida · Caraway · Cardamom · Cardamom,
  black · Cassia · Celery seed · Chili · Cinnamon · Clove · Coriander
     seed · Cubeb · Cumin · Cumin, black · Dill seed · Fenugreek ·
 Galangal · Garlic · Ginger · Grains of paradise · Horseradish · Juniper
 berry · Liquorice · Mace · Mahlab · Mustard, black · Mustard, white ·
 Nigella (kalonji) · Nutmeg · Paprika · Pepper, black · Pepper, green ·
    Pepper, pink · Pepper, white · Pomegranate seed (anardana) · Poppy
 seed · Saffron · Sarsaparilla · Sassafras · Sesame · Sichuan pepper ·
      Star anise · Sumac · Tamarind · Turmeric · Wasabi · Zedoary

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marjoram"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
