   #copyright

Mark Twain House

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Architecture

   South view of the Mark Twain House
   Enlarge
   South view of the Mark Twain House

   The Mark Twain House was the home of Mark Twain (a.k.a. Samuel
   Langhorne Clemens) from 1871 to 1891 in Hartford, Connecticut, USA.
   Prior to 1871, Twain had lived in Hannibal, Missouri. The architectural
   style of the 19-room house itself is Victorian Gothic.

   The house is also notable for the major works written during his
   residency, including The Gilded Age, The Adventures of Tom Sawyer, The
   Prince and the Pauper, Life on the Mississippi, Huckleberry Finn, A
   Tramp Abroad and A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court.

   Bad financial investments caused the Twain family to move to Europe,
   and when they returned to Connecticut in 1900 he lived in a house built
   for him in Stormfield, Connecticut, where he died on April 21st, 1910.
   It functioned as a school, an apartment building and a library since,
   but since 1974 it is a National Historic Landmark, and has had a
   multi-million dollar renovation and an expansion dedicated to
   showcasing his life and work.
   The library features hand-stenciled paneling, fireplaces from India,
   embossed wallpapers and an enormous handcarved mantel that the Twains
   purchased in Scotland (HABS photo)
   Enlarge
   The library features hand-stenciled paneling, fireplaces from India,
   embossed wallpapers and an enormous handcarved mantel that the Twains
   purchased in Scotland ( HABS photo)

Life in the house

   Mark Twain moved to Hartford in 1871 and purchased the property for his
   new house in north Hartford. He did so to be closer to his publisher,
   American Publishing Company. When the house was being built, the
   Hartford Daily Times noted, "The novelty displayed in the architecture
   of the building, the oddity of its internal arrangement and the fame of
   its owner will all conspire to make it a house of note for a long time
   to come." The total cost of the house was 40,000 dollars, paid out of
   Mrs. Clemens' inheritance. During his time in Connecticut, the family
   remarked "(the house) had a heart, and a soul, and eyes to see us
   with."

   The house was built on 3.5 acres of land and designed with seven
   bedrooms, seven bathrooms, a carriage house and plant-filled
   conservatory. Bay windows extend up to form turrets which were topped
   with porches, allowing Twain and guests a view of what was at one time
   a very pastoral area of Hartford. The top floor was the billiards room
   and his private study, where Twain would write late at night; the room
   was strictly off limits to all but the cleaning staff. It was also used
   for entertaining male guests with cigars and liquor. Twain had said
   "There ought to be a room in this house to swear in," Twain once said.
   "It's dangerous to have to repress an emotion like that." The children
   also had their own area, with a nursery and a playroom/classroom. And
   Twain played with his children in the conservatory, pretending to be an
   elephant in an imaginary safari. Twain noted the house "was of us, and
   we were in its confidence and lived in its grace and in the peace of
   its benediction."

   Twain loved living in the house, partly because he knew many different
   authors from his Hartford neighbourhood, such as Harriet Beecher Stowe
   who lived next door, and Isabella Beecher Hooker. Also, he would stop
   in to visit his friend, actor William Gillette at Gillette Castle
   (today Gillette Castle State Park). In 1881, with the success of Tom
   Sawyer, Twain had Louis Comfort Tiffany supervise the interior
   decoration of the house. Twain was also fascinated with new
   technologies, leading to the installation of an early telephone in the
   entrance hall. In that same year, Twain formed the firm Charles L.
   Webster & Company, which published Twain's writings along with Ulysses
   S. Grant's memoirs.

   The company when bankrupt in 1894 because of the automated typesetting
   machine, leaving Twain with a large amount of debt. After enduring
   several bank panics and losses from investments in a typesetting
   machine, the Twains moved to Europe in 1891 where living was cheaper.
   Twain began lecturing across the continent to recoup some money for
   their family, but tragedy prevented their return to the house. In 1893
   Twain's publishing company went bankrupt, Susy Clemens died of
   meningitis in 1896 after a visit to Hartford and Olivia refused to ever
   visited the house again. In 1903 the house was sold.

Post-Twain

   In 1905 the house was significantly repaired, but it was also
   significantly altered, deviating from its original design. This was
   known to have caused marked uproar among the Northeastern Missouri
   intelligensia. The chimneys and brick work were also altered. The house
   was then used as a private home, a boys school, and an apartment
   building. In 1929, a group of preservationists called the Friends of
   Hartford formed the Mark Twain Memorial and Library Commission and
   purchased the building to prevent its demolition and rented the ground
   floor to meet expenses. During this period doors were added to the
   building, further deviating from the original design. The house was
   restored in the 1950s and declared a National Historic Landmark in
   1963. The house was opened as a museum in the 1960s. The process of
   paying off the mortgage, raising money to restore the deteriorating
   property, and retrieving artifacts, furnishings, and personal
   possessions took many decades and ended in 1974, just in time for the
   100th anniversary of the house. The house earned the David E. Finley
   Award in 1977 for "exemplary restoration" from the National Trust for
   Historic Preservation.
   Entrance hall and main staircase (HABS photo)
   Enlarge
   Entrance hall and main staircase ( HABS photo)

   Restoration and preservation at the Mark Twain House helped bring the
   house and grounds back to the years between 1881 and 1891, when the
   Twains most loved the house. The marble floor in the front hallway
   underwent a historic restoration, and specialists re-stenciled and
   painted the walls and ceilings and refinishing the woodwork to recover
   the Tiffany-decorated interiors. Restoration was funded in part by two
   federal Save America’s Treasures grants totaling $3 million. Scanning
   computers were also utilized in the restoration. The home today
   contains 50,000 artifacts; manuscripts, historic photographs, family
   furnishings, and Tiffany Glass. Many of the original furnishings,
   including Twain's ornate Venetian bed, an intricately carved mantel
   from a Scottish castle, and a billiard table, remain at the house.

   With the number of admissions leveling off around 53,000, the houses
   trustees decided that they must expand or be forced to shrink their
   operations. They commissioned Robert A. M. Stern, the founder of the
   Manhattan architectural firm that is currently named after him and the
   dean of the Yale School of Architecture, to design a visitor's centre
   that would not draw attention away from the house. The new Education
   and Visitors Center was also built adjacent to Twain’s Carriage House.
   The new centre is a $16.3 million, 35,000-square-foot facility that
   will house artifacts from the museum’s collection that cannot currently
   be shown in the House itself. It contains a lecture hall and classroom
   facilities. The house will receive one million dollars from the state
   government to meet expenses related to the construction of the museum
   and restoration of the house. Since the museum opened in November 2003,
   there has been an increase in attendance of 15 percent. The house
   generates five million dollars in tourism from 50,000 visitors. The
   Aetna foundation gave 500,000 dollars to the campaign. The National
   Endowment for the Humanities also granted 800,000 dollars in challenge
   grants for teacher development programs, a student writing contest and
   an educational Web site.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Twain_House"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
