   #copyright

Mark Webber

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Sports and games people

                         Mark Webber
   Webber in Sydney before the start of the 2005 season
   F1 Record
          Nationality         Australia Australian
             Car #            9
          Current team        Williams- Cosworth
         Team for 2007        Red Bull Racing
          Grands Prix         85
      World Championships     0
              Wins            0
        Podium finishes       1
         Pole positions       0
          Fastest laps        0
        First Grand Prix      2002 Australian Grand Prix
        Last Grand Prix       2006 Brazilian Grand Prix
   2006 Championship position 14th (7 pts)
                                                       edit

   Mark Alan Webber (born August 27, 1976) is an Australian Formula One
   driver. He was born in Queanbeyan, New South Wales, son of Alan, the
   local motorcycle dealer. He is the first Australian to race in Formula
   One since David Brabham in 1994.

   After some racing success in Australia, Webber moved to the UK in 1995
   to further his motorsports career. He continued to win, although he
   gained his biggest headlines while driving for the Mercedes-Benz sports
   car squad at Le Mans in 1999 where he had two spectacular accidents
   during practice and warmup in which an aerodynamic fault caused the car
   to somersault off the Mulsanne straight. After Mercedes' withdrawal
   from the race, Webber began a partnership with fellow Australian Paul
   Stoddart, at that time owner of the European racing Formula 3000 team,
   which eventually took them both into Formula One when Stoddart bought
   the Minardi team.

   Webber made an emotional debut in Formula One in 2002, scoring
   Minardi's first points in three years at his and Stoddart's home race.
   After an impressive first season, Jaguar Racing took him on as lead
   driver. During two years with the generally uncompetitive team Webber
   several times qualified on the front two rows of the grid and
   outperformed his team mates. He joined the former championship winning
   Williams team in 2005, for whom he achieved his best finish in Formula
   One to date; a third place at the 2005 Monaco Grand Prix.

   Webber is a keen sportsman away from the track. He has won the annual
   F1 Pro-Am tennis tournament in Barcelona three times and has recently
   set up the 'Mark Webber Pure Tasmania Challenge' trek across Tasmania
   to raise funds for cancer charities.

Early career

   Mark Webber was born in Queanbeyan, New South Wales, son of Alan, the
   local motorcycle dealer. He started his relationship with sport young,
   working as a ball-boy for premiership winning rugby league team the
   Canberra Raiders during the late 1980s. However, motorsport was where
   his interest lay, later listing Formula One World Champion Alain Prost
   and Grand Prix motorcycle racer Kevin Schwantz as his childhood heroes.
   Starting out racing motorcycles, Webber moved to four wheels in 1991,
   taking up karting at the relatively late age of 15. He won the New
   South Wales state championship in 1993, and moved straight into the
   Australian Formula Ford Championship after his father bought him an ex-
   Craig Lowndes Van Diemen FF1600. Working as a driving instructor at
   Sydney's Oran Park Raceway between races, Webber finished 14th overall
   in his debut season. Continuing in the series in 1995, Webber scored
   several victories, including a win in the support race for the
   Australian Grand Prix at Adelaide. He finished the series in fourth
   place, but perhaps more importantly, teamed up with Championship
   co-ordinator Ann Neal, who secured him a seven-year sponsorship with
   Australian Yellow Pages, and would become his manager and accompany him
   on a trip to England in an attempt to start a career in Europe.

   Webber was given a test at Snetterton with the Van Diemen team, and
   subsequently earned a works drive for the team at the 1995 Formula Ford
   Festival, held at Brands Hatch. He finished third in his first
   international race, a result good enough to see him retained by the
   team for the 1996 Championship. Before moving to Europe permanently,
   Webber won the Formula Holden race at the 1996 Australian Grand Prix in
   Melbourne. During the 1996 British Formula Ford Championship, Webber
   took four victories on his way to second place overall, finishing his
   season strongly with a win in the Formula Ford Festival. He also won
   the Spa-Francorchamps race of the Formula Ford Euro Cup, taking third
   in the series despite competing in only two of the three rounds. His
   results throughout the year saw him voted as Australian motorsport's
   "Young Achiever" and "International Achiever" of 1996. Two days after
   his Festival victory, Webber completed a successful test for Alan
   Docking Racing, and was signed by the team to graduate to Formula Three
   in 1997.

   Without the financial backing he had enjoyed during his time in Formula
   Ford, Webber and his team struggled to find the money to fund their
   championship campaign. He was almost forced to quit halfway through the
   season, but was able to obtain personal support from Australian rugby
   union legend David Campese, which helped him to complete the year.
   Webber took victory in just his fourth ever F3 race, at Brands Hatch,
   leading from start to finish and setting a new lap record in the
   process. He took a further four podium finishes, including a second
   place in the support race for the 1997 British Grand Prix, and finished
   the season in fourth overall. Webber also took strong finishes in the
   Marlboro Masters at Zandvoort (3rd) and the F3 Macao Grand Prix (4th),
   both times making his circuit debut. During the 1997 season, Webber was
   approached by Mercedes-AMG to participate in a sports car race. He
   initially declined the offer, but at the end of the year he was invited
   to participate in a test session for the team at A1-Ring in Austria.
   AMG were suitably impressed with Webber, and he was signed as the
   official Mercedes works junior driver for the 1998 FIA GT Championship,
   alongside reigning champion Bernd Schneider. Travelling around the
   world, including the United States, Japan and Europe, the pair won five
   of the ten rounds on their way to second in the overall standings,
   remarkably beaten to the Championship by teammates Klaus Ludwig and
   Ricardo Zonta by just 8 seconds in the final race at Laguna Seca.

   Webber remained with the AMG team for 1999, and was promoted to his own
   race car for the season. However, his sportscar career came to an early
   end after he flipped twice on the straight in the lead up to the 24
   Hours of Le Mans race that year. An aerodynamic fault on the team's
   Mercedes-Benz CLRs caused Webber to spectacularly become airborne
   during both practice and race-day warm up, with the same fate befalling
   teammate Peter Dumbreck five hours into the race. Both drivers escaped
   uninjured, but the crashes forced Mercedes to shelve their sportscar
   program for the year and Webber to reconsider a return to open wheel
   racing. Webber spoke to Formula One team owner Eddie Jordan, who
   introduced him to fellow Australian Paul Stoddart. Stoddart offered to
   undercut the necessary $1.1 million budget for Webber, and gave him a
   drive in his Eurobet Arrows Formula 3000 team for 2000. As a result,
   Webber also got his first taste of a Formula One car, completing a
   two-day test at Barcelona in December 1999 for the Arrows F1 team.

   Webber was signed as test driver for the Arrows F1 team for 2000, and
   also gained sponsorship from Australian beer company Foster's whilst
   competing in the F3000 Championship. Webber took victory in round two
   of the season at Silverstone Circuit, and finished the series with two
   fastest laps and three podiums on his way to third overall - the
   highest position of any rookie that year. Contract issues meant that
   Webber was never able to drive the Arrows A21 car, and rejected an
   offer of a full contract for 2001 in July. However, he was offered a
   three day evaluation test for Benetton at the end of the year,
   outpacing F1 drivers Ralf Schumacher and Giancarlo Fisichella at
   Estoril. The results were good enough to earn him the test driver role
   with the team for 2001, and he also agreed to take on team boss Flavio
   Briatore as manager in return for finance for a further F3000 season.
   Webber joined the championship-winning Super Nova Racing team, and
   despite winning at Imola, Monaco and Magny-Cours, he finished second
   overall to British driver Justin Wilson. Webber was replaced as test
   driver for Benetton for 2002 by Fernando Alonso, but Briatore managed
   to secure Webber a contract to race alongside Alex Yoong in the
   Stoddart-owned Minardi team, making him the first Australian in Formula
   One since David Brabham in 1994.

Formula One career

2002

   Webber made his Formula One debut at his home race, the 2002 Australian
   Grand Prix. He qualified 18th of the 22 cars, over 4 seconds away from
   the pole position time, but 1.4 seconds ahead of teammate Yoong. The
   start of the race featured a spectacular accident between Ralf
   Schumacher and Rubens Barrichello, the aftermath of which forced 8 cars
   to retire from the race. Webber, who had a problem with his launch
   control at the start, battled with a broken differential to fend off
   the experienced Mika Salo and finish fifth. The result made Webber just
   the fourth Australian F1 driver to score World Championship points, and
   the first Minardi driver to score points since Marc Gené in 1999.
   Webber was forced into retirement in the Malaysian Grand Prix, before
   picking up consecutive 11th-place finishes in the following two races.
   He, along with Yoong, was forced to pull out of the Spanish Grand Prix
   due to potentially dangerous wing failures during the weekend. Webber
   picked up two more 11th place finishes, but was unable to score points
   for the remainder of the year, his next best result coming in the
   French Grand Prix, where he finished 8th. In the Hungarian Grand Prix,
   Webber lost two kilograms in weight over the length of the race as he
   was forced to drive without a drink after his water bottle broke.
   Webber was able to outqualify Yoong (and Anthony Davidson, who replaced
   Yoong for the Hungarian and Belgian Grands Prix) in every race, and his
   two points in Australia were the only points that Minardi scored all
   season, helping them to 9th in the Constructors' Championship, ahead of
   Toyota and Arrows. Webber's results earned him the "Rookie of the Year"
   award in F1 Racing magazine's annual Man of the Year awards (receiving
   53.70% of public votes), the Autosport.com "Rookie of the Year" award
   and "F1 Newcomer of the Year" at the annual Grand Prix Party "Bernie"
   Awards. In light of his season, notable Formula One journalist Peter
   Windsor related Webber to 1992 World Champion Nigel Mansell, saying
   they had similar amounts of "raw talent". In November 2002, it was
   announced that Webber would join Jaguar Racing for the following
   season, alongside Brazilian Williams test driver Antônio Pizzonia.

2003

   Webber's Jaguar career started disappointingly, as he qualified in 14th
   place for the 2003 Australian Grand Prix before being forced to retire
   on lap 15 with a rear suspension failure. The following race in
   Malaysia was even more dramatic for Webber, as Giancarlo Fisichella
   began reversing towards him on the starting grid, before Webber's
   in-car fire extinguisher discharged into his face and he was eventually
   forced to retire from 8th with an oil consumption problem. Webber took
   a remarkable provisional pole position in Friday qualifying of the
   Brazilian Grand Prix, outqualifying local driver Rubens Barrichello by
   0.138 seconds in a rain-affected session. He continued his good
   performance in the Saturday session, taking a career-best 3rd on the
   grid, a result which was also Jaguar Racing's best qualifying
   performance in their four-year Formula 1 history. In the race, which
   was hit heavily by rain, Webber was sitting in seventh place when he
   attempted to cool his tyres by driving through a puddle lying off-line
   in the final corner. The resultant lack of grip caused Webber to crash
   heavily into the pit straight tyre barriers, leaving debris on the
   track which caused a second major crash. The race was subsequently
   red-flagged, and although Webber was originally classified in 7th, an
   FIA investigation found a timekeeping error, and Webber was placed 9th
   in the re-classification. Webber's good qualifying form continued into
   the San Marino Grand Prix, but he dropped from 5th to 11th by the first
   corner due to a launch control failure that affected both Jaguars, and
   he retired from the race after 54 laps with a driveshaft failure, his
   fourth consecutive non-finish for the year. His luck improved in the
   following races though, taking his first points in Spain and signing a
   new 2-year contract with the team reportedly worth $US6 million per
   season. He then went on to score points in five of the next six races
   on his way to moving into the top 10 in the World Drivers'
   Championship, the run of results interrupted only by an engine failure
   in Monaco. One of his best races came in Austria, where despite
   starting from the pitlane and suffering a drive-through penalty, he set
   the race's third fastest lap (behind only the Ferraris of Michael
   Schumacher and Rubens Barrichello), and finished in 7th.
   Webber's 2003 helmet design
   Enlarge
   Webber's 2003 helmet design

   After the British Grand Prix, which Webber finished 14th, he had scored
   12 Championship points compared to Pizzonia's 0, and after much
   speculation it was announced that Minardi driver Justin Wilson would
   replace the Brazilian for the remainder of the year. The German Grand
   Prix saw Webber's sixth retirement for the season, after he made a
   desperate last lap lunge on Jenson Button in an attempt to salvage a
   point from the weekend. Consecutive points finishes in Hungary and
   Italy saw Webber climb to ninth in the drivers' standings, with a 5
   point margin to Button. He was unable to hold onto his position
   however, as one too many laps on dry tyres saw him spin out from the
   lead of the United States Grand Prix, and a disappointing 11th-place
   result in the Japanese Grand Prix meant he finished on equal points
   with Button, but lost out on a countback. Although Wilson scored a
   point in the United States Grand Prix, Webber had still never been
   outqualified by a teammate, and late in the year, Jaguar announced that
   rookie Christian Klien would team up with Webber for the 2004 season.
   Webber's results again earned him plaudits in the press, winning the
   2003 "Driver of the Year" award from Autocar magazine.

2004

   Continuing with Jaguar in 2004, Webber qualified sixth fastest for the
   first race of the season, the Australian Grand Prix, but faced his
   second consecutive retirement from his home race, this time due to a
   gearbox failure. The following race, the Malaysian Grand Prix, Webber
   produced the best qualifying performance of his career, splitting the
   dominant Ferraris to line up 2nd on the grid. The race was
   disappointing though, a stall at the start meaning he was well outside
   the top 10 by the time the cars reached turn 1. An aggressive lap saw
   him move up to ninth place, but during an exciting battle with Ralf
   Schumacher, the German collided with him and forced Webber to pit with
   damage to his front wing and tyre. In his desperation to make up for
   the lost time, Webber exceeded the pitlane speed limit and was handed a
   drive-through penalty, which left him even further behind. More
   frustration eventually led to the end of his race, as he spun into the
   gravel trap on the outside of the final corner on lap 23. The situation
   improved for the following race in Bahrain though, as Webber picked up
   his first point for the season despite a small mistake in qualifying
   which left him in 14th and marked the first time he had been
   outqualified by his teammate in F1. He was unable to continue his
   pointscoring form, however, as intermittent electrical problems in San
   Marino and a lack of grip in Spain meant that he could do no better
   than 13th and 12th in those races.

   Amid Jaguar's announcements of special one-race sponsorship deals with
   movie Ocean's Twelve and diamond company Steinmetz Group, Webber
   suffered two engine failures in practice for the Monaco Grand Prix, the
   first of which forced Webber to extinguish it himself after being
   unable to find a trackside marshall willing to help. In the race
   itself, Webber was forced to retire due to a loss of engine power, but
   he was able to pick up two Championship points in the following race
   with a seventh place finish in the European Grand Prix. Webber lined up
   14th on the grid after being handed a one-second penalty for yellow
   flag infringements during Friday practice, but was able to move through
   the field to take his points tally to 3. After the race he was
   criticised by Michael Schumacher for refusing to yield after Webber
   emerged from his pit stop slightly ahead of (but one lap behind)
   Schumacher, although after hearing the comments, Webber said he "would
   do exactly the same again" in the same situation.
   Mark Webber driving for Jaguar at the 2004 United States Grand Prix
   Enlarge
   Mark Webber driving for Jaguar at the 2004 United States Grand Prix

   Consecutive retirements in Canada (hit by Klien) and the United States
   (oil leak) and a 9th place finish in the French Grand Prix preceded a
   further point in the British Grand Prix, although his total of 4 points
   compared unfavourably to his 12 scored by the same time in the previous
   season. It was at this stage that former teammate Pizzonia returned to
   racing as a replacement for the injured Ralf Schumacher, and upon his
   return he accused Jaguar of favouritism towards Webber during their
   time as teammates, saying that Webber received new car parts one or two
   races before Pizzonia. The claims were categorically denied by Jaguar
   boss David Pitchforth, and whilst Webber did not publicly comment on
   the situation at the time, he picked up his best finish of the season
   by finishing sixth in the German Grand Prix, running ahead of Pizzonia
   for the entire race. Meanwhile, reports emerged that Jaguar could not
   guarantee that they would compete in Formula One for the 2005 season,
   and on July 28 it was announced that Webber would drive for WilliamsF1
   for 2005 and beyond, later admitting this was the team that his "heart
   was always set on" throughout negotiations. Webber was unable to build
   on his points tally, however as a 10th place in Hungary, followed by a
   first-lap accident in Belgium, 9th in Italy and 10th in China saw him
   sitting 13th in the Championship. The penultimate race of the season in
   Japan saw Webber produce another good qualifying effort as he set the
   third fastest time, but his race ended prematurely as he suffered from
   a badly overheating cockpit, the cause of which could not be determined
   by Jaguar. The Brazilian Grand Prix marked Webber's last race for
   Jaguar, and Jaguar's last in Formula One, but it ended sadly for the
   team, as Klien turned in on and collided with Webber as the Australian
   attempted to make up for a pit stop delay earlier in the race. Webber
   was forced to retire due to the damage and watched the remainder of the
   race from the grass on the outside of turn 1 as Klien finished 14th.

   Webber was granted an early release from his Jaguar contract to be
   allowed to test with his new team Williams over the winter. Williams
   had announced earlier that Jenson Button would drive for the team in
   2005 alongside Webber, but after claims the Brit was still contracted
   to BAR, his contract with Williams was overturned. With his new
   teammate undecided, and apparently going down to a "shootout" between
   Nick Heidfeld and Pizzonia, Webber hit back at Pizzonia's claims of
   unfair treatment during 2003, claiming the Brazilian was lying and
   saying he was a "loser" for believing that there was favouritism
   towards Webber, comments which led to a reprimand from his new team.

2005

   Heidfeld was finally announced as Webber's 2005 teammate at the
   Williams season launch on January 31, with Webber admitting he was
   pleased with the eventual decision. Webber's move to Williams brought
   about comparisons to Alan Jones, Australia's last F1 World Champion
   (also in a Williams) and expectations were high as Webber's former team
   boss Paul Stoddart predicted Webber would take his first victory in
   2005, while Williams technical director Sam Michael said Webber would
   eventually win the World Championship with Williams. In his first race
   for the team, the 2005 Australian Grand Prix, Webber took 3rd on the
   grid but was beaten to the first corner by David Coulthard and
   eventually finished fifth – still unable to improve on his best F1
   finish. His best chance to do so though came in the following race in
   Malaysia. After qualifying fourth, Webber was running behind the
   Renault of Giancarlo Fisichella, who was struggling due to a lack of
   downforce and tyre grip. As Webber closed in and attempted a pass
   around the outside of turn 15, Fisichella locked up his brakes and slid
   into the side of Webber's car, eliminating both drivers from the race.
   Fisichella was later reprimanded by race stewards because of the
   incident, but as Heidfeld took third in place of Webber, the weekend
   came to epitomise Webber's growing reputation as a fast qualifier who
   did not perform well under pressure in race situations. It was later
   revealed that Webber had competed in the first two races carrying a
   fractured rib, an injury he had sustained during pre-season testing at
   Barcelona, though he "didn't want to make a fuss" about it and would be
   fully fit in time for the Bahrain Grand Prix.

   After qualifying fifth in Bahrain, a spin under pressure from Kimi
   Räikkönen whilst in third place saw Webber ultimately finish sixth,
   taking his points tally to 7 for the season. He followed this up by
   qualifying fourth and finishing a disappointing 10th after twice
   running wide off the track in the San Marino Grand Prix, although his
   position was revised to 7th after the disqualification of the BAR team
   and a penalty to Ralf Schumacher. The race was a poor one for Williams
   (Heidfeld was 9th before the reclassification), but Webber hit back at
   the Spanish Grand Prix, qualifying 2nd and finishing 6th – his fourth
   pointscoring finish in the first five races. The following race in
   Monaco saw Webber take the first podium finish of his career, with
   third. On the rostrum however, Webber looked noticeably disappointed
   with the result after losing second to teammate Heidfeld in a pitstop
   sequence towards the end of the race. The best result of Webber's
   career was followed by one of his worst at the European Grand Prix.
   After qualifying third, Webber locked his brakes and had a collision
   with Juan Pablo Montoya in the very first corner of the race, forcing
   him to retire as Heidfeld went from pole position to take an impressive
   second-place finish, overtaking Webber in the Championship in the
   process. The following race in Canada was affected by this result, as
   Webber was only able to qualify 14th, but he was pleased with an
   eventual 5th-place finish and a further 4 Championship points. The
   United States Grand Prix (where only 6 cars took part) was the
   beginning of a lean streak for Webber, with just one pointscoring
   finish in the next seven races, a seventh in Hungary, but by this stage
   he had slipped from 6th to 10th in the World Championship. Webber had
   another poor race in Turkey, where he collided with Michael Schumacher,
   causing extensive damage to both cars.

   With Heidfeld injured, Webber's former Jaguar teammate Antônio Pizzonia
   stepped into the second Williams seat, with added pressure on Webber to
   perform well given the public argument the pair had towards the end of
   2004. The Italian Grand Prix saw Pizzonia gain the upper hand, driving
   to seventh whilst Webber was caught up in a first-corner incident which
   saw him finish 14th. The roles were reversed for the following race in
   Belgium, as Webber raced to fourth but Pizzonia retired after a
   collision with Juan Pablo Montoya in the closing laps. With rumours
   that Heidfeld had in fact signed with BMW Sauber for the 2006 season
   spreading, Pizzonia continued in the race seat, and in the Brazilian
   Grand Prix, was clipped by David Coulthard in turn one. The contact
   caused Pizzonia to spin into the path of Webber, forcing extensive
   repairs to the Australian's car. Webber eventually finished 17th and
   set the race's 8th fastest lap, but was not classified as a finisher.
   The final two races of the season saw Webber take 4th and 7th to
   consolidate his 10th place in the Drivers' Championship. Webber
   described the 2005 season as "frustrating" and acknowledged that his
   reputation had somewhat diminished, but he opted to stay on with
   Williams despite an offer from BMW Sauber. Webber's teammate for 2006
   would be German Nico Rosberg, becoming the seventh different driver to
   partner Webber since 2002.

2006

   For the first time in Webber's career, the first race of the season was
   not held in Melbourne, and instead was in Bahrain. Webber qualified 7th
   and had a solid race to finish 6th and pick up 3 Championship points.
   Although Webber was considered by some to have the better race
   performance, this was generally overlooked for the fact that Rosberg
   set the fastest lap in his debut race and moved through the field well
   after a first-lap incident. The following two races, in Malaysia and
   Australia were cut short due to mechanical problems. In Malaysia,
   Webber started 4th on the grid and was still running in that position
   before a hydraulics failure ended his race on lap 14. In his home race,
   Webber qualified seventh and was leading the race (before his first pit
   stop) when his gearbox failed on lap 22. A sixth-place finish in San
   Marino saw Webber move up to 9th in the Championship, but in the
   European Grand Prix hydraulics failure struck again to end his race
   after he had fought up to 12th from 19th on the grid (due to a
   mid-weekend engine change).

   The Spanish Grand Prix marked the first time Webber failed to make the
   top-10 cutoff in the new qualifying system, and he struggled during the
   race to eventually finish ninth. Monaco, however, saw a huge
   improvement, with Webber qualifying on the front row (after Michael
   Schumacher's grid penalty) and holding third for a large part of the
   race before retiring with a cracked exhaust. In the 2006 British Grand
   Prix Webber crashed out on the first lap after an incident with Ralf
   Schumacher and Scott Speed. In France, Webber suffered a spectacular
   tyre blowout at maximum speed. He gathered it up & parked it in the
   garage. Germany was one of Webber's strongest races of the year. He was
   on target for a podium until Mechanical failure stopped him in his
   tracks with only 9 laps to go. The Hungarian Grand Prix was another
   retirement for Webber, as he slid into a barrier in the wet conditions
   and crushed his front wing under the chassis of the Williams.

Future

   Webber's contract with Williams finishes at the end of the 2006 season.
   Although Webber had expressed his desire to stay with the team Williams
   announced on the 3rd of August, 2006 that they had decided to promote
   current test driver Alex Wurz to a race seat. Williams team boss Sir
   Frank Williams stated that he was reluctant to wait for Webber to
   commit to the team once the option for future years had expired, though
   he did not blame Webber for waiting to see if there was a seat
   available at another team. Webber is managed by Renault boss Flavio
   Briatore who will be losing Fernando Alonso to McLaren for 2007 and
   expressed his praise for Webber after the 2006 Monaco Grand Prix,
   leading to speculation that Webber would join the French team for next
   season. However, recent ties to Austrian energy drink giant Red Bull's
   racing team strongly suggested that this would be Mark's future home
   and on August 7 and it was announced that Webber had indeed joined Red
   Bull Racing for 2007 to partner David Coulthard at the Milton Keynes
   based team. Webber replaces former team mate Christian Klien and will
   partner David Coulthard.

Season summaries

     * 2002: Minardi- Asiatech – 16 starts, 2 pts, 16th in Championship
     * 2003: Jaguar- Cosworth – 16 starts, 17 pts, 10th in Championship
     * 2004: Jaguar- Cosworth – 18 starts, 7 pts, 13th in Championship
     * 2005: Williams- BMW – 19 starts, 1 podium, 36 pts, 10th in
       Championship
     * 2006: Williams- Cosworth – 14 starts, 7 pts, 14th in Championship

Complete Formula One results

   ( key)
   Year Team 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Team WDC
   Points
   2002 Minardi AUS
   5 MYS
   Ret BRA
   11 SMR
   11 ESP
   DNS AUT
   12 MON
   11 CAN
   11 EUR
   15 GBR
   Ret FRA
   8 DEU
   Ret HUN
   16 BEL
   Ret ITA
   Ret USA
   Ret JPN
   10 Minardi 16th 2
   2003 Jaguar AUS
   Ret MYS
   Ret BRA
   9 SMR
   Ret ESP
   7 AUT
   7 MON
   Ret CAN
   7 EUR
   6 FRA
   6 GBR
   14 DEU
   11 HUN
   6 ITA
   7 USA
   Ret JPN
   11 Jaguar 10th 17
   2004 Jaguar AUS
   Ret MYS
   Ret BAH
   8 SMR
   13 ESP
   12 MON
   Ret EUR
   7 CAN
   Ret USA
   Ret FRA
   9 GBR
   8 DEU
   6 HUN
   10 BEL
   Ret ITA
   9 CHN
   10 JPN
   Ret BRA
   Ret Jaguar 13th 7
   2005 Williams AUS
   5 MYS
   Ret BAH
   6 SMR
   7 ESP
   6 MON
   3 EUR
   Ret CAN
   5 USA
   DNS FRA
   12 GBR
   11 DEU
   Ret HUN
   7 TUR
   Ret ITA
   14 BEL
   4 BRA
   Ret JPN
   4 CHN
   7 Williams 10th 36
   2006 Williams BAH
   6 MYS
   Ret AUS
   Ret SMR
   6 EUR
   Ret ESP
   9 MON
   Ret GBR
   Ret CAN
   12 USA
   Ret FRA
   Ret GER
   Ret HUN
   Ret TUR
   10 ITA
   10 CHN
   8 JPN
   Ret BRA
   Ret Williams 14th 7

Outside motorsport

   Webber lives in Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, England with his
   girlfriend/manager Ann Neal. Outside motorsport, Webber enjoys "most
   outdoor pursuits" including road cycling, mountain biking, tennis and
   fitness training. He has won the annual F1 Pro-Am tennis tournament in
   Barcelona three times (2002, 2004 and 2005), coming runner-up to Juan
   Pablo Montoya in 2003.

Charity Challenge

   Route map for Webber's 2003 Challenge
   Enlarge
   Route map for Webber's 2003 Challenge

   In November 2003, Webber set up and competed in a 10-day trek across
   Tasmania in an attempt to raise funds for children's cancer research
   charities. Starting in Marrawah on the state's west coast, the trek
   involved 1,000 km of cycling, kayaking and trekking along the southern
   coast and finished at Coles Bay in the east. Four teams of four
   competitors each started the trek, with only two teams (including
   Webber's) completing the entire journey. Along the way, Australian
   sporting stars Pat Rafter, Steve Waugh, Cathy Freeman, James Tomkins,
   Guy Andrews and actor Joel Edgerton completed certain parts of the
   trek. The challenge concluded with a black tie dinner and auction to
   raise funds. Webber said he was driven to organise the event after the
   death of his grandfather to cancer, as well as his experiences with
   friends whose children had battled the disease.

   With Webber's switch from Jaguar to Williams at the end of 2004, the
   challenge was postponed until 2006, when he was able to secure a
   three-year deal with the Tasmanian Government to hold the event. In
   2006 the event (now named the "Mark Webber Pure Tasmania Challenge")
   will be over six days and 600 km, with up to 12 teams competing. In
   addition to funds raised by the challenge, Webber has announced that
   all proceeds from his 2006 merchandise range will be given to cancer
   charities through his "Mark Webber Challenge Foundation".
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Webber"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
