   #copyright

Marshall Islands

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Oceania
(Australasia)

   Aolepān Aorōkin M̧ajeļ
   Republic of the Marshall Islands

   Flag of Marshall Islands Coat of arms of Marshall Islands
   Flag                     Coat of arms
   Motto: "Jepilpilin ke ejukaan"
   Anthem: Forever Marshall Islands
   Location of Marshall Islands
   Capital
   (and largest city) Majuro
   7°7′N 171°4′E
   Official languages Marshallese, English
   Government
    - President Kessai Note
   Independence
    - from the United States October 21, 1986
   Area
    - Total 181 km² ( 213th)
   69.8 sq mi
    - Water (%) negligible
   Population
    - July 2005 estimate 61,963 ( 205th)
    - 2003 census 56,429
    - Density 326/km² ( 28th)
   846/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2001 estimate
    - Total $115 million ( 220th)
    - Per capita $1,600 (2001 est.) ( 195th)
   HDI  (n/a) n/a (unranked) ( n/a)
   Currency United States dollar ( USD)
   Time zone ( UTC+12)
   Internet TLD .mh
   Calling code +692

   The Marshall Islands, officially the Republic of the Marshall Islands
   (RMI), is a Micronesian island nation in the western Pacific Ocean,
   located north of Nauru and Kiribati, east of the Federated States of
   Micronesia and south of the U.S. territory of Wake Island.

History

   Although they were settled by Micronesians in the 2nd millennium BC,
   little is known of the early history of the islands. Spanish explorer
   Alonso de Salazar was the first European to sight the Marshalls in
   1526, but the islands remained virtually unvisited by Europeans for
   several more centuries, before being visited by British captain John
   Marshall in 1788; the islands owe their name to him.

   A German trading company settled on the islands in 1885, and they
   became part of the protectorate of German New Guinea some years later.
   Japan conquered the islands in World War I, and administered them as a
   League of Nations mandate.

   In World War II, the United States occupied the islands ( 1944), and
   they were added to the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands
   (including several more island groups in the South Sea). Between 1946
   and 1958 the USA tested 67 nuclear weapons in the Marshall Islands,
   including the largest nuclear test the US ever conducted, Castle Bravo.
   Nuclear claims between the United States and the Marshall Islands are
   ongoing, and health effects still linger from these tests. (see
   Rongelap)

   In 1979 the Government of the Marshall Islands is officially
   established and the country becomes self-governing. In 1986 the Compact
   of Free Association with the United States enters into force, granting
   the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI) its sovereignty. The Compact
   also provides for aid and US defense of the islands in exchange for
   continued US military use of the missile testing range at Kwajalein
   Atoll. The independence was formally completed under international law
   in 1990, when the UN officially ended the Trusteeship status.

Administrative divisions

   The Marshall Islands have no formal administrative division, but are
   divided into twenty-six legislative districts, which correspond to the
   inhabited islands and atolls of the country:
     * Ailinglaplap Atoll
     * Ailuk Atoll
     * Arno Atoll
     * Aur Atoll
     * Ebon Atoll
     * Enewetak Atoll
     * Jabat Island
     * Jaluit Atoll
     * Kili Island
     * Kwajalein Atoll
     * Lae Atoll
     * Lib Island
     * Likiep Atoll

                           * Majuro Atoll
                           * Maloelap Atoll
                           * Mejit Island
                           * Mili Atoll
                           * Namorik (Namdrik) Atoll
                           * Namu Atoll
                           * Rongelap Atoll
                           * Ujae Atoll
                           * Ujelang Atoll
                           * Utirik (Utrik) Atoll
                           * Wotho Atoll
                           * Wotje Atoll

Geography

   Map of the Marshall Islands.
   Enlarge
   Map of the Marshall Islands.
   Average monthly temperatures (red) and precipitation (blue) on Majuro.
   Enlarge
   Average monthly temperatures (red) and precipitation (blue) on Majuro.

   The country consists of twenty-nine atolls and five isolated islands.
   The most important atolls and islands form two groups: the Ratak Chain
   and the Ralik Chain (meaning "sunrise" and "sunset" chains). Two-thirds
   of the nation's population lives on Majuro (which is also the capital)
   and Ebeye. The outer islands are sparsely populated due to lack of
   employment opportunities and economic development. Life on the outer
   atolls is generally still fairly traditional, and the nutrition of the
   rural population, being grown and caught, is superior that of most of
   the urban residents, who rely considerably on white rice.

   The uninhabited atolls are:
     * Ailinginae Atoll
     * Bikar (Bikaar) Atoll
     * Bikini Atoll
     * Bokak Atoll
     * Erikub Atoll

                             * Jemo Island
                             * Nadikdik (Knox) Atoll
                             * Rongerik Atoll
                             * Toke Atoll

   The climate is hot and humid, with a wet season from May to November.
   The islands occasionally suffer from typhoons.

Economy

   United States Government assistance is the mainstay of the economy.
   Agricultural production is concentrated on small farms, and the most
   important commercial crops are coconuts, tomatoes, melons, and
   breadfruit. Small-scale industry is limited to handicrafts, fish
   processing, and copra. The tourist industry, now a small source of
   foreign exchange employing less than 10% of the labor force, remains
   the best hope for future added income. The islands have few natural
   resources, and imports far exceed exports. In 1999 a private company
   constructed a tuna loining plant, which employed upwards of 400 people,
   mostly women. The plant was closed in 2005, following a failed attempt
   to convert it from producing tuna loins to tuna steaks, a process that
   requires only half of the employee base. The owners noted that the plan
   would not be economically viable without government largesse and a
   reduction below the statutory minimum wage, neither of which the
   government cared to provide. As the guarantor of a $2 million loan to
   the business, the government took control of the plant facility
   following its closure, and is seeking to find another operator.

   In 2005 Aloha Airlines canceled its flight services to the Marshall
   Islands as part of its withdrawal from several markets in the region.
   Though other international airlines still serve Majuro, the Aloha
   decision was a setback in the country's hopes of increased revenues
   from tourism.

   Under the terms of the Amended Compact of Free Association, the US will
   provide millions of dollars per year to the Marshall Islands (RMI)
   through 2023, at which time a Trust Fund made up of US and RMI
   contributions will begin perpetual annual payouts. Government
   downsizing, drought, a drop in construction, the decline in tourism and
   foreign investment due to Asian financial difficulties, and less income
   from the renewal of fishing vessel licenses have held GDP growth to an
   average of 1% over the past decade.

   The 2007 edition of "Doing Business," prepared by the World Bank's
   private sector development department, has declared the Marshall
   Islands to be the world's "Best Performer" for its ease and low expense
   in hiring and firing employees. By the same token, the same study gave
   the Marshall Islands extremely low ratings for its protection of
   investors and contract enforcement.

   Not being among the 179 member countries of the ILO, Marshall Islands
   is among the handful of countries not obliged to abide by the core
   labour standards (elimination of forced labour, child labour and
   discrimination, and respect for freedom of association and right to
   collective bargaining) as required of ILO members.

   The United States also maintains the U.S. Army's Ronald Reagan
   Ballistic Missile Defense Test Site on Kwajalein Atoll. It is an
   important aspect of the Marshallese economy, as the Marshallese land
   owners receive rent for the base, and a large number of Marshallese
   work at the base. It is noted that the Majuro Atoll benefited from
   foreign assistance. The main airport was built by the Japanese (during
   World War II), the only tarmac road of the capital was built partly by
   the Taiwanese and partly by the Americans.

Demographics

   The Marshallese are of Micronesian origin and migrated from Asia
   several thousand years ago. Although English is an official language
   and is spoken widely, although not fluently, Marshallese is used by the
   government. Japanese is also occasionally spoken in some areas of
   Marshall Islands.

   Virtually all Marshallese are Christian, most of them Protestant.

Culture

   Although now in decline, the Marshallese were once able navigators,
   using the stars and stick and shell charts. They are also experienced
   in canoe building and still hold annual competitions involving the
   unique oceanic sailing canoe, the proa.

Mexican Fishermen

   In October of 2005, Mexican fishermen got lost at sea and a Taiwanese
   boat found them alive 11 months later, close to the Marshall Islands
   where they set foot on solid ground again on August 9 of 2006. They
   spent 20 days in an Asian hospital and then returned to Mexico.

"the smell"

   it's a fact that marshalese people smell bad but the question is why
   and where does the rotten fish smell come from. well the answer is
   simple they do not own or take showers.

flip flop

   marshalese people don't have shoes so they where flip flops (<fact)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marshall_Islands"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
