   #copyright

Martinique

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Central & South American
Countries; Countries

   Martinique, Matinik

   Flag of Martinique Logo of Martinique
         (flag)          (Région logo)
   Location

   Map of France highlighting the Region of Martinique
   Administration
   Capital Fort-de-France
   Regional President Alfred Marie-Jeanne
   ( MIM) (since 1998)
   Départements Martinique
   Arrondissements 4
   Cantons 45
   Communes 31
   Statistics
   Land area^1 1,100 km²
   Population (Ranked 24th)
    - January 1, 2008 est. 436,131
    - March 8, 1999 est. 381,427
    - Density (2005) 353/km²
   ^1 French Land Register data, which exclude lakes, ponds, and glaciers
   larger than 1 km² (0.386 sq. mi. or 247 acres) as well as the estuaries
   of rivers
   France
   Satellite view
   Enlarge
   Satellite view

   Martinique is an island in the eastern Caribbean Sea, having a total
   area of 1,128 km². It is an overseas département ( département
   d'outre-mer, or DOM) of France. Like the other DOMs, Martinique is also
   one of the 26 régions of France (as a région d'outre-mer), and an
   integral part of the Republic. As part of France, Martinique is part of
   the European Union, the currency used is the euro. Its official
   language is French, although almost all of its inhabitants also speak
   Antillean Creole (Créole Martiniquais). Martinique is pictured on all
   euro banknotes, on the backside at the bottom of each note, right of
   the Greek ΕΥΡΩ (EURO) next to the denomination.

Economy

   Agriculture accounts for about 6% of GDP and the small industrial
   sector for 11%. Sugar production has declined, with most of the
   sugarcane now used for the production of rum. Banana exports are
   increasing, going mostly to France. The bulk of meat, vegetable, and
   grain requirements must be imported, contributing to a chronic trade
   deficit that requires large annual transfers of aid from France.
   Tourism has become more important than agricultural exports as a source
   of foreign xchange. The majority of the work force is employed in the
   service sector and in administration.

History

   Martinique's indigenous people were Carib indians. Christopher Columbus
   saw the island in 1493 but he didn't set foot on it until 1502 during
   his fourth voyage. However, Spaniards did not colonize the island. The
   first European to inhabit the island was the Frenchman Pierre Belan
   d'Esnambuc who founded a settlement on the island in 1635. His nephew
   Jacques-Dyel du Parquet bought the island and developed a rich and
   wealth colony. The island became a part of the French crown in 1658.
   Sugar, cocoa and coffee were the first crops to be grown on the island.
   Black slaves were brought to to island from West Africa.

   The Dutch and English navy tried to occupy the island.

   The island was under Britain's command during the Seven Years' War from
   1762 to 1763; during the French Revolutionary Wars from 1794 to 1802;
   and again during the Napoleonic wars from 1809 to 1814.

   Slavery was banned in 1848. People from India and China were brought to
   work the farms.

   During WWII the island was controlled by the Vichy regime from 1940-
   1943; later it was under the Free French Forces.

Culture

   As an overseas départment of France, Martinique's culture is basically
   French with a Caribbean twist. Its former capital, Saint-Pierre
   (destroyed by a volcanic eruption), was often referred to as the Paris
   of the Lesser Antilles. Following French custom, many businesses close
   at midday, then reopen later in the afternoon. The official language is
   French, although many Martinicans speak a Creole patois. Based in
   French, Martinique's Creole also incorporates elements of English,
   Spanish, Portuguese, and African languages. Originally passed down
   through oral storytelling traditions, it continues to be used more
   often in speech than in writing.

   Most of Martinique's population is descended from African slaves
   brought to work on sugar plantations during the colonial era. Today,
   the island enjoys a higher standard of living than most other Caribbean
   countries. The finest French products are easily available, from Chanel
   fashions to Limoges porcelain. Among young people, going to study in
   France is common. For the French, Martinique has been a vacation
   hotspot for many years, attracting both the upper class and more
   budget-conscious travelers. With all the interchange between the two
   regions, the people of Martinique are every bit as chic and
   sophisticated as their counterparts from the mainland.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martinique"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
