   #copyright

Marvin Gaye

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Performers and composers

   Marvin Gaye
   Marvin Gaye on the cover of his landmark 1971 album What's Going On
   Marvin Gaye on the cover of his landmark 1971 album What's Going On
   Background information
   Birth name Marvin Pentz Gay, Jr.
   Born April 2, 1939
   Origin Washington, D.C., USA
   Died April 1, 1984; Los Angeles, California
   Genre(s) R&B, pop, soul, funk
   Occupation(s) Singer-songwriter, instrumentalist, record producer
   Instrument(s) Vocals, piano/ keyboard, synthesizer, drums
   Years active 1957-1984
   Label(s) Tamla, Columbia
   Associated
   acts The Moonglows, Tammi Terrell, The Originals

   Marvin Gaye (born Marvin Pentz Gay, Jr.) ( April 2, 1939 – April 1,
   1984) was an American soul and R&B singer-songwriter, instrumentalist,
   record producer and performer who gained international fame as an
   artist on the Motown label in the 1960s and 1970s.

   Beginning his career in Motown in 1960, Gaye quickly became Motown's
   top solo male artist and scored numerous hits during the 1960s, among
   them " Stubborn Kind of Fellow", " How Sweet It Is (To Be Loved By
   You)", " I Heard It Through the Grapevine", and several hit duets with
   Tammi Terrell, including " Ain't No Mountain High Enough" and " You're
   All I Need to Get By", before moving on to his own form of musical
   self-expression.

   Along with Stevie Wonder, Gaye is notable for fighting the
   hit-making—but creatively restrictive—Motown record-making process, in
   which performers and songwriters and record producers were generally
   kept in separate camps. Gaye forced Motown to release his very
   successful 1971 album What's Going On. Subsequent releases proved that
   Gaye, who had been a part-time songwriter for Motown artists during his
   early years with the label, could write and produce his own singles
   without having to rely on the Motown system. This achievement would
   pave the way for the successes of later self-sufficient
   singer-songwriter-producers in African American music, such as Stevie
   Wonder, Luther Vandross, and Babyface.

   During the 1970s, Gaye would release several other notable albums,
   including Let's Get It On and I Want You, and had hits with soul
   singles such as " Let's Get It On", " Got to Give It Up", and " Sexual
   Healing". By the time of his death in 1984, at the hands of his
   clergyman father, Gaye had become one of the most influential artists
   of the soul music era.

Biography

Early music career

   After being discharged from a tenure in the United States Air Force for
   not following orders, young Marvin joined several doo wop groups,
   settling on The Marquees, a popular D.C. group. With Bo Diddley, The
   Marquees released a single, "Wyatt Earp", in 1958 on Okeh Records and
   were then recruited by Harvey Fuqua to become The Moonglows. "Mama
   Loocie", released in 1959 on Chess Records, was Gaye's first single
   with the Moonglows and his first recorded lead. After a concert in
   Detroit, the "new" Moonglows disbanded and Fuqua introduced Gaye to
   Motown Records president Berry Gordy. He signed Gaye first as a session
   drummer for acts such as The Miracles and The Marvelettes and after
   much pleading, was signed as a singer less than a year later.

   As a session drummer and part-time songwriter, Gaye worked with The
   Miracles, The Contours, Martha & the Vandellas, and other Motown acts.
   Most notably, he is the drummer on The Marvelettes' 1961 number one hit
   " Please Mr. Postman" and Little Stevie Wonder's 1963 number one hit "
   Fingertips Pt. 2" and co-wrote Martha & the Vandellas' 1964 hit "
   Dancing In The Street" and The Marvelettes' 1962 hit "Beechwood
   4-5789". Popular and well-liked around Motown, Gaye already carried
   himself in a sophisticated, gentlemanly manner and had little need of
   training from Motown's in-house Artist Development director Miss Maxine
   Powell.

Solo career

   In 1961, Marvin released his debut album for the label, The Soulful
   Moods of Marvin Gaye, which was full of jazz standards and Broadway
   theatre standards. However, the album and three subsequent singles that
   came afterwards, failed to generate an audience and in the fall of
   1962, he was convinced to do the R&B-rooted productions that was a
   staple at Motown releasing his first hit with " Stubborn Kind of
   Fellow". The single was co-written by Gaye and William "Mickey"
   Stevenson, who created the title as a sly reference to the sometimes
   moody Gaye and became a Top 10 R&B record peaking at number eight on
   the chart. 1963's " Hitch Hike" and " Can I Get a Witness" were his
   first Top 40 pop hits. These earlier records featured a
   "churchiness…that was pushed by that urgent Detroit rhythm section". "
   Pride & Joy" ( 1963) became a smash hit, but Gaye was discontented with
   the role he felt Motown Records kept him locked in: a romantic
   balladeer and crooner, aiming always for chart success in the singles
   market. He wanted instead to be a pop singer in the vein of Nat King
   Cole or Frank Sinatra but settled for a blend of the styles of those
   artists with the passionate soul singing of performers such as Jackie
   Wilson and his role model Sam Cooke. Some of Marvin's famed early
   material followed including " You Are a Wonderful One", " How Sweet It
   Is (To Be Loved By You)", and his first two #1 R&B singles, the
   Miracles-composed numbers " I'll Be Doggone" and " Ain't That
   Peculiar". His 1966 album, Moods of Marvin Gaye, made him one of the
   first R&B artists to have more than five Top 40 hit singles in one
   record.

Enter Tammi Terrell

   A number of Gaye's hit singles for Motown were duets with female
   artists such as Mary Wells, Kim Weston and Tammi Terrell; the first
   Gaye/Wells album, 1964's Together, was Gaye's first charting album.
   Terrell and Gaye in particular had a good rapport, and their first
   album together, 1967's United, birthed the massive hits " Ain't No
   Mountain High Enough" and " Your Precious Love". Real life couple
   Nickolas Ashford and Valerie Simpson provided the writing and
   production for the Gaye/Terrell records; while Gaye and Terrell
   themselves were not lovers (though rumors persist that they may have
   been), they convincingly portrayed lovers on record, indeed Gaye
   sometimes claimed that for the durations of the songs he was in love
   with her. On October 14, 1967, Terrell collapsed into Gaye's arms
   onstage while they were performing at the Hampton University homecoming
   in Virginia (contrary to popular belief, it was not Hampden-Sydney
   College, also in Virginia). She was later diagnosed with a brain tumor,
   and her health continued to deteriorate.

   Motown decided to try and carry on with the Gaye/Terrell recordings,
   issuing the You're All I Need album in 1968, which featured the hits "
   Ain't Nothing Like the Real Thing" and " You're All I Need to Get By".
   By the time of the final Gaye/Terrell album, Easy, in 1969, Terrell's
   vocals were performed mostly by Valerie Simpson. Two tracks on Easy
   were archived Terrell solo songs with Gaye's vocals overdubbed onto
   them.

   Terrell's illness put Gaye in a depression; when his Norman
   Whitfield-produced " I Heard It Through the Grapevine" ( sample )
   became his first #1 hit and the biggest selling single in Motown
   history to that point, he refused to acknowledge his success, feeling
   that it was undeserved. Meanwhile, Gaye's marriage was crumbling with
   Anna and he continued to feel irrelevant, singing endlessly about love
   while popular music underwent a revolution and began addressing social
   and political issues.

What's Going On

   Tammi Terrell died of brain cancer on March 16, 1970. Gaye subsequently
   went into self-seclusion, and did not perform in concert for nearly two
   years. He tried various spirit-lifting diversions, including a
   short-lived attempt at a football career with the Detroit Lions. He
   trained hard but the team's managers turned him down without a tryout.
   He continued to feel pain with no form of self-expression. As a result,
   he entered the studio on June 1, 1970 and recorded the songs " What's
   Going On", "God is Love", and "Sad Tomorrows" - an early version of
   "Flying High (In the Friendly Sky)".

   Gaye wanted to release " What's Going On" ( sample ). Motown head Berry
   Gordy refused, however, calling the single "uncommercial". Gaye refused
   to record any more until Gordy gave in, and the song became a surprise
   hit in January of 1971. Gordy subsequently requested an entire album of
   similar tracks from Gaye.

   The What's Going On album became one of the highlights of Gaye's
   career, and is today his best known work. Both in terms of sound
   (influenced by funk and jazz) and lyrical content (heavily political)
   it was a major departure from his earlier Motown work. Two more of its
   singles, " Mercy Mercy Me (The Ecology)" and " Inner City Blues (Make
   Me Wanna Holler)", became Top 10 pop hits and #1 R&B hits. The album
   became one of the most memorable soul albums of all time, and, based
   upon its themes, the concept album became the next new frontier for
   soul music. It has been called "the most important and passionate
   record to come out of soul music, delivered by one of its finest
   voices."

Continued success in music

   After the success of the soundtrack to the blaxplotation film, Trouble
   Man in 1972, Marvin decided to switch topics from social to sensual
   with the release of Let's Get It On ( sample ). The album was a rare
   departure for the singer for its blatant sensualism inspired by the
   success of What's Going On and Marvin's need to produce himself in his
   own way. Yielded by the smash title track and subsequent other hits
   such as " Come Get to This", " You Sure Love to Ball" and " Distant
   Lover", the album would be later hailed as "a record unparallelled in
   its sheer sensuality and carnal energy."

   Gaye began working on his final duet album, this time for Diana Ross
   for the Diana & Marvin project, an album of duets that began recording
   in 1972, while Ross was pregnant with her second child, Tracee Ellis
   Ross. Gaye, a longtime marijuana smoker, refused to put his joints out
   for the pregnant Ross, who immediately complained to Berry Gordy about
   the issue. Gaye refused to sing if he couldn't smoke in the studio, and
   the duet album was recorded by overdubbing Ross and Gaye at separate
   studio session dates. Released in the fall of 1973, the album yielded
   the US hit singles " You're a Special Part of Me and the UK top five
   version of The Stylistics' " You Are Everything". During this time, a
   live recording of " Distant Lover" was so well received that Motown
   issued a single release for the live album resulting in a rare chart
   success for Gaye and helping his live album, Marvin Gaye Live!, reach
   the top ten of the Billboard pop album chart. Also during this time,
   Marvin hosted his own special concerning his return to live performing
   after the death of Tammi Terrell on The Midnight Special, which also
   showed rare interviews by Gaye during the period and a rare moment with
   Marvin and his father. After the success of Let's Get It On, Marvin
   went through writer's block trying to come up with a follow-up.

   In 1975 Marvin teamed up with Motown songwriter and aspiring singer
   Leon Ware on a series of sensual productions that were originally were
   to be recorded by Ware himself until Motown CEO Berry Gordy approached
   Ware to give the songs to Gaye. In April of the following year, Marvin
   released the I Want You LP, which yielded the number-one R&B single, "
   I Want You", and the modest charter, " After the Dance", and produced
   erotic album tracks such as "Since I Had You" and "Soon I'll Be Loving
   You Again" with its musical productions gearing Gaye more towards more
   funky material.

Later years

   In 1977, Gaye released the seminal funk single, " Got to Give It Up",
   which went to number-one on both the pop, R&B and dance singles charts
   and helped his Live at the London Palladium album sell over two million
   copies and becoming one of the top ten best-selling albums of the year.
   The following year, after divorcing his first wife Anna, he agreed to
   remit a portion of his salary and sales of his upcoming album to his ex
   for alimony. The result was 1978's Here, My Dear, which addressed the
   sour points of his marriage to Anna and almost led to Anna filing a
   invasion of privacy against Marvin though she later recanted that
   decision. That album tanked on the charts, despite its later critical
   reevaulation, however, and Gaye struggled to sell a record. By 1979,
   beseiged by tax problems and drug addictions, Gaye filed for bankruptcy
   and moved to Hawaii where he lived in a bread van. In 1980, he signed
   with British promoter Jeffrey Kruger to do concerts overseas with the
   highlight supposedly a Royal Command Performance at London's Drury Lane
   in front of Princess Margaret. Gaye failed to make the stage on time
   and by the time he came, everyone had left. While in London, Marvin
   worked on In Our Lifetime?, a complex and deeply personal record. When
   Motown issued the album in 1981, Gaye was livid: he accused Motown of
   editing and remixing the album without his consent, releasing an
   unfinished song, ("Far Cry") altering the album art he requested and
   removing the question mark from the title (rendering the intended irony
   imperceptible).

   After being offered a chance to clear things out in Oostende, Belgium,
   he permanently moved to the famous coastal country in 1981. After being
   upset over Motown's hasty decision to release In Our Lifetime, he
   negotiated a release from the label and signed with Columbia Records in
   1982 and released Midnight Love the same year. The album included
   Marvin's final big hit, " Sexual Healing" ( sample ). The song gave
   Gaye his first two Grammy Awards for ( Best R&B Male Vocal Performance
   and Best R&B Instrumental) in February 1983. The following year, he won
   a Grammy nomination for Best Male R&B Vocal Performance again, this
   time for the Midnight Love album itself. Around this time Marvin gave
   an emotional performance of The Star-Spangled Banner at the NBA
   All-Star Game, held at The Forum in Inglewood, California. A month
   later, he gave his final performance in front of his old mentor and
   label for "Motown 25" performing "What's Going On" before going out on
   a U.S. tour to support his album, which was plagued by health problems
   and Gaye's bouts with depression and paranoia over an alleged attempt
   on his life before ending in August 1983.

   By the time the tour ended, he isolated himself by moving into his
   parents' house. He threatened to commit suicide several times after
   numerous bitter arguments with his father, Marvin, Sr. On April 1,
   1984, one day before his forty-fifth birthday, Gaye's father shot and
   killed him after an argument that had started after Marvin's parents
   argued over misplaced business documents. Marvin, Sr. later was
   sentenced to six years of probation after pleading guilty to
   manslaughter. Charges of first-degree murder were dropped after doctors
   discovered he had a tumor. Later serving his final years in a
   retirement home, he died of pneumonia in 1998.

   After some posthumous releases cemented his memory in the popular
   consciousness, Gaye was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in
   1987. He later was inducted to Hollywood's Rock Walk in 1989 and the
   following year was given a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1990.

Personal life

   Marvin Gaye was born the first son and second eldest of four children
   to Rev. Marvin Pentz Gay, Sr and schoolteacher Alberta Williams. He,
   sisters Jeanne and baby Zeola, and younger brother Frankie Gaye lived
   in the segregated section of Washington, D.C.'s Deanwood neighbourhood
   in the northeastern section of the city. Marvin's father preached in a
   Seventh-day Adventist Church sect called the House of God, which went
   by a strict code of conduct and mixed teachings of " Orthodox Judaism
   subarity and black Pentecostal joy" and didn't practice celebrating
   holidays and birthdays. Marvin's father was physically abusive and
   often whup his four children if he felt they misbehaved. Jeanne Gay has
   said that Marvin's father couldn't understand Marvin's
   free-spirtedness. After dropping out of Cardozo High School, Marvin
   left school and joined the United States Air Force only to drop out
   within months because the teenager refused to follow orders. Brother
   Frankie Gaye would later follow his brother in the music business with
   modest success. After starting his recording career in Motown, Marvin
   changed his name from Marvin Gay to Marvin Gaye adding the 'e' to
   separate himself from his father, end all gossip concerning his
   sexuality, and also in admiration of his idol, Sam Cooke, who also
   added an 'e' to his last name ( ). Marvin married twice. His first
   marriage, to Berry Gordy, Jr.'s sister Anna Gordy, which was inspired
   by Gaye's earlier hits including " Stubborn Kind of Fellow" and " You
   Are a Wonderful One", produced an adopted son, Marvin Pentz Gaye III
   (b. June 8, 1965). Troubling from the start, the marriage permanently
   imploded after Marvin began courting the seventeen-year-old daughter of
   hipster jazz icon Slim Gaillard named Jan Hunter in 1973 following the
   release of his Let's Get It On album. Hunter was also an inspiration to
   Gaye's music, particularly his entire post- What's Going On/ Trouble
   Man period which included Let's Get It On and I Want You. Their
   relationship produced two children, Nona Marvisa Gaye (b. September 4,
   1974) and Frankie Christian Gaye (b. November 16, 1975). Marvin and
   Janis didn't marry until the final termination of Marvin's marriage to
   Anna was confirmed. Shortly after their October 1977 wedding in Baton
   Rouge, Louisiana, however, they separated due to growing tensions
   between the couple finally divorcing in February of 1981. After
   Marvin's death, two of Marvin's children followed in his footsteps to
   show business: eldest son Marvin Pentz Gaye III became a record
   producer and has control of his estate while Gaye's only daughter,
   Nona, became a model, an acclaimed actress and as a singer was noted
   for working closely with Prince. Marvin's youngest child, son Frankie
   Christian, has not followed his siblings into show business. Marvin has
   two grandchildren and neo-soul singer Donnie, who recorded the
   critically-acclaimed 2001 album, The Colored Section, is a relative of
   Gaye's.

Legacy, tributes and award recognitions

   Even before Gaye died, there had already been tributes to the singer.
   In 1983, the British group Spandau Ballet recorded the single "True" as
   a partial tribute to both Gaye and the Motown sound he helped
   establish. A year after his death, The Commodores made reference to
   Gaye's death in their 1985 song "Night Shift" as did the Violent Femmes
   in their 1988 song "See My Ships". Former Motown alum Diana Ross also
   paid tribute with her Top 10 pop single " Missing You" (1985) while the
   soul band Maze featuring Frankie Beverly recorded the tribute song,
   "Silky Soul" (1989), in honour of their late mentor. He was also
   mentioned in the next-to-last choral verse of George Michael's record,
   "John & Elvis are Dead", featured on his album, Patience.

   In 1995, certain artists including Madonna, Stevie Wonder, Speech of
   the group Arrested Development and Gaye's own daughter Nona, paid
   tribute to Gaye with the MTV-assisted tribute album, Inner City Blues:
   The Music of Marvin Gaye, which also included a documentary of the same
   name that aired on MTV. In 1999, R&B artists such as D'Angelo, Erykah
   Badu, Brian McKnight and Will Downing paid their respects to Gaye in a
   tribute album, Marvin Is 60. In October 2001, an all-star cover of
   "What's Going On", produced by Jermaine Dupri, was issued as a benefit
   single, credited to "Artists Against AIDS Worldwide". The single, which
   was a reaction to the tragedy of the September 11, 2001 attacks as well
   as to the AIDS crisis, featured contributions from a plethora of stars,
   including Christina Aguilera, Mary J. Blige, Bono, Mariah Carey,
   Destiny's Child, Fred Durst of Limp Bizkit, Nelly Furtado, Alicia Keys,
   Aaron Lewis of the rock group StainD, Nas, *NSYNC, P. Diddy, ?uestlove
   of The Roots, Britney Spears, and Gwen Stefani . The "What's Going On"
   cover also featured Nona, who sang one of the song's memorable lines,
   Father, father/we don't need to escalate.

   In 1987, Marvin was inducted posthumously to the Rock & Roll Hall of
   Fame with Marvin's first wife Anna Gordy and son Marvin III accepting
   for Marvin. He was later given his own star on the Hollywood Walk of
   Fame in 1990. In 1996, he was posthumously awarded with the Grammy
   Award for Lifetime Achievement Award and was honored in song by
   admirers Annie Lennox and Seal.

   Throughout his long career, Gaye scored a total of forty-one Top 40 hit
   singles on Billboard's Pop Singles chart between 1963 and 2001, sixty
   top forty R&B singles chart hits from 1962 to 2001, eighteen Top 10 pop
   singles on the pop chart, thirty-eight Top 10 singles on the R&B chart
   (according to latest figures from Joel Whitburns Top R&B/Hip-Hop
   Singles: 1942-2004, 2004), three number-one pop hits and thirteen
   number-one R&B hits and tied with Michael Jackson in total as well as
   the fourth biggest artist of all-time to spend the most weeks at the
   number-one spot on the R&B singles chart (52 weeks). In all, Gaye
   produced a total of sixty-seven singles on the Billboard charts in
   total spanning five decades including five posthumous releases.

   The year a remix of Marvin's "Let's Get It On" was released to urban
   adult contemporary radio, "Let's Get It On" was certified gold by the
   RIAA for sales in excess of 500,000 units, making it the best-selling
   single of all time on Motown in the United States. Gaye's " I Heard It
   Through the Grapevine" holds the title of the best-selling
   international Motown single of all time, with high sales explained by a
   re-release in Europe following a Levi's 501 Jeans commercial in 1986.

   In 2005, rock group A Perfect Circle released "What's Going On" as part
   of an anti-war CD titled eMOTIVe. The next year, it was announced that
   rock group the Strokes was going to cover Marvin's " Mercy Mercy Me
   (The Ecology)" on their next album. In October of 2005, a discussion
   was delivered at Marvin's hometown of Washington, D.C.'s City Council
   to change the name of a park located at Marvin's childhood
   neighbourhood from Watts Branch Park to Marvin Gaye Park and was soon
   offered so for $5 million to make the name change a reality. The park
   was renamed on April 2, 2006 on what would've been Marvin's
   sixty-seventh birthday.

   A documentary about Gaye's life and death - What's Going On: The Marvin
   Gaye Story - was a UK/PBS USA co-production, directed by Jeremy Marre.

   In February of 2006, production on an independent film, titled Sexual
   Healing, a biopic about Gaye's later years, was announced. It was to
   have been a full-scale biopic of Gaye, but Motown refused to license
   rights to its Marvin Gaye catalog. It is to start filming in May 2006,
   starring Jesse L. Martin. Recently news has been made about another
   Gaye biopic, titled Marvin - The Life Story of Marvin Gaye, being set
   for production also later this year with singer Roberta Flack
   supervising on the music and is said to be a full-scale biopic of Gaye
   . A play in Marvin's hometown of Washington, D.C. about the singer is
   currently playing.

Discography

U.S. and UK Top Ten Singles

   The following singles reached the Top Ten of either the United States
   pop singles chart or the United Kingdom pop singles chart.
     * 1963: " Pride & Joy" (US #10)
     * 1964: " How Sweet It Is (To Be Loved By You)" (US #6)
     * 1965: " I'll Be Doggone" (US #8)
     * 1965: " Ain't That Peculiar" (US #8)
     * 1967: " Your Precious Love" (with Tammi Terrell) (US #5)
     * 1967: " If I Could Build My Whole World Around You" (with Tammi
       Terrell) (US #10)
     * 1968: " Ain't Nothing Like the Real Thing" (with Tammi Terrell) (US
       #8)
     * 1968: " You're All I Need to Get By" (with Tammi Terrell) (US #7)
     * 1968: " I Heard It through the Grapevine" (US #1; UK #1)
     * 1969: " The Onion Song" (with Tammi Terrell) (UK #9)
     * 1969: " Too Busy Thinking About My Baby" (US #4; UK #5)
     * 1969: " Abraham, Martin & John" (UK #9)
     * 1969: " That's The Way Love Is" (US #7)
     * 1971: " What's Going On" (US #2)
     * 1971: " Mercy Mercy Me (The Ecology)" (US #4)
     * 1971: " Inner City Blues (Make Me Wanna Holler)" (US #9)
     * 1972: " Trouble Man" (US #7)
     * 1973: " Let's Get It On" (US #1)
     * 1974: " You Are Everything" (with Diana Ross) (UK #5)
     * 1977: " Got To Give It Up" (US #1; UK #7)
     * 1982: " Sexual Healing" (US #3; UK #4)

Top Ten Albums

   The following albums reached the Top Ten on either the United States
   pop albums chart or the United Kingdom pop albums chart.
     * 1971: What's Going On (U.S. #6)
     * 1973: Let's Get It On (U.S. #2)
     * 1973: Diana & Marvin (w/Diana Ross) (UK #6)
     * 1974: Marvin Gaye Live! (U.S. #8)
     * 1976: I Want You (U.S. #4)
     * 1977: Live at the London Palladium (U.S. #3)
     * 1982: Midnight Love (U.S. #7; UK #10)
     * 1994: The Very Best of Marvin Gaye (UK #3)
     * 2000: Marvin Gaye Love Songs (UK #8)

Sound clips

     * "I Heard It Through the Grapevine" —
          + Released as a single in 1968 from In the Groove, this single
            was the best-selling Motown single of the 1960s. - 1.2 MB
     * "What's Going On" —
          + Released as a single in 1971 from What's Going On, one of
            Marvin Gaye's best-known recordings. - 691 KB
     * "Let's Get It On" —
          + Marvin Gaye's popular #1 1973 single from the album Let's Get
            It On - 208 KB
     * "Sexual Healing" —
          + The last major single released before his death, from the
            album Midnight Love - 232 KB
     * Problems playing the files? See media help.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marvin_Gaye"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
