   #copyright

Mary Kingsley

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Writers and critics

   Mary Henrietta Kingsley
   Mary Henrietta Kingsley

   Mary Henrietta Kingsley ( October 13, 1862 – June 3, 1900) was an
   English writer and explorer who greatly influenced European ideas about
   Africa and African people.

   Kingsley was born in Islington. She was the daughter of George Kingsley
   (himself a travel writer) and Mary Bailey, and the niece of Charles
   Kingsley. Her father was a doctor and worked for George Herbert, 13th
   Earl of Pembroke. Her mother was an invalid and Mary was expected to
   stay at home and look after her. Mary had little formal schooling but
   she did have access to her father's large library and loved to hear her
   father's stories of foreign countries.

   Her father died in February 1892. Her mother also died just five weeks
   later. Freed from her family responsibilities, and with an income of
   £500 a year, Mary was now able to travel. Mary decided to visit Africa
   to collect the material she would need to finish off a book that her
   father had started on the culture of the people of Africa.

   Mary arrived in Luanda in Angola in August 1893. She lived with local
   people who taught her necessary skills for surviving in the African
   jungles, and often went into dangerous areas alone.

   She returned to Africa in 1895 in order to study cannibal tribes. She
   traveled by canoe up the Ogowe River where she collected specimens of
   previously unknown fish. After meeting the Fang tribe she climbed the
   13,760 feet Mount Cameroon by a route unconquered by any other
   European.

   News of her adventures reached England and when she returned home in
   October 1895 she was greeted by journalists who were eager to interview
   her. She was now famous and over the next three years she toured the
   country, giving lectures about life in Africa.

   Mary Kingsley upset the Church of England when she criticized
   missionaries for attempting to change the people of Africa. She talked
   about, and indeed defended, many aspects of African life that had
   shocked many English people, including polygamy. For example explaining
   the "seething mass of infamy, degradation and destruction going on
   among the Coast native... [as] the natural consequence of the breaking
   down of an ordered polygamy into a disordered monogamy". She argued
   that a " black man is no more an undeveloped white man than a rabbit is
   an undeveloped hare" as well asserting that she did not regard "the
   native form as 'low'. or 'inferior'... but as a form of mind of a
   different sort to white men's - a very good form of mind too, in its
   way". She was, however, fairly conservative on other issues and did not
   support the women's suffrage movement.

   Kingsley wrote two books about her experiences: Travels in West Africa
   ( 1897), which was an immediate best-seller, and West African Studies (
   1899).

   During the Second Boer War, Kingsley volunteered as a nurse. She died
   of typhoid at Simon's Town, where she was treating Boer prisoners. In
   accordance with her wishes, she was buried at sea.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mary_Kingsley"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
