   #copyright

Maseru

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography

   Location of Maseru in Lesotho
   Enlarge
   Location of Maseru in Lesotho

   Maseru (pronounced "m큼's창ru") is the capital of Lesotho. Located on the
   Caledon River, bordering South Africa, it is Lesotho's only sizable
   city, with a population of approximately 180,000 (2004). It is the
   capital or camptown of the Maseru District. Up until 2004 Maseru had a
   growing textile industry supported by and invested in by Chinese
   manufactures. Since the expiration of US tariffs to China the textile
   industry in Lesotho has tapered off. The city's manufactures once
   included candles and carpets but has been overshadowed by South African
   industry. Maseru is located at 29.31째 S 27.48째 E.

   Maseru is located on the border with South Africa, by the Maseru Bridge
   border post. On the South African side, Ladybrand is the town closest
   to Maseru.

   Maseru was a small trading town when it was made the capital of the
   Basotho people by Paramount Chief Moshoeshoe I in 1869. It was the
   capital of the British Basutoland protectorate from 1869 to 1871 and
   from 1884 to 1966, when Basutoland gained its independence and was
   renamed Lesotho.

   Kingsway, the road joining Moeshoeshoe II airport and the royal palace
   in Maseru, was the first paved road in Lesotho, having previously been
   just a dirt path until Queen Elizabeth of England visited in the 1960s.

   The National University of Lesotho is near the city, in a town called
   Roma, and an international airport is also nearby, at Thoteng-ea-Moli.

   Maseru is a sister city of Austin, Texas

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maseru"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
