   #copyright

Mass media

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Media; Television

   Mass media is a term used to denote, as a class, that section of the
   media specifically conceived and designed to reach a very large
   audience (typically at least as large as the whole population of a
   nation state). It was coined in the 1920s (with the advent of
   nationwide radio networks, mass-circulation newspapers and magazines),
   although mass media was present centuries before the term became
   commom.

   The term public media has a similar meaning: it is the sum of the
   public mass distributors of news and entertainment(almost all being
   members of AFL-CIO, via Newspaper Guild and AFTRA)and other
   information: newspapers, television and radio broadcasting, book
   [[publishers], and suchlike. To this have been added more recently the
   Internet, podcasting, blogging, and suchlike. All of these public media
   sources have better informed the general public of what is going on in
   the world today.

   Some traditional public broadcasters are turning to these new areas to
   reach more people or quicker. These methods of communication reach a
   greater number of people faster than traditional oral communication.
   Such things as podcasting and blogging give people an opportunity to
   express themsleves in ways that can only be done with such technology.

   The mass-media audience has been viewed by some commentators as forming
   a mass society with special characteristics, notably atomization or
   lack of social connections, which render it especially susceptible to
   the influence of modern mass-media techniques such as advertising and
   propaganda. It is also gaining popularity in the blogosphere when
   referring to the mainstream media (MSM). The mass-media audience can be
   easily persuaded one way or another (depending on the subject of
   discussion)whether or not they want to believe the media. Mass media
   can be one of the hardest forms of media to decipher what is true and
   what is not.

Etymology and usage

   Media (the plural of "medium") is a truncation of the term media of
   communication, referring to those organized means of dissemination of
   fact, opinion, entertainment, and other information, such as
   newspapers, magazines, banners and billboards,cinema films, radio,
   television, the World Wide Web, billboards, books, CDs, DVDs,
   videocassettes, computer games and other forms of publishing. Although
   writers currently differ in their preference for using media in the
   singular ("the media is...") or the plural ("the media are..."), the
   former will still incur criticism in some situations. (Please see data
   for a similar example.) Academic programs for the study of mass media
   are usually referred to as mass communication programs.

   An individual corporation within the mass media is referred to as a
   Media Institution.

   The term "mass media" is mainly used by academics and
   media-professionals. When members of the general public refer to "the
   media" they are usually referring to the mass media, or to the news
   media, which is a section of the mass media.

   Sometimes mass media (and the news media in particular) are referred to
   as the " corporate media". Other references include the "mainstream
   media" (MSM). Technically, " mainstream media" includes outlets that
   are in harmony with the prevailing direction of influence in the
   culture at large. In the United States, usage of these terms often
   depends on the connotations the speaker wants to invoke. The term
   "corporate media" is often used by leftist media critics to imply that
   the mainstream media are themselves composed of large multinational
   corporations, and promote those interests (see e.g., Fairness and
   Accuracy in Reporting; Herman and Chomsky's " A Propaganda Model").
   This is countered by the right-wing media critics with the term "MSM",
   the acronym implying that the majority of mass media sources are
   dominated by leftist powers which are furthering their own agenda.

   The more recent term 'Drive-by Media' has been popularized by
   conservative talk-show host Rush Limbaugh in response to the proposed
   transfer of operations of several U.S. ports to Dubai Ports World.

History

   Types of drama in numerous cultures were probably the first mass-media,
   going back into the Ancient World. The first printed book known is the
   "Diamond Sutra", printed in China in 868 AD, and it is often suspected
   that books were printed earlier. Movable clay type was invented in 1041
   in China. However, due to the slow spread to the masses of literacy in
   China, and the relatively high cost of paper there, the earliest
   printed mass-medium was probably European popular prints from about
   1400. Although these were produced in huge numbers, very few early
   examples survive, and even most known to be printed before about 1600
   have not survived. Johannes Gutenberg printed the first book on a
   printing press with movable type in 1453. This invention transformed
   the way the world received printed materials, although books remained
   too expensive really to be called a mass-medium for at least a century
   after that.

   Newspapers developed around from 1605, with the first example in
   English in 1620  ; but they took until the nineteenth century to reach
   a mass-audience directly.

   During the 20th century, the growth of mass media was driven by
   technology that allowed the massive duplication of material. Physical
   duplication technologies such as printing, record pressing and film
   duplication allowed the duplication of books, newspapers and movies at
   low prices to huge audiences. Radio and television allowed the
   electronic duplication of information for the first time.

   Mass media had the economics of linear replication: a single work could
   make money proportional to the number of copies sold, and as volumes
   went up, units costs went down, increasing profit margins further. Vast
   fortunes were to be made in mass media. In a democratic society,
   independent media serve to educate the public/electorate about issues
   regarding government and corporate entities (see Mass media and public
   opinion). Some consider the concentration of media ownership to be a
   grave threat to democracy.

Timeline

     * c1400: Appearance of European popular prints
     * 1453: Johnannes Gutenberg prints the Bible, using his printing
       press, ushering in the Renaissance
     * 1620: First newspaper (or coranto) in English
     * 1825: Nicéphore Niépce takes the first permanent photograph
     * 1830: Telegraphy is independently developed in England and the
       United States.
     * 1876: First telephone call made by Alexander Graham Bell
     * 1878: Thomas Alva Edison patents the phonograph
     * 1890: First juke box in San Francisco's Palais Royal Saloon.
     * 1890: Telephone wires are installed in Manhattan.
     * 1895: Cinematograph invented by Auguste and Louis Lumiere
     * 1896: Hollerith founds the Tabulating Machine Co. It will become
       IBM in 1924.
     * 1898: Loudspeaker is invented.
     * 1906: The Story of the Kelly Gang from Australia is world's first
       feature length film.
     * 1909: RMS Republic, a palatial White Star passenger liner, uses the
       Marconi Wireless for a distress at sea. She had been in a
       collision. This is the first "breaking news" mass media event.
     * 1912: Air mail begins
     * 1913: Edison transfers from cylinder recordings to more easily
       reproducible discs
     * 1913: The portable phonograph is manufactured.
     * 1915: Radiotelephone carries voice from Virginia to the Eiffel
       Tower
     * 1916: Tunable radios invented.
     * 1919: Short-wave radio is invented.
     * 1920: KDKA-AM in Pittsburgh, United States, becoming the world's
       first commercial radio station.
     * 1922: BBC is formed and broadcasting to London.
     * 1924: KDKA created a short-wave radio transmitter.
     * 1925: BBC broadcasting to the majority of the UK.
     * 1926: NBC is formed
     * 1927: The Jazz Singer: The first motion picture with sounds debuts
     * 1927: Philo Taylor Farnsworth debuts the first electronic
       television system
     * 1928: The Teletype was introduced.
     * 1933: Edwin Armstrong invents FM Radio
     * 1934: Half of the homes in the U.S. have radios.
     * 1935: First telephone call made around the world.
     * 1936: BBC opened world's first regular (then defined as at least
       200 lines) high definition television service.
     * 1938: The War of the Worlds is broadcast on October 30, causing
       mass hysteria.
     * 1939: Western Union introduces coast-to-coast fax service.
     * 1939: Regular electronic television broadcasts begin in the U.S.
     * 1939: The wire recorder is invented in the U.S.
     * 1940: The first commercial television station, WNBT (now
       WNBC-TV)/New York signs on the air
     * 1951: The first colour televisions go on sale
     * 1957: Sputnik is launched and sends back signals from near earth
       orbit
     * 1959: Xerox makes the first copier
     * 1960: Echo I, a U.S. balloon in orbit, reflects radio signals to
       Earth.
     * 1962: Telstar satellite transmits an image across the Atlantic.
     * 1963: Audio cassette is invented in the Netherlands.
     * 1963: Martin Luther King gives "I have a dream" speech.
     * 1965: Vietnam War becomes first war to be televised.
     * 1967: Newspapers, magazines start to digitize production.
     * 1969: Man's first landing on the moon is broadcast to 600 million
       people around the globe.
     * 1970s: ARPANET, progenitor to the internet developed
     * 1971: Intel debuts the microprocessor
     * 1972: Pong becomes the first video game to win widespread
       popularity.
     * 1976: JVC introduces VHS videotape - becomes the standard consumer
       format in the 1980s & 1990s.
     * 1980: CNN launches
     * 1980: New York Times, Wall Street Journal, Dow Jones put news
       database online.
     * 1981: The laptop computer is introduced by Tandy.
     * 1983: Cellular phones begin to appear
     * 1984: Apple Macintosh is introduced.
     * 1985: Pay-per-view channels open for business.
     * 1991: World-Wide Web (WWW) publicly released by Tim Berners-Lee at
       CERN.
     * 1993: CERN announces that the WWW will be free for anyone to use.
     * 1995: The internet grows exponentially
     * 1996: First DVD players and discs are available in Japan. Twister
       is the first film on DVD.

Purposes

   Mass media can be used for various purposes:
     * Advocacy, both for business and social concerns. This can include
       advertising, marketing, propaganda, public relations, and political
       communication.
     * Enrichment and education, such as literature.
     * Entertainment, traditionally through performances of acting, music,
       and sports, along with light reading; since the late 20th century
       also through video and computer games.
     * Journalism.
     * Public service announcements.

Journalism

   Journalism is a discipline of collecting, analyzing, verifying, and
   presenting information regarding current events, trends, issues and
   people. Those who practice journalism are known as journalists.

   News-oriented journalism is sometimes described as the "first rough
   draft of history" (attributed to Phil Graham), because journalists
   often record important events, producing news articles on short
   deadlines. While under pressure to be first with their stories, news
   media organizations usually edit and proofread their reports prior to
   publication, adhering to each organization's standards of accuracy,
   quality and style. Many news organizations claim proud traditions of
   holding government officials and institutions accountable to the
   public, while media critics have raised questions about holding the
   press itself accountable.

Public relations

   Public relations is the art and science of managing communication
   between an organization and its key publics to build, manage and
   sustain its positive image. Examples include:
     * Corporations use marketing public relations (MPR) to convey
       information about the products they manufacture or services they
       provide to potential customers to support their direct sales
       efforts. Typically, they support sales in the short and long term,
       establishing and burnishing the corporation's branding for a
       strong, ongoing market.
     * Corporations also use public-relations as a vehicle to reach
       legislators and other politicians, seeking favorable tax,
       regulatory, and other treatment, and they may use public relations
       to portray themselves as enlightened employers, in support of
       human-resources recruiting programs.
     * Non-profit organizations, including schools and universities,
       hospitals, and human and social service agencies, use public
       relations in support of awareness programs, fund-raising programs,
       staff recruiting, and to increase patronage of their services.
     * Politicians use public relations to attract votes and raise money,
       and, when successful at the ballot box, to promote and defend their
       service in office, with an eye to the next election or, at career’s
       end, to their legacy.

Forms

   Electronic media and print media include:
     * Broadcasting, in the narrow sense, for radio and television.
     * Various types of discs or tape. In the 20th century, these were
       mainly used for music. Video and computer uses followed.
     * Film, most often used for entertainment, but also for
       documentaries.
     * Internet, which has many uses and presents both opportunities and
       challenges. Blogs and podcasts, such as news, music, pre-recorded
       speech and video)
     * Publishing, in the narrow sense, meaning on paper, mainly via
       books, magazines, and newspapers.
     * Computer games, which have developed into a mass form of media
       since devices such as the PlayStation 2 , Xbox, and the GameCube
       broadened their use.

Audio recording and reproduction

   Sound recording and reproduction is the electrical or mechanical
   re-creation and/or amplification of sound, often as music. This
   involves the use of audio equipment such as microphones, recording
   devices and loudspeakers. From early beginnings with the invention of
   the phonograph using purely mechanical techniques, the field has
   advanced with the invention of electrical recording, the mass
   production of the 78 record, the magnetic wire recorder followed by the
   tape recorder, the vinyl LP record. The invention of the compact
   cassette in the 1960's, followed by Sony's Walkman, gave a major boost
   to the mass distribution of music recordings, and the invention of
   digital recording and the compact disc in 1983 brought massive
   improvements in ruggedness and quality. The most recent developments
   have been in digital audio players like the Apple iPod.

   An album is a collection of related audio tracks, released together to
   the public, usually commercially.

   The term record album originated from the fact that 78 RPM Phonograph
   disc records were kept together in a book resembling a photo album. The
   first collection of records to be called an "album" was Tchaikovsky's
   Nutcracker Suite, release in April 1909 as a four-disc set by Odeon
   records. It retailed for 16 shillings — about £15 in modern currency.

   A music video (also promo) is a short film or video that accompanies a
   complete piece of music, most commonly a song. Modern music videos were
   primarily made and used as a marketing device intended to promote the
   sale of music recordings. Although the origins of music videos go back
   much further, they came into their own in the 1980s, when Music
   Television's format was based around them. In the 1980s, the term "rock
   video" was often used to describe this form of entertainment, although
   the term has fallen into disuse.

   Music videos can accommodate all styles of filmmaking, including
   animation, live action films, documentaries, and non-narrative,
   abstract film.

Broadcasting

   Broadcasting is the distribution of audio and/or video signals
   (programs) to a number of recipients ("listeners" or "viewers") that
   belong to a large group. This group may be the public in general, or a
   relatively large audience within the public. Thus, an Internet channel
   may distribute text or music world-wide, while a public address system
   in (for example) a workplace may broadcast very limited ad hoc
   soundbites to a small population within its range.

   The sequencing of content in a broadcast is called a schedule. With all
   technological endeavours a number of technical terms and slang are
   developed please see the list of broadcasting terms for a glossary of
   terms used.

   Television and radio programs are distributed through radio
   broadcasting or cable, often both simultaneously. By coding signals and
   having decoding equipment in homes, the latter also enables
   subscription-based channels and pay-per-view services.

   A broadcasting organisation may broadcast several programs at the same
   time, through several channels ( frequencies), for example BBC One and
   Two. On the other hand, two or more organisations may share a channel
   and each use it during a fixed part of the day. Digital radio and
   digital television may also transmit multiplexed programming, with
   several channels compressed into one ensemble.

   When broadcasting is done via the Internet the term webcasting is often
   used. In 2004 a new phenomenon occurred when a number of technologies
   combined to produce podcasting. Podcasting is an asynchronous
   broadcast/narrowcast medium, with one of the main proponents being Adam
   Curry and his associates the Podshow.

   Broadcasting forms a very large segment of the mass media. Broadcasting
   to a very narrow range of audience is called narrowcasting. The term
   "broadcast" was coined by early radio engineers from the midwestern
   United States.

Film

   Film is a term that encompasses motion pictures as individual projects,
   as well as the field in general. The origin of the name comes from the
   fact that photographic film (also called filmstock) has historically
   been the primary medium for recording and displaying motion pictures.
   Many other terms exist — motion pictures (or just pictures or
   "picture"), the silver screen, photoplays, the cinema, picture shows,
   flicks — and commonly movies.

   Films are produced by recording people and objects with cameras, or by
   creating them using animation techniques and/or special effects. They
   comprise a series of individual frames, but when these images are shown
   rapidly in succession, the illusion of motion is given to the viewer.
   Flickering between frames is not seen due to an effect known as
   persistence of vision — whereby the eye retains a visual image for a
   fraction of a second after the source has been removed. Also of
   relevance is what causes the perception of motion; a psychological
   effect identified as beta movement.

   Film is considered by many to be an important art form; films
   entertain, educate, enlighten and inspire audiences. The visual
   elements of cinema need no translation, giving the motion picture a
   universal power of communication. Any film can become a worldwide
   attraction, especially with the addition of dubbing or subtitles that
   translate the dialogue. Films are also artifacts created by specific
   cultures, which reflect those cultures, and, in turn, affect them.

Internet

   The Internet (also known simply as "the Net") can be briefly understood
   as "a network of networks". Specifically, it is the worldwide, publicly
   accessible network of interconnected computer networks that transmit
   data by packet switching using the standard Internet Protocol (IP). It
   consists of millions of smaller domestic, academic, business, and
   governmental networks, which together carry various information and
   services, such as electronic mail, online chat, file transfer, and the
   interlinked Web pages and other documents of the World Wide Web.

   Contrary to some common usage, the Internet and the World Wide Web are
   not synonymous: the Internet is a collection of interconnected computer
   networks, linked by copper wires, fibre-optic cables, wireless
   connections etc.; the Web is a collection of interconnected documents,
   linked by hyperlinks and URLs. The World Wide Web is accessible via the
   Internet, along with many other services including e-mail, file sharing
   and others described below.

   Toward the end of the 20th century, the advent of the World Wide Web
   marked the first era in which any individual could have a means of
   exposure on a scale comparable to that of mass media. For the first
   time, anyone with a web site can address a global audience, although
   serving to high levels of web traffic is still relatively expensive. It
   is possible that the rise of peer-to-peer technologies may have begun
   the process of making the cost of bandwidth manageable. Although a vast
   amount of information, imagery, and commentary (i.e. "content") has
   been made available, it is often difficult to determine the
   authenticity and reliability of information contained in (in many
   cases, self-published) web pages. The invention of the Internet has
   also allowed breaking news stories to reach around the globe within
   minutes. This rapid growth of instantaneous, decentralized
   communication is often deemed likely to change mass media and its
   relationship to society. "Cross-media" means the idea of distributing
   the same message through different media channels. A similar idea is
   expressed in the news industry as "convergence". Many authors
   understand cross-media publishing to be the ability to publish in both
   print and on the web without manual conversion effort. An increasing
   number of wireless devices with mutually incompatible data and screen
   formats make it even more difficult to achieve the objective “create
   once, publish many”.

Publishing

   Publishing is the industry concerned with the production of literature
   or information – the activity of making information available for
   public view. In some cases, authors may be their own publishers.

   Traditionally, the term refers to the distribution of printed works
   such as books and newspapers. With the advent of digital information
   systems and the Internet, the scope of publishing has expanded to
   include websites, blogs, and the like.

   As a business, publishing includes the development, marketing,
   production, and distribution of newspapers, magazines, books, literary
   works, musical works, software, other works dealing with information.

   Publication is also important as a legal concept; (1) as the process of
   giving formal notice to the world of a significant intention, for
   example, to marry or enter bankruptcy, and; (2) as the essential
   precondition of being able to claim defamation; that is, the alleged
   libel must have been published.

Book

   Brockhaus Konversations-Lexikon, 1902.
   Enlarge
   Brockhaus Konversations-Lexikon, 1902.

   A book is a collection of sheets of paper, parchment or other material
   with a piece of text written on them, bound together along one edge
   within covers. A book is also a literary work or a main division of
   such a work. A book produced in electronic format is known as an
   e-book.

   In library and information science, a book is called a monograph to
   distinguish it from serial publications such as magazines, journals or
   newspapers.

   Publishers may produce low-cost, pre-proof editions known as galleys or
   'bound proofs' for promotional purposes, such as generating reviews in
   advance of publication. Galleys are usually made as cheaply as
   possible, since they are not intended for sale.

   A lover of books is usually referred to as a bibliophile, a
   bibliophilist, or a philobiblist, or, more informally, a bookworm.

   A book may be studied by students in the form of a book report. It may
   also be covered by a professional writer as a book review to introduce
   a new book. Some belong to a book club.

Magazine

   A magazine is a periodical publication containing a variety of
   articles, generally financed by advertising and/or purchase by readers.

   Magazines are typically published weekly, biweekly, monthly, bimonthly
   or quarterly, with a date on the cover that is in advance of the date
   it is actually published. They are often printed in colour on coated
   paper, and are bound with a soft cover.

   Magazines fall into two broad categories: consumer magazines and
   business magazines. In practice, magazines are a subset of periodicals,
   distinct from those periodicals produced by scientific, artistic,
   academic or special interest publishers which are subscription-only,
   more expensive, narrowly limited in circulation, and often have little
   or no advertising.

   Magazines can be classified as:-
     * General interest magazines (e.g. Frontline, India Today, The Week,
       etc)
     * Special interest magazines (women's, sports, business, scuba
       diving, etc)

Newspaper

   A selection of newspapers
   Enlarge
   A selection of newspapers

   A newspaper is a publication containing news and information and
   advertising, usually printed on low-cost paper called newsprint. It may
   be general or special interest, most often published daily or weekly.
   The first printed newspaper was published in 1605, and the form has
   thrived even in the face of competition from technologies such as radio
   and television. Recent developments on the Internet are posing major
   threats to its business model, however. Paid circulation is declining
   in most countries, and advertising revenue, which makes up the bulk of
   a newspaper's income, is shifting from print to online; some
   commentators, nevertheless, point out that historically new media such
   as radio and television did not entirely supplant existing media.

Software publishing

   A software publisher is a publishing company in the software industry
   between the developer and the distributor. In some companies, two or
   all three of these roles may be combined (and indeed, may reside in a
   single person, especially in the case of shareware).

   Software publishers often license software from developers with
   specific limitations, such as a time limit or geographical region. The
   terms of licensing vary enormously, and are typically secret.

   Developers may use publishers to reach larger or foreign markets, or to
   avoid focussing on marketing. Or publishers may use developers to
   create software to meet a market need that the publisher has
   identified.

Video and computer games

   A computer game is a computer-controlled game. A video game is a
   computer game where a video display such as a monitor or television is
   the primary feedback device. The term "computer game" also includes
   games which display only text (and which can therefore theoretically be
   played on a teletypewriter) or which use other methods, such as sound
   or vibration, as their primary feedback device, but there are very few
   new games in these categories. There always must also be some sort of
   input device, usually in the form of button/joystick combinations (on
   arcade games), a keyboard & mouse/ trackball combination (computer
   games), or a controller ( console games), or a combination of any of
   the above. Also, more esoteric devices have been used for input.
   Usually there are rules and goals, but in more open-ended games the
   player may be free to do whatever they like within the confines of the
   virtual universe.

   The phrase interactive entertainment is the formal reference to
   computer and video games. To avoid ambiguity, this game software is
   referred to as "computer and video games" throughout this article,
   which explores properties common to both types of game.

   In common usage, a "computer game" or a " PC game" refers to a game
   that is played on a personal computer. " Console game" refers to one
   that is played on a device specifically designed for the use of such,
   while interfacing with a standard television set. "Video game" (or
   "videogame") has evolved into a catchall phrase that encompasses the
   aforementioned along with any game made for any other device,
   including, but not limited to, mobile phones, PDAs, advanced
   calculators, etc.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass_media"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
