   #copyright

Mass Rapid Transit (Singapore)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Railway transport

   CAPTION: Mass Rapid Transit (MRT)

       Locale      Singapore
    Transit type   Rapid transit
   Began operation 7 November 1987
    System length  109.4 km
    No. of lines   3
   No. of stations 64
   Daily ridership about 1.338 million (2005)
     Track gauge   1435 mm ( standard gauge)
      Operator     SMRT Corporation, SBS Transit
   A C751B train at Eunos MRT Station.
   Enlarge
   A C751B train at Eunos MRT Station.
   Outram Park MRT Station, an interchange station between East-West Line
   and North-East Line
   Enlarge
   Outram Park MRT Station, an interchange station between East-West Line
   and North-East Line
   The MRT/LRT rail map, including Circle Line.
   Enlarge
   The MRT/LRT rail map, including Circle Line.

   The Mass Rapid Transit or MRT (Chinese: 大众快速交通 or more commonly known
   as 地铁; Malay: Sistem Pengangkutan Gerak Cepat; Tamil: சிங்கை துரிதக்
   கடவு ரயில்) is a rapid transit system that forms the backbone of the
   railway system in Singapore with a network spanning the entire
   city-state. The initial section of the MRT, between Yio Chu Kang and
   Toa Payoh, was opened in 1987, establishing the MRT as the second
   oldest metro system in Southeast Asia after Manila's LRT System.

   The network has since grown rapidly as a result of Singapore's aim of
   developing a comprehensive rail network as the main backbone of the
   public transport system in Singapore. In 2005, the average daily
   ridership on the MRT network was about 1.338 million. While this figure
   pales in comparison to the bus network's 2.785 million, it was
   nonetheless an 76% increase compared to figures in 1995 (0.760
   million), while the bus network saw a 8.1% drop in ridership in the
   same period. This trend is expected to continue as current public
   transport policies promote the expansion of the rail network at the
   expense of bus services which are withdrawn or reduced to avoid
   duplication of services.

   The MRT has 64 operating stations with 109.4 kilometres of lines, and
   operates on standard gauge. The rail lines have been constructed by the
   Land Transport Authority, a department of the government of Singapore,
   which allocates operating concessions to the profit-based corporations
   SMRT Corporation and SBS Transit. These operators also run bus and taxi
   services, thus ensuring that there is a full integration of public
   transport services. The MRT is complemented by the regional Light Rapid
   Transit (LRT) systems which links the MRT stations with the respective
   HDB public housing estates they serve. Services operate from about 5:30
   am and usually end before 1 a.m. daily with frequencies of
   approximately five minutes, and services being extended during festive
   periods.

The current Mass Rapid Transit network


   Network map of the Mass Rapid Transit
   Enlarge
   Network map of the Mass Rapid Transit

   North South Line
   Between Jurong East and Marina Bay
   25 stations over 44 km, operated by SMRT Trains
   East West Line
   Between Boon Lay and Pasir Ris
   Between Tanah Merah and Changi Airport
   29 stations over 45.4 km, operated by SMRT Trains
   North East Line
   Between HarbourFront and Punggol
   15 stations (excluding Woodleigh) over 20 km, operated by SBS Transit

History of the MRT

   Exterior view of Jurong East MRT Station, showing a C151 train pulling
   in.
   Enlarge
   Exterior view of Jurong East MRT Station, showing a C151 train pulling
   in.

   The origins of the Mass Rapid Transit are derived from a forecast by
   city planners in 1967 which stated the need for a rail-based urban
   transport system by 1992. Following a debate on whether a bus-only
   system would be more cost-effective, the Parliament came to the
   conclusion that an all-bus system would be inadequate, since it would
   have to compete for road space in a land-scarce country. The initial
   S$5 billion construction of the Mass Rapid Transit network was
   Singapore's largest public works project at the time, starting on 22
   October 1983 at Shan Road. The network was built in stages, with the
   North South Line given priority because it passed through the Central
   Area that has a high demand for public transport. The Mass Rapid
   Transit Corporation—MRTC, later called the SMRT Corporation—was
   established on 14 October 1983; it took over the roles and
   responsibilities of the former provisional Mass Rapid Transit
   Authority. On 7 November 1987, the first section of the North South
   Line started operations, consisting of five stations over six
   kilometres. Fifteen more stations were later opened, and the MRT system
   was officially launched on 12 March 1988 by Lee Kuan Yew, then Prime
   Minister of Singapore. Another 21 stations were subsequently added to
   the system; the opening of Boon Lay station on the East West Line on 6
   July 1990 marked the completion of the system two years ahead of
   schedule.

   The Mass Rapid Transit has subsequently been expanded. This includes a
   S$1.2 billion expansion of the North South Line into Woodlands,
   completing a continuous loop. The concept of having rail lines that
   bring people almost directly to their homes led to the introduction of
   the Light Rapid Transit (LRT) system into the existing Mass Rapid
   Transit network. On 6 November 1999, the first LRT trains on the Bukit
   Panjang LRT Line went into operation. To promote tourism, the Changi
   Airport and Expo stations were built. The North East Line, the first
   line operated by SBS Transit, opened on 20 June 2003 and became one of
   the first fully automated heavy rail lines in the world.

Station facilities, amenities and services

   Concourse level of Queenstown MRT Station, showing a plasma display
   screen, passenger service centre and faregates.
   Enlarge
   Concourse level of Queenstown MRT Station, showing a plasma display
   screen, passenger service centre and faregates.

   All MRT stations are either above-ground or underground except for
   Bishan station, which is at ground level. Most underground stations are
   deep enough to withstand conventional aerial bomb attacks and to serve
   as bomb shelters.

   Every station has at least four General Ticketing Machines (GTMs), a
   Passenger Service Centre, LED and plasma displays that show train
   service information and announcements. All stations are equipped with
   restrooms and payphones, although some restrooms are located on street
   level. Some stations, especially the major ones, have additional
   amenities and services, such as retail shops and kiosks, supermarkets,
   convenience stores such as 7-Eleven or Cheers, automatic teller
   machines, and self-service automated kiosks for a variety of services.

   The older stations on the North South Line and East West Line were not
   originally constructed with fully accessible facilities, such as lifts,
   ramps, tactile guidance systems and toilets for passengers with
   disabilities. However, these facilities are being progressively
   installed as part of a program to make all stations accessible to the
   elderly and the those with disabilities. As of 16 September 2006, all
   stations with the exception of Buona Vista Station & Bishan Station are
   barrier free.

Fares and tickets

   General Ticketing Machines (GTM) at Expo station, where commuters can
   purchase a Standard Ticket, or add value to their EZ-Link card.
   Enlarge
   General Ticketing Machines (GTM) at Expo station, where commuters can
   purchase a Standard Ticket, or add value to their EZ-Link card.

   Because the rail operators are government-assisted, profit-based
   corporations, fares on the MRT system are pitched to at least
   break-even level. The operators collect these fares by selling
   electronic data-storing tickets, the prices of which are calculated
   based on the distance between the start and destination stations. These
   prices increase in fixed stages for standard non-discounted travel.
   Fares are calculated in increments based on approximate distances
   between stations, in contrast to the use of fare zones in other subway
   systems, such as the London Underground. As the fare system has been
   integrated by TransitLink, commuters need pay only one fare and pass
   through two fare gates during the entire journey, even when
   transferring between lines operated by different companies. Commuters
   can choose to extend a trip mid-journey, and pay the difference as they
   exit their destination station.

   Stations are divided into two areas, paid and unpaid, which allow the
   rail operators to collect fares by restricting entry only through the
   fare gates, also known as access control gates. These gates, connected
   to a computer network, are capable of reading and updating electronic
   tickets capable of storing data, and can store information such as the
   initial and destination stations and the duration for each trip.
   General Ticketing Machines sell tickets for single trips or allow the
   customer to purchase additional value for stored-value tickets. Tickets
   for single trips, coloured in green, are valid only on the day of
   purchase, and have a time allowance of 30 minutes beyond the estimated
   travelling time. Tickets that can be used repeatedly until their expiry
   date require a minimum amount of stored credit.

   Although operated by private companies, the system's fare structure is
   regulated by the Public Transport Council, to which the operators
   submit requests for changes in fares. Fares are kept affordable by
   pegging them approximately to distance-related bus fares, thus
   encouraging commuters to use the network and reduce its heavy reliance
   on the bus system. Fare increases over the past few years have caused
   public concern. There were similar expressions of disapproval over the
   slightly higher fares charged on SBS Transit's North East line, a
   disparity that SBS Transit justified by citing higher costs of
   operation and maintenance on a completely underground line, as well as
   lower patronage.

Magnetic tickets (1987–2002)

   When the MRT first came into operation in 1987, fares ranged from
   S$0.50 to S$1.10 in S$0.10 increments for all adult tickets, regardless
   of whether they were single-trip or stored-value tickets. Several
   discounted fares were available: senior citizens and permanent
   residents above the age of 60 could travel on a flat fare of S$0.50
   during off-peak hours; children below the height of 1.2 metres and
   full-time students in primary, secondary, pre-university and vocational
   training (VITB) institutions paid a flat fare of S$0.30 at all times.

   Magnetic strip plastic tickets were used, in various forms.
   Stored-value tickets were called farecards and came in three types: the
   blue farecard was issued to adults, the magenta farecard to senior
   citizens, and the red farecard to children. Single-trip forms of these
   tickets were retained at the faregates on exiting the paid area of a
   destination station. Monthly discounted tickets were available in four
   values: beige, pink, and purple tickets for primary and tertiary
   students, and full-time national servicemen came with a value of S$13,
   S$30 and S$36, respectively; the peach ticket was for secondary,
   pre-university and VITB students, costing S$17 each. These discounted
   tickets were valid for a month from the date of purchase, allowed up to
   four trips a day, and were non-transferable.

EZ-Link cards and Standard Tickets (2002–present)

   The EZ-Link card is a contactless smartcard based on Sony's FeliCa
   smartcard technology. These cards are used for making payments for some
   goods and services in Singapore, mainly transportation services.
   Established in 2002, the technology was promoted as a means for speedy
   and convenient transactions, and an efficient method of reducing fare
   evasion, although there have been some cases of overcharging users. As
   a benchmark, fares range from S$0.69 to S$3.04 for adults, S$0.64 to
   S$0.70 for senior citizens, and S$0.40 to S$0.50 for student EZ-Link
   cards.

   The General Ticketing Machines (GTMs) at each station, replacing older
   ticket machines, allow commuters to purchase additional credit to add
   to their EZ-Link cards or to purchase tickets for single trips. Fares
   for these single-trip forms of these cards range are between one or two
   times the expense of non single-trip tickets. In addition, a S$1.00
   refundable ticket deposit is charged for each Standard Ticket. This
   refund can be collected from any General Ticketing Machine when the
   card is returned to the machine within 30 days of purchase. The card
   can also be left in a charity collection box, thereby donating the
   S$1.00 deposit. The smartcard technology contained in each Standard
   Ticket makes each one costly enough to necessitate recycling of
   Standard Tickets. Concession fares are available for children,
   students, senior citizens and national servicemen. The Visitor's Card,
   which offers a package of services to tourists, can be used as an
   EZ-Link card.

   Students are given free, personalised cards, complete with their
   photos, names and national identification numbers. Regardless of its
   type, each card is assigned a unique card ID that can be used to
   recover the card if lost. Transport operators have organised lotteries
   that are based on these card IDs.

MRT rolling stock

   The French-manufactured Alstom Metropolis Cars are the newest rolling
   stock on the MRT network.
   Enlarge
   The French-manufactured Alstom Metropolis Cars are the newest rolling
   stock on the MRT network.

   Three types of rolling stock are used to carry passengers on both the
   North–South Line and the East–West Line. They are powered by 750-volt
   DC third rail, operate in sets of six cars, and use the automatic train
   operation system (ATO) that is similar to London Underground's Victoria
   Line.

   The majority of the fleet comprises 396 C151 Cars; these are the oldest
   trains that are still in operation, as of 2006. They were built between
   1986 and 1989 by Kawasaki Heavy Industries in consortium with Nippon
   Sharyo, Tokyu Car Corporation and Kinki Sharyo. A S$142.7 million
   upgrade of these trains is under way and will be completed by 2008.

   In 1994, 114 C651 Cars, manufactured by Siemens of Germany, were
   purchased to complement the existing fleet of C151 trains when the
   Woodlands extension opened. Some of these trains have been previously
   reconfigured in experimental programs to accommodate more passengers,
   but such arrangements have since been abandoned.
   Trains parked at the bay of the Ulu Pandan MRT Depot
   Enlarge
   Trains parked at the bay of the Ulu Pandan MRT Depot

   Between 1998 and 2001, 126 C751B Cars built by Kawasaki Heavy
   Industries and Nippon Sharyo in a joint venture were introduced.
   Kawasaki Heavy Industries manufactured 66 cars and Nippon Sharyo
   manufactured 60 cars respectively. The cars have a sleeker design and
   come with an improved passenger information system, more grab poles,
   wider seats, more space near the doors and spaces for wheelchairs. As
   these trains were originally intended to operate on a direct service
   from Boon Lay to Changi Airport, luggage racks were installed for air
   travellers. However, in April 2002 faulty gearboxes forced all 21
   train-sets to be off-service, and the service was temporarily
   suspended. The direct service was scrapped in July 2003, and the
   luggage racks were removed.

   Since its opening in 2003, 150 driverless Alstom Metropolis Cars have
   been operating on the North East Line. Alstom Transportation of France
   was contracted by Land Transport Authority in 1997 and 1998 to supply
   these cars. They are fully automatic, powered by overhead lines on
   1,500 volts DC, and are the first trains to have closed-circuit cameras
   (CCTV) installed within their interiors. A further order of 120 cars is
   due to be delivered when the Circle Line starts operations in 2007.

Depots

   SMRT Corporation has 4 train depots: The Bishan depot is the central
   maintenance depot with train overhaul facilities, while the Changi and
   Ulu Pandan depots only inspect and house trains overnight. The
   underground Kim Chuan Depot houses trains for the Circle Line. Ang Mo
   Kio, Jurong East and Tanah Merah stations were built with a third
   middle track for off-service trains to stop at before they return to
   their depots, but the last two are now used as termini for the North
   South Line and the Changi shuttle, respectively.

   The Sengkang Depot houses trains for the North East Line, the Sengkang
   LRT and the Punggol LRT, all operated by SBS Transit. It is the first
   depot to have structual provisions for an industrial development
   located above the depot, to minimize the wastage of land in land-scarce
   Singapore.

Architecture and art on the MRT

   Chinese Calligraphy is integrated into the flooring of the Chinatown
   Station.
   Enlarge
   Chinese Calligraphy is integrated into the flooring of the Chinatown
   Station.
   Expo MRT Station, sited adjacent to the 100,000 square metre Singapore
   Expo exhibition facility, sports a futuristic design by Foster and
   Partners.
   Enlarge
   Expo MRT Station, sited adjacent to the 100,000 square metre Singapore
   Expo exhibition facility, sports a futuristic design by Foster and
   Partners.

   Early stages of the MRT's construction paid relatively scant attention
   to station design, with an emphasis on functionality over aesthetics.
   This is particularly evident in the first few stages of the North–South
   Line and the East–West Line that opened between 1987 and 1988 from Yio
   Chu Kang to Clementi. Architectural themes became an issue only in
   subsequent stages, and resulted in such designs as the cylindrical
   station shapes on most stations between Kallang and Pasir Ris, and the
   perched roofs on stations to the west of Jurong East.

   Art pieces, where present, are seldom highlighted; they primarily
   consist of a few paintings or sculptures representing the recent past
   of Singapore, mounted in major stations. The opening of the Woodlands
   Extension introduced bolder pieces of artwork, such as the large
   hanging sculpture in the Woodlands MRT Station. With the opening of the
   North East Line, a series of artworks created under a programme called
   "The Art In Transit" were commissioned by the Land Transport Authority.
   Created by 19 local artists and integrated into the stations' interior
   architecture, these artworks aim to promote the appreciation of public
   art in high-traffic environments. The artwork for each station is
   designed to suit the station's identity. Only stations on the North
   East Line come under this programme.

   Along the extension to the East-West line connecting to Changi Airport,
   the Expo Station is sited adjacent to the 100,000 square metre
   Singapore Expo exhibition facility. Designed by Foster and Partners and
   completed in January 2001, the station features a large pillarless
   titanium clad roof in an elliptical shape that sheathes the length of
   the station platform. This complements a smaller 40 metre reflective
   stainless steel disc overlapping the titanium ellipse and visually
   floats over a glass elevator shaft and the main entrance.

Safety on the MRT

   Platform screen doors at Dhoby Ghaut station on the North-South Line.
   Enlarge
   Platform screen doors at Dhoby Ghaut station on the North-South Line.

   Assurance has been given by both operators and authorities, that
   numerous measures have been taken in an effort to ensure the safety of
   passengers, with SBS Transit having to make greater efforts in actively
   publicising its safety considerations on the driver-less North East
   Line before and after its opening. Safety campaign posters are highly
   visible in trains and stations, and the operators frequently broadcast
   safety announcements to passengers and to commuters waiting for trains.
   Fire safety standards are consistent with the strict guidelines of the
   US National Fire Protection Association. Platform screen doors are
   installed at all underground stations. These doors prevent suicides,
   enable climate control in stations and prevent unauthorised access to
   restricted areas. Above-ground stations have open platforms, with a
   wide yellow line drawn along each platform edge requiring passengers to
   stand at a safe distance from arriving trains (or face a fine). Bylaws
   are implemented in the system to deter uncivil, disruptive and
   dangerous acts, such as smoking, the consumption of food and drinks,
   the frivolous use of safety features, and trespassing onto the railway
   tracks. Penalties ranging from fines to imprisonment are imposed for
   these offences.

   Safety concerns were raised among the public after several accidents on
   the system during the 1980s and 1990s, but most problems have been
   rectified. On 5 August 1993, two trains collided at Clementi station
   because of an oil spillage on the track, which resulted in 132
   injuries. There were calls for platform screen doors to be installed at
   above-ground stations after several incidents in which passengers were
   killed by oncoming trains when they fell onto the railway tracks at
   above-ground stations. However, the authorities rejected the proposal,
   because of doubts over functionality and concerns about the high
   installation costs.

Security on the MRT

   A closed-circuit camera monitors activities at Toa Payoh MRT Station.
   Enlarge
   A closed-circuit camera monitors activities at Toa Payoh MRT Station.

   Security concerns related to crime and terrorism were not high on the
   agenda of the system's planners at its original inception. However, in
   the wake of heightened security concerns after the foiled plot to bomb
   the Yishun MRT Station and the Madrid train bombings in 2004, the
   operators deployed private, unarmed guards to patrol station platforms
   and check the belongings of commuters.

   Recorded announcements are frequently made to remind passengers to
   report suspicious activity and not to leave their belongings
   unattended. Digital closed-circuit cameras (CCTVs) are being upgraded
   with recording-capability at all stations and trains operated by SMRT
   Corporation. Trash bins and mail boxes have been removed from station
   platforms and concourse levels to eliminate the risk that bombs will be
   placed in them.

   On 14 April 2005, the Singapore Police Force announced plans to step up
   rail security by establishing a specialised Police MRT Unit. These
   armed officers began overt patrols on the MRT and LRT systems on 15
   August 2005, conducting random patrols in pairs in and around rail
   stations and within trains. They are trained and authorised to use
   their firearms at their discretion, including deadly force if deemed
   necessary. On 8 January 2006, a major civil exercise involving over
   2,000 personnel from 22 government agencies, codenamed Exercise
   Northstar V, simulating bombing and chemical attacks at Dhoby Ghaut,
   Toa Payoh, Raffles Place and Marina Bay MRT stations was conducted.
   Thirteen stations were closed and about 3,400 commuters were affected
   during the three-hour duration of the exercise.

Future expansion

   An artist's representation of the possible MRT network after a series
   scheduled extensions, expected to occur by 2020, in addition to the
   current three lines. The routes and stations for the future lines are
   speculative and actual stations and routes are subjected to study by
   the Land Transport Authority.
   Enlarge
   An artist's representation of the possible MRT network after a series
   scheduled extensions, expected to occur by 2020, in addition to the
   current three lines. The routes and stations for the future lines are
   speculative and actual stations and routes are subjected to study by
   the Land Transport Authority.
   Construction is currently underway for the Bishan MRT Station, to be
   linked to the Circle Line.
   Enlarge
   Construction is currently underway for the Bishan MRT Station, to be
   linked to the Circle Line.

   The MRT system had relied on its two main lines, namely the North–South
   and East–West Lines, for more than a decade until the opening of the
   North East Line in 2003. While plans for these lines, as well as those
   currently under construction, were formulated long before, the Land
   Transport Authority's (LTA) publication of a white paper entitled "A
   World-Class Land Transport System" in 1995 galvanised the government's
   intentions to greatly expand on the existing system. The plans allow
   for the long-term replacement of the bus network by rail-based
   transportation as the primary mode of public transportation. It called
   for the expansion of the existing 67 kilometres of track (in 1995) to
   over 160 in 10 to 15 years, and envisaged further expansion in the
   longer term. By 2030, the government envisages a rail network of 540
   kilometres — more extensive than London's 408-kilometre Tube system.

Circle Line

   Currently under construction in five stages, the 33.3-kilometre Circle
   Line will be the next major rail line to open after the North East Line
   began operating in June 2003. It was originally scheduled to be opened
   in stages from 2007 to 2010, but the completion of the first stage was
   postponed to about 2010 when a section of tunnel near the Nicoll
   Highway station collapsed on 20 April 2004 during its construction and
   caused the death of four workers. The other four stages are expected to
   be opened progressively and on schedule from 2008 to 2010. When
   completed, the line will connect all the existing MRT lines, and will
   allow commuters to travel around the country without needing to go
   downtown to interchange with another line, reducing congestion
   especially at City Hall and Raffles Place stations.

   It is also expected to have a Stage 6 which completes the circle from
   HarbourFront to Promenade stations.

East West Line Boon Lay Extension

   The plan for Boon Lay MRT Extension (BLE) was announced by the Land
   Transport Authority on 29 December 2004. The 3.81-kilometre,
   two-station extension will extend from Boon Lay MRT Station on the
   western end of the East West MRT Line, with one station along Jurong
   West Street 63 (station name: Pioneer), between Jurong West Street 61
   and Pioneer Road North, and the second station at Joo Koon Circle
   (station name: Joo Koon), near the junction of Benoi Road and
   International Road.

   The fully elevated extension will cost about S$436 million, which is
   expected to be completed by 2009. Construction works commenced on 11
   March 2006. The alignment of the extension along Jurong West Street 63,
   Upper Jurong Road, and International Road has required the acquisition
   of 28,000 square metres of land.

Downtown Line Phase 1

   On 14 June 2005, the Land Transport Authority announced that it would
   construct a Downtown Extension (DTE) to serve the Downtown at Marina
   Bay (DTMB) area, where an integrated resort and Singapore's second
   botanical garden will be located. The 3.4-kilometre fully underground
   extension is estimated to cost S$1.4 billion. Construction of the
   extension is to start by 2007, with completion by 2012.

   Three new stations will be constructed underground, linking the
   Promenade station on the Circle Line and the Chinatown station on the
   North East Line. Two stations, tentatively named Bayfront and Landmark,
   will be built to serve the DTMB area. Another station, tentatively
   named Cross Street, will be built along Cross Street near the Chinatown
   area.

Future lines

   The LTA is currently conducting feasibility studies for the 40
   kilometre Downtown Line which will connect the northwestern and eastern
   regions of Singapore to the new downtown at Marina Bay, Singapore in
   the south. The Downtown Line will be a merger of the previously planned
   Bukit Timah Line, the Eastern Region Line and the confirmed Downtown
   Extension, now referred to as the Downtown Line Phase 1. .

   Previously, the Bukit Timah Line was to be a 20-kilometre line that
   would connect the new downtown with the Bukit Panjang, Upper Bukit
   Timah and Bukit Timah corridor. It was to intersect the Circle Line and
   some other lines along the way. When constructed, it was expected to
   alleviate the heavy traffic along Bukit Timah, Dunearn Road and Upper
   Bukit Timah. Provisions have been made at Promenade Station which would
   have been the line's southern interchange with the Circle Line.
   Preliminary work has recently begun — LTA was looking at possible
   station locations, soil profile and engineering challenges. If works
   had begun by 2010, when the Circle Line is completed, Bukit Timah Line
   would have been completed by 2016.

   The Eastern Region Line was also to be a 40-kilometre rectangular loop
   that would complement the existing East-West Line and enhance inter-
   and intra-town travelling in the eastern region. It would have looped
   around the Jalan Besar and East Coast areas, intersecting the Circle
   Line and other lines along the way, benefitting residents in Tampines,
   Bedok, Marine Parade, MacPherson and Kaki Bukit. Provisions have been
   made at Chinatown Station, which would have been the line's western
   interchange with the North-East Line and the Downtown Line Phase 1. The
   northern segment of the loop was to be constructed first, passing
   through Jalan Besar area and eastwards to parts of Bedok and Tampines.
   Like the Bukit Timah Line, preliminary work had recently begun — LTA
   was currently looking at possible station locations, soil profile and
   engineering challenges. If works had begun in 2016, the first segment
   of Eastern Region Line would have been ready by 2020.
   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass_Rapid_Transit_%28Singapore%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
