   #copyright

Matilda of Boulogne

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: British History 1500 and
before (including Roman Britain)

   Matilda of Boulogne, Queen Consort of England
   Matilda of Boulogne, Queen Consort of England

   Matilda I or Maud (1105– 3 May 1152), was Queen consort of the Kingdom
   of England, the wife of King Stephen. She was also sovereign Countess
   of Boulogne.

   She was born in Boulogne, France. She was the daughter of Eustace III,
   Count of Boulogne and his wife Princess Mary of Scotland, herself the
   daughter of King Malcolm III of Scotland and Saint Margaret of
   Scotland. In 1119 Matilda married Stephen, Count of Mortain, later King
   of England, and proved his strongest supporter during the period of
   civil war known as the Anarchy. Stephen and Matilda had three sons:
     * Eustace IV of Boulogne
     * Baldwin (d. before 1135)
     * William of Blois, Count of Mortain and Boulogne and Earl of Surrey.

   They also had two daughters, Matilda and Marie of Boulogne.

   Around 1125, her father died and she succeeded as Countess of Boulogne.
   She ruled this area jointly with her husband until 1150, when she
   reigned alone until 1151, when the County was given to her eldest son
   Eustace, then her surviving son William inherited it, and then her
   daughter Marie.

   Matilda died at Hedingham Castle, Essex, England and is buried at
   Faversham Abbey, England.
      Preceded by
   Eustace III        Countess of Boulogne
                      1125–1151
                      with Stephen                      Succeeded by
                                                    Eustace IV
      Preceded by
   Adeliza of Louvain Queen Consort of England
                      22 December 1135 - 3 May 1152     Succeeded by
                                                    Eleanor of Aquitaine
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matilda_of_Boulogne"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
