   #copyright

Mauritania

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Countries;
Countries

   الجمهورية الإسلامية الموريتانية
   Al-Jumhūriyyah al-Islāmiyyah al-Mūrītāniyyah
   République Islamique de Mauritanie
   Islamic Republic of Mauritania

   Flag of Mauritania Coat of arms of Mauritania
   Flag               Coat of arms
   Motto: شرف إخاء عدل  (Arabic)
   "Honneur, Fraternité, Justice"  (French)
   "Honour, Fraternity, Justice"
   Anthem: National Anthem of Mauritania
   Location of Mauritania
   Capital
   (and largest city) Nouakchott
                      18°09′N 15°58′W
   Official languages Arabic (de jure)
                      (also Hassaniya and French)
   Government         Military junta
    - President       Ely Ould Mohamed Vall
    - Prime Minister  Sidi Mohamed Ould Boubacar
      Independence    from France
    - Date            November 28, 1960
                               Area
    - Total           1,030,700 km² ( 29th)
                      397,954 sq mi
    - Water (%)       0.03
                            Population
    - 2005 estimate   3,069,000 ( 135th)
    - 1988 census     1,864,236
    - Density         3.0/km² ( 221st)
                      7.8/sq mi
       GDP ( PPP)     2005 estimate
    - Total           $7.159 billion ( 144th)
    - Per capita      $2,402 ( 132nd)
      HDI  (2003)     0.477 (low) ( 152nd)
        Currency      Ouguiya ( MRO)
       Time zone      GMT ( UTC+0)
    - Summer ( DST)   not observed ( UTC+0)
      Internet TLD    .mr
      Calling code    +222

   Mauritania (Arabic: موريتانيا <--موريتانية is the Arabic form for
   Mauritanis'a nationality--> Mūrītāniyya'a), officially the Islamic
   Republic of Mauritania, is a country in northwest Africa. It is
   bordered by the Atlantic Ocean on the west, by Senegal on the
   south-west, by Mali on the east and south-east, by Algeria on the
   north-east, and by Moroccan- annexed territory of Western Sahara on the
   north-west. It is named after the ancient Berber kingdom of Mauretania.
   The capital and largest city is Nouakchott, located on the Atlantic
   coast.

History

   From the 5th to 7th centuries, the migration of Berber tribes from
   North Africa displaced the Bafours, the original inhabitants of
   present-day Mauritania and the ancestors of the Soninke. The Bafours
   were primarily agriculturalist, and among the first Saharan people to
   abandon their historically nomadic lifestyle. With the gradual
   desiccation of the Sahara, they headed south. Following them came a
   migration of not only Central Saharans into West Africa, but in 1076,
   Islamic warrior monks ( Almoravid or Al Murabitun) attacked and
   conquered the ancient Ghana Empire. Over the next 500 years, Arabs
   overcame fierce resistance from the local population (Berber and
   non-Berber alike) and came to dominate Mauritania. The Mauritanian
   Thirty-Year War (1644-74) was the unsuccessful final effort to repel
   the Yemeni Maqil Arab invaders led by the Beni Hassan tribe. The
   descendants of the Beni Hassan warriors became the upper stratum of
   Moorish society. Berbers retained influence by producing the majority
   of the region's Marabouts—those who preserve and teach Islamic
   tradition. Many of the Berber tribes claimed Yemeni (and sometimes
   other Arab) origin: there is little evidence to suggest this, though
   some studies do make a connection between the two. Hassaniya, a mainly
   oral, Berber-influenced Arabic dialect that derives its name from the
   Yemeni Beni Hassan tribe, became the dominant language among the
   largely nomadic population.

   French colonization at the beginning of the 20th century brought legal
   prohibitions against slavery and an end to interclan warfare. During
   the colonial period, the population remained nomadic, but many
   sedentary peoples, whose ancestors had been expelled centuries earlier,
   began to trickle back into Mauritania. As the country gained
   independence in 1960, the capital city Nouakchott was founded at the
   site of a small colonial village, the Ksar, and 90% of the population
   was still nomadic. With independence, larger numbers of the indigenous
   peoples (Haalpulaar, Soninke, and Wolof) entered Mauritania, moving
   into the area north of the Senegal River. Educated in French language
   and customs, many of these recent arrivals became clerks, soldiers, and
   administrators in the new state.

   Moors reacted to this change by increasing pressure to Arabize many
   aspects of Mauritanian life, such as law and language. A schism
   developed between those—mainly Moors—who consider Mauritania to be an
   Arab country and those who seek a dominant role for the non-Moorish
   peoples. The discord between these two conflicting visions of
   Mauritanian society was evident during intercommunal violence that
   broke out in April 1989 (the "1989 Events"), but has since subsided.
   The tension between these two visions remains a feature of the
   political dialogue. A significant number from both groups, however,
   seek a more diverse, pluralistic society.

Politics

   Politics in Mauritania have always been determined by personalities and
   tribes more than ideologies, with any leader's ability to exercise
   political power dependent upon control over resources; perceived
   ability and integrity; and tribal, ethnic, family, and personal
   considerations. Conflict between white Moor, black Moor, and non-Moor
   ethnic groups (Haal Pulaars, Soninkes, Wolofs and Bambaras), centering
   on language, land tenure, and other issues, continues to be the
   dominant challenge to national unity.

   The government bureaucracy is composed of traditional ministries,
   special agencies, and parastatal companies. The Ministry of Interior
   spearheads a system of regional governors and prefects modeled on the
   French system of local administration. Under this system, Mauritania is
   divided into 13 regions ( wilaya), including the capital district,
   Nouakchott. Control is tightly concentrated in the executive branch of
   the central government, but a series of national and municipal
   elections since 1992 have produced some limited decentralization.

   Mauritania, along with Morocco, illegally annexed the territory of
   Western Sahara in 1976, with Mauritania taking the lower one-third.
   After several military losses to Polisario, Mauritania retreated in
   1979, and its claims were taken over by Morocco. Due to economic
   weakness, Mauritania has been a negligible player in the territorial
   dispute, with its official position being that it wishes for an
   expedient solution that is mutually agreeable to all parties.

   The discovery of oil in 2001 in the offshore Chinguetti deposit will be
   a test for the current government since, according to human rights
   activists, it can be a blessing for one of the poorest countries in the
   world as well as a curse bringing corruption and violence to the
   country.

Moktar Ould Daddah

   After independence, President Moktar Ould Daddah, originally installed
   by the French, formalized Mauritania into a one-party state in 1964
   with a new constitution, which set up an authoritarian presidential
   regime. Daddah's own Parti du Peuple Mauritanien (PPM) became the
   ruling organization. The President justified this decision on the
   grounds that he considered Mauritania unready for western-style
   multi-party democracy. Under this one-party constitution, Daddah was
   reelected in uncontested elections in 1966, 1971 and 1976. Daddah was
   ousted in a bloodless coup on July 10, 1978.

Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya's rule (1984-2005)

   The Parti Républicain Démocratique et Social (PRDS), formerly led by
   President Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya, dominated Mauritanian politics
   following the country's first multi-party elections in April 1992
   following the approval by referendum of the current constitution in
   July 1991. President Taya, who won elections in 1992 and 1997, first
   became chief of state through a December 12, 1984 bloodless coup which
   made him chairman of the committee of military officers that governed
   Mauritania from July 1978 to April 1992.

   Political parties, illegal during the military period, were legalized
   again in 1991. By April 1992, as civilian rule returned, 16 major
   political parties had been recognized; 12 major political parties were
   active in 2004. Most opposition parties boycotted the first legislative
   election in 1992, and for nearly a decade the parliament was dominated
   by the PRDS. The opposition participated in municipal elections in
   January-February 1994 and subsequent Senate elections, most recently in
   April 2004, gained representation at the local level as well as three
   seats in the Senate.

   Mauritania's presidential election, its third since adopting the
   democratic process in 1992, took place on November 7, 2003. Six
   candidates, including Mauritania's first female and first Haratine
   (former slave family) candidates, represented a wide variety of
   political goals and backgrounds. Incumbent President Maaouya Ould
   Sid'Ahmed Taya won reelection with 67.02% of the popular vote,
   according to the official figures, with Mohamed Khouna Ould Haidalla
   finishing second.

   Sid'Ahmed Taya recognized Israel (see Foreign relations of Mauritania),
   which made Mauritania the only Arab country not neighbouring Israel
   which recognized the latter (Morocco and Qatar have official ties with
   Israel, but do not fully recognize it). He also started cooperating
   with the United States in antiterrorism activities, which was
   criticized by human rights NGOs, who talked of an exaggeration and
   instrumentation of alleged terrorist activities for geopolitical aims.

   A group of current and former Army officers launched a bloody but
   unsuccessful coup attempt on June 8, 2003. The leaders of the attempted
   coup were never caught.

August 2005 military coup

   In August 2005, a military coup led by Col. Ely Ould Mohamed Vall ended
   Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya's 21 years of strong-arm rule.

   On August 3, the Mauritanian military, including members of the
   presidential guard, seized control of key points in the capital of
   Nouakchott. They took advantage of President Taya's attendance at the
   funeral of Saudi King Fahd to organize the coup, which took place
   without loss of life. The officers, calling themselves the Military
   Council for Justice and Democracy, released the following statement:

          The national armed forces and security forces have unanimously
          decided to put a definitive end to the oppressive activities of
          the defunct authority, which our people have suffered from
          during the past years. (BBC)

   The Military Council later issued another statement naming as president
   Col. Mohamed Vall, director of the national police force, the Sûreté
   Nationale, since 1987, and listing 16 other officers as members.

   Col. Mohamed Vall was once regarded as a firm ally of the now-ousted
   president Sid'Ahmed Taya, even aiding him in the original coup that
   brought him to power, and later serving as his security chief. This
   high-level betrayal of the former president suggests broad discontent
   within the branches of local government, which is further supported by
   the lack of bloodshed and the population's support of the rebel
   militaries.

   Applauded by the Mauritanian people, but cautiously watched by the
   international community, the coup has since been generally accepted,
   while the military junta has promised to organize elections within two
   years. In a referendum on June 26, 2006, Mauritanians overwhelmingly
   (97%) approved a new constitution which limited the duration of a
   president's stay in office. The leader of the junta, Col. Vall,
   promised to abide by the referendum and relinquish power peacefully.

   Israel's recognition by the Islamic Republic of Mauritania was
   maintained by the new regime.

Dispute with Woodside Petroleum

   In February 2006, the Mauritanian government denounced amendments to an
   oil contract made by former leader Maaouiya Ould Taya with Woodside
   Petroleum, an Australian company. In 2004, Woodside had agreed to
   invest $US 600 million in developing Mauritania's Chinguetti offshore
   oil project. The controversial amendments, which Mauritanian
   authorities declared had been signed "outside the legal framework of
   normal practice, to the great detriment of our country", could cost
   Mauritania up to $200 million a year, according to BBC News. Signed by
   Woodside two weeks after the February 1, 2005 legislation authorizing
   the four amendments, they provided for a lower state quota in the
   profit-oil, and reduced taxes by 15 percent in certain zones. They also
   eased environmental constraints, and extended the length and scope of
   the exploitation and exploration monopoly, among other measures.

   The disputed amendments were signed by former oil minister Zeidane Ould
   Hmeida in February 2004 and March 2005. Hmeida was arrested in January
   2006 on charges of "serious crimes against the country's essential
   economic interests".

   Nouakchott's authorities declared that the government would likely seek
   international arbitration, which Woodside (which operated for Hardman,
   BG Group, Premier, ROC Oil, Fusion, Petronas, Dana Petroleum, Energy
   Africa and the Hydrocarbons Mauritanian Society) also contemplated.

   Discovered in 2001, Chinguetti has proven reserves of about 120 million
   barrels of oil. At the end of December 2005, authorities estimated that
   in 2006, the oil profits would be 47 billion ouguiyas (about US$180
   million) and represent a quarter of the state budget, according to RFI
   .

   The Australian Federal Police are currently investigating Woodside for
   allegations of bribery and corruption in Mauritania (according to the
   Sydney Morning Herald ).

   Atar in Mauritania
   Enlarge
   Atar in Mauritania
   Chinguetti mosque in Mauritania
   Enlarge
   Chinguetti mosque in Mauritania

Administrative Divisions

   Mauritania is divided into 12 regions (régions) and 1 capital district,
   and subdivided into 44 departments (départements).

   The regions include (capitals in parentheses):
     * Adrar ( Atar)
     * Assaba ( Kifa)
     * Brakna ( Aleg)
     * Dakhlet Nouadhibou ( Nouadhibou)
     * Gorgol ( Kaédi)
     * Guidimaka ( Sélibaby)
     * Hodh Ech Chargui ( Néma)
     * Hodh El Gharbi ( Ayoun el Atrous)
     * Inchiri ( Akjoujt)
     * Tagant ( Tidjikdja)
     * Tiris Zemmour ( F'dérik)
     * Trarza ( Rosso)

     * Nouakchott ( capital district)

   Departments: see Departments of Mauritania

Geography

   Satellite image of Mauritania, generated from raster graphics data
   supplied by The Map Library
   Enlarge
   Satellite image of Mauritania, generated from raster graphics data
   supplied by The Map Library
   Traces of the Dakar Rally in Mauritania
   Enlarge
   Traces of the Dakar Rally in Mauritania
   Richat Structure, Mauritania
   Enlarge
   Richat Structure, Mauritania

   At 397,929 mi² (1,030,700 km² ), Mauritania is the world's 29th-largest
   country (after Bolivia). It is comparable in size to Egypt.

   Mauritania is generally flat, its 1,030,700 square kilometers (397,850
   sq mi) forming vast, arid plains broken by occasional ridges and
   clifflike outcroppings. A series of scarps face southwest,
   longitudinally bisecting these plains in the centre of the country. The
   scarps also separate a series of sandstone plateaus, the highest of
   which is the Adrar Plateau, reaching an elevation of 500 meters (1,640
   ft). Spring-fed oases lie at the foot of some of the scarps. Isolated
   peaks, often rich in minerals, rise above the plateaus; the smaller
   peaks are called guelbs and the larger ones kedias. The concentric
   Guelb er Richat (also known as the Richat Structure) is a prominent
   feature of the north-central region. Kediet Ijill, near the city of
   Zouîrât, has an elevation of 1,000 meters (3,280 ft) and is the highest
   peak.

Trivia

     * Mauritania and Madagascar are the only two countries in the world
       not to use decimal-based currency. The basic unit of currency, the
       ouguiya, is comprised of five khoums.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mauritania"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
