   #copyright

Max Weber

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Human Scientists


   This is a featured article. Click here for more information.
                Maximilian Weber
   German political economist and sociologist
   Born April 21, 1864
        Erfurt, Germany
   Died June 14, 1920
        Munich, Germany

   Maximilian Weber ( IPA: [maks ˈveːbɐ]) ( April 21, 1864 – June 14,
   1920) was a German political economist and sociologist who is
   considered one of the founders of the modern study of sociology and
   public administration. He began his career at the University of Berlin,
   and later worked at Freiburg University, University of Heidelberg,
   University of Vienna and University of Munich. He was influential in
   contemporary German politics, being one of Germany's negotiators at the
   Treaty of Versailles and the member of the commission charged with
   drafting the Weimar Constitution.

   His major works deal with rationalisation in sociology of religion and
   government, but he also contributed much in the field of economics. His
   most famous work is his essay The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of
   Capitalism, which began his work in the sociology of religion. In this
   work, Weber argued that religion was one of the non-exclusive reasons
   for the different ways the cultures of the Occident and the Orient have
   developed, and stressed importance of particular characteristics of
   ascetic Protestantism which led to the development of capitalism,
   bureaucracy and rational-legal state in the West. In another major
   work, Politics as a Vocation, Weber defined the state as an entity
   which possesses a monopoly on the legitimate use of physical force, a
   definition that became pivotal to the study of modern Western political
   science. His most known contributions are often referred to as the '
   Weber Thesis'.

Life and career

   Weber was born in Erfurt in Thuringia, Germany, the eldest of seven
   children of Max Weber Sr., a prominent politician and civil servant,
   and Helene Fallenstein. Weber Sr.'s engagement with public life
   immersed the family home in politics, as his salon received many
   prominent scholars and public figures.

   The young Weber and his brother Alfred, who also became a sociologist
   and economist, thrived in this intellectual atmosphere. Max's 1876
   Christmas present to his parents, when he was thirteen years old, was
   two historical essays entitled "About the course of German history,
   with special reference to the positions of the emperor and the pope"
   and "About the Roman Imperial period from Constantine to the migration
   of nations". At the age of fourteen, he wrote letters studded with
   references to Homer, Virgil, Cicero, and Livy, and he had an extended
   knowledge of Goethe, Spinoza, Kant, and Schopenhauer before he began
   university studies. It seemed clear that Weber would pursue advanced
   studies in the social sciences.
   Max Weber and his brothers, Alfred and Karl, in 1879
   Enlarge
   Max Weber and his brothers, Alfred and Karl, in 1879

   In 1882 Weber enrolled in the University of Heidelberg as a law
   student. Weber joined his father's duelling fraternity, and chose as
   his major study Weber Sr.'s field of law. Along with his law
   coursework, young Weber attended lectures in economics and studied
   medieval history and theology. Intermittently, he served with the
   German army in Strasbourg.

   In the fall of 1884, Weber returned to his parents' home to study at
   the University of Berlin. For the next eight years of his life,
   interrupted only by a term at the University of Goettingen and short
   periods of further military training, Weber stayed at his parents'
   house; first as a student, later as a junior barrister, and finally as
   a Dozent at the University of Berlin. In 1886 Weber passed the
   examination for " Referendar", comparable to the bar association
   examination in the British and American legal systems. Throughout the
   late 1880s, Weber continued his study of history. He earned his law
   doctorate in 1889 by writing a doctoral dissertation on legal history
   entitled The History of Medieval Business Organisations. Two years
   later, Weber completed his " Habilitationsschrift", The Roman Agrarian
   History and its Significance for Public and Private Law. Having thus
   become a " Privatdozent", Weber was now qualified to hold a German
   professorship.

   In the years between the completion of his dissertation and
   habilitation, Weber took an interest in contemporary social policy. In
   1888 he joined the " Verein für Socialpolitik", the new professional
   association of German economists affiliated with the historical school,
   who saw the role of economics primarily as the solving of the
   wide-ranging social problems of the age, and who pioneered large-scale
   statistical studies of economic problems. In 1890 the "Verein"
   established a research program to examine "the Polish question" or
   Ostflucht, meaning the influx of foreign farm workers into eastern
   Germany as local labourers migrated to Germany's rapidly
   industrialising cities. Weber was put in charge of the study, and wrote
   a large part of its results. The final report was widely acclaimed as
   an excellent piece of empirical research, and cemented Weber's
   reputation as an expert in agrarian economics.
   Max Weber and his wife Marianne in 1894
   Enlarge
   Max Weber and his wife Marianne in 1894

   In 1893 he married his distant cousin Marianne Schnitger, later a
   feminist and author in her own right, who was instrumental in
   collecting and publishing Weber's journal articles as books after his
   death. The couple moved to Freiburg in 1894, where Weber was appointed
   professor of economics at Freiburg University, before accepting the
   same position at the University of Heidelberg in 1896. Next year, Max
   Weber Sr. died, two months after a severe quarrel with his son that was
   never resolved. After this, Weber become increasingly prone to
   nervousness and insomnia, making it difficult for him to fulfill his
   duties as a professor. His condition forced him to reduce his teaching,
   and leave his last course in the fall of 1899 unfinished. After
   spending months in a sanatorium during the summer and fall of 1900,
   Weber and his wife traveled to Italy at the end of the year, and did
   not return to Heidelberg until April 1902.
   Max Weber in 1917
   Enlarge
   Max Weber in 1917

   After Weber's immense productivity in the early 1890s, he did not
   publish a single paper between early 1898 and late 1902, finally
   resigning his professorship in fall 1903. Freed from those obligations,
   in that year he accepted a position as associate editor of the Archives
   for Social Science and Social Welfare next to his colleagues Edgar
   Jaffé and Werner Sombart. In 1904, Weber began to publish some of his
   most seminal papers in this journal, notably his essay The Protestant
   Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. It became his most famous work, and
   laid the foundations for his later research on the impact of cultures
   and religions on the development of economic systems. This essay was
   the only one of his works that was published as a book during his
   lifetime. Also that year, he visited United States and participated in
   the Congress of Arts and Sciences held in connection with the World's
   Fair ( Louisiana Purchase Exposition) at St. Louis. Despite his
   successes, Weber felt that he was unable to resume regular teaching at
   that time, and continued on as a private scholar, helped by an
   inheritance in 1907. In 1912, Weber tried to organise a left-wing
   political party to combine social-democrats and liberals. This attempt
   was unsuccessful, presumably because many liberals feared
   social-democratic revolutionary ideals at the time.

   During the First World War, Weber served for a time as director of the
   army hospitals in Heidelberg. In 1915 and 1916 he sat on commissions
   that tried to retain German supremacy in Belgium and Poland after the
   war. Weber's views on war, as well as on expansion of the German
   empire, changed throughout the war. He became a member of the worker
   and soldier council of Heidelberg in 1918. In 1918 Weber became a
   consultant to the German Armistice Commission at the Treaty of
   Versailles and to the commission charged with drafting the Weimar
   Constitution. He argued in favour of inserting Article 48 into the
   Weimar Constitution This article was later used by Adolf Hitler to
   institute rule by decree, thereby allowing his government to suppress
   opposition and obtain dictatorial powers. Weber contributions to German
   politics remain a controversial subject to this day.

   Weber resumed teaching during this time, first at the University of
   Vienna, then in 1919 at the University of Munich. In Munich, he headed
   the first German university institute of sociology, but ultimately
   never held a personal sociology appointment. Weber left politics due to
   right-wing agitation in 1919 and 1920. Many colleagues and students in
   Munich argued against him for his speeches and left-wing attitude
   during the German Revolution of 1918 and 1919, with some right-wing
   students holding protests in front of his home. Max Weber died of
   pneumonia in Munich on June 14, 1920.

Achievements

   Along with Karl Marx and Émile Durkheim, Weber is regarded as one of
   the founders of modern sociology, although in his times he was viewed
   primarily as a historian and an economist. Whereas Durkheim, following
   Comte, worked in the positivist tradition, Weber created and worked –
   like Werner Sombart, his friend and then the most famous representative
   of German sociology – in the antipositivist tradition. Those works
   started the antipositivistic revolution in social sciences, which
   stressed the difference between the social sciences and natural
   sciences, especially due to human social actions (which Weber
   differentiated into traditional, affectional, value-rational and
   instrumental). Weber's early work was related to industrial sociology,
   but he is most famous for his later work on the sociology of religion
   and sociology of government.

   Max Weber began his studies of rationalisation in The Protestant Ethic
   and the Spirit of Capitalism, in which he shows how the aims of certain
   ascetic Protestant denominations, particularly Calvinism, shifted
   towards the rational means of economic gain as a way of expressing that
   they had been blessed. The rational roots of this doctrine, he argued,
   soon grew incompatible with and larger than the religious, and so the
   latter were eventually discarded. Weber continues his investigation
   into this matter in later works, notably in his studies on bureaucracy
   and on the classifications of authority. In these works he alludes to
   an inevitable move towards rationalization.

   It should be noted that many of his works famous today were collected,
   revised, and published posthumously. Significant interpretations of
   Weber's writings were produced by such sociological luminaries as
   Talcott Parsons and C. Wright Mills.

Sociology of religion

   Weber's work on the sociology of religion started with the essay The
   Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism and continued with the
   analysis of The Religion of China: Confucianism and Taoism, The
   Religion of India: The Sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism, and Ancient
   Judaism. His work on other religions was interrupted by his sudden
   death in 1920, which prevented him from following Ancient Judaism with
   studies of Psalms, Book of Jacob, Talmudic Jewry, early Christianity
   and Islam. His three main themes were the effect of religious ideas on
   economic activities, the relation between social stratification and
   religious ideas, and the distinguishable characteristics of Western
   civilization.

   His goal was to find reasons for the different development paths of the
   cultures of the Occident and the Orient, although without judging or
   valuing them, like some of contemporary thinkers who followed the
   social darwinist paradigm; Weber wanted primarily to explain the
   distinctive elements of the Western civilization. In the analysis of
   his findings, Weber maintained that Calvinist (and more widely,
   Christian) religious ideas had had a major impact on the social
   innovation and development of the economic system of Europe and the
   United States, but noted that they were not the only factors in this
   development. Other notable factors mentioned by Weber included the
   rationalism of scientific pursuit, merging observation with
   mathematics, science of scholarship and jurisprudence, rational
   systematisation of government administration, and economic enterprise.
   In the end, the study of the sociology of religion, according to Weber,
   merely explored one phase of the freedom from magic, that
   "disenchantment of the world" that he regarded as an important
   distinguishing aspect of Western culture.

The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism

   Cover of the original German edition of The Protestant Ethic and the
   Spirit of Capitalism.
   Enlarge
   Cover of the original German edition of The Protestant Ethic and the
   Spirit of Capitalism.

   Weber's essay The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (Die
   protestantische Ethik und der Geist des Kapitalismus) is his most
   famous work. It is argued that this work should not be viewed as a
   detailed study of Protestantism, but rather as an introduction into
   Weber's later works, especially his studies of interaction between
   various religious ideas and economic behaviour. In The Protestant Ethic
   and the Spirit of Capitalism, Weber puts forward the thesis that the
   Puritan ethic and ideas influenced the development of capitalism.
   Religious devotion has usually been accompanied by rejection of mundane
   affairs, including economic pursuit. Why was that not the case with
   Protestantism? Weber addresses that paradox in his essay.

   He defines "the spirit of capitalism" as the ideas and habits that
   favour the rational pursuit of economic gain. Weber points out that
   such a spirit is not limited to Western culture, when considered as the
   attitude of individuals, but that such individuals – heroic
   entrepreneurs, as he calls them – could not by themselves establish a
   new economic order (capitalism). Among the universal tendencies
   identified by Weber that those individuals had to fight were the desire
   to profit with minimum effort, the idea that work was a curse and a
   burden to be avoided, especially when it exceeded what was enough for
   modest life. "In order that a manner of life well adapted to the
   peculiarities of capitalism" wrote Weber "could come to dominate
   others, it had to originate somewhere, and not in isolated individuals
   alone, but as a way of life common to whole groups of man."

   After defining the spirit of capitalism, Weber argues that there are
   many reasons to look for its origins in the religious ideas of the
   Reformation. Many observers like William Petty, Montesquieu, Henry
   Thomas Buckle, John Keats, and others have commented on the affinity
   between Protestantism and the development of the commercial spirit.

   Weber showed that certain types of Protestantism – notably Calvinism –
   favoured rational pursuit of economic gain and worldly activities which
   had been given positive spiritual and moral meaning. It was not the
   goal of those religious ideas, but rather a byproduct – the inherent
   logic of those doctrines and the advice based upon them both directly
   and indirectly encouraged planning and self-denial in the pursuit of
   economic gain. A common illustration is in the cobbler, hunched over
   his work, who devotes his entire effort to the praise of God.

   Weber stated that he abandoned research into Protestantism because his
   colleague Ernst Troeltsch, a professional theologian, had initiated
   work on the book The Social Teachings of the Christian Churches and
   Sects. Another reason for Weber's decision was that that essay has
   provided the perspective for a broad comparison of religion and
   society, which he continued in his later works. The phrase " work
   ethic" used in modern commentary is a derivative of the " Protestant
   ethic" discussed by Weber. It was adopted when the idea of the
   Protestant ethic was generalised to apply to Japanese, Jews and other
   non-Christians.

The Religion of China: Confucianism and Taoism

   The Religion of China: Confucianism and Taoism was Weber's second major
   work on the sociology of religion. Weber focused on those aspects of
   Chinese society that were different from those of Western Europe and
   especially contrasted with Puritanism, and posed a question why
   capitalism did not develop in China. In Hundred Schools of Thought
   Warring States Period, he concentrated on the early period of Chinese
   history, during which the major Chinese schools of thoughts
   (Confucianism and Taoism) came to the fore.

   By 200 BC, the Chinese state had developed from a loose federation of
   feudal states into a unified empire with patrimonal rule, as described
   in the Warring States Period.As in Europe, Chinese cities had been
   founded as forts or leaders' residences, and were the centres of trade
   and crafts. However, they never received political autonomy and its
   citizens had no special political rights or privileges. This is due to
   the strength of kinship ties, which stems from religious beliefs in
   ancestral spirits. Also, the guilds competed against each other for the
   favour of the Emperor, never uniting in order to fight for more rights.
   Therefore, the residents of Chinese cities never constitute a separate
   status class like the residents of European cities.

   Early unification of the state and the establishment of central
   officialdom meant that the focus of the power struggle changed from the
   distribution of land to the distribution of offices, which with their
   fees and taxes were the most prominent source of income for the holder,
   who often pocketed up to 50% of the revenue. The imperial government
   depended on the services of those officials, not on the service of the
   military ( knights) as in Europe.

   Weber emphasised that Confucianism tolerated a great number of popular
   cults without any effort to systematise them into a religious doctrine.
   Instead of metaphysical conjectures, it taught adjustment to the world.
   The "superior" man ( literati) should stay away from the pursuit of
   wealth (though not from wealth itself). Therefore, becoming a civil
   servant was preferred to becoming a businessman and granted a much
   higher status.

   Chinese civilisation had no religious prophecy nor a powerful priestly
   class. The emperor was the high priest of the state religion and the
   supreme ruler, but popular cults were also tolerated (however the
   political ambitions of their priests were curtailed). This forms a
   sharp contrast with medieval Europe, where the Church curbed the power
   of secular rulers and the same faith was professed by rulers and common
   folk alike.

   According to Confucianism, the worship of great deities is the affair
   of the state, while ancestral worship is required of all, and the
   multitude of popular cults is tolerated. Confucianism tolerated magic
   and mysticism as long as they were useful tools for controlling the
   masses; it denounced them as heresy and suppressed them when they
   threatened the established order (hence the opposition to Buddhism).
   Note that in this context, Confucianism can be referred to as the state
   cult, and Taoism as the popular religion.

   Weber argued that while several factors favoured the development of a
   capitalist economy (long periods of peace, improved control of rivers,
   population growth, freedom to acquire land and move outside of native
   community, free choice of occupation) they were outweighed by others
   (mostly stemming from religion):
     * technical inventions were opposed on the basis of religion, in the
       sense that the disturbance of ancestral spirits was argued to lead
       to bad luck, and adjusting oneself to the world was preferred to
       changing it.
     * sale of land was often prohibited or made very difficult.
     * extended kinship groups (based on the religious importance of
       family ties and ancestry) protected its members against economic
       adversities, therefore discouraging payment of debts, work
       discipline, and rationalisation of work processes.
     * those kinship groups prevented the development of an urban status
       class and hindered developments towards legal institutions,
       codification of laws, and the rise of a lawyer class.

   According to Weber, Confucianism and Puritanism represent two
   comprehensive but mutually exclusive types of rationalisation, each
   attempting to order human life according to certain ultimate religious
   beliefs. Both encouraged sobriety and self-control and were compatible
   with the accumulation of wealth. However, Confucianism aimed at
   attaining and preserving "a cultured status position" and used as means
   adjustment to the world, education, self-perfection, politeness and
   familial piety. Puritanism used those means in order to create a "tool
   of God", creating a person that would serve the God and master the
   world. Such intensity of belief and enthusiasm for action were alien to
   the aesthetic values of Confucianism. Therefore, Weber states that it
   was the difference in prevailing mentality that contributed to the
   development of capitalism in the West and the absence of it in China.

The Religion of India: The Sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism

   The Religion of India: The Sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism was
   Weber's third major work on the sociology of religion. In this work he
   deals with the structure of Indian society, with the orthodox doctrines
   of Hinduism and the heterodox doctrines of Buddhism, with modifications
   brought by the influence of popular religiosity, and finally with the
   impact of religious beliefs on the secular ethic of Indian society.

   The Indian social system was shaped by the concept of caste. It
   directly linked religious belief and the segregation of society into
   status groups. Weber describes the caste system, consisting of the
   Brahmins (priests), the Kshatriyas (warriors), the Vaisyas (merchants)
   and the Shudras (labourers). Then he describes the spread of the caste
   system in India due to conquests, the marginalisation of certain tribes
   and the subdivision of castes.

   Weber pays special attention to Brahmins and analyses why they occupied
   the highest place in Indian society for many centuries. With regard to
   the concept of dharma he concludes that the Indian ethical pluralism is
   very different both from the universal ethic of Confucianism and
   Christianity. He notes that the caste system prevented the development
   of urban status groups.

   Next, Weber analyses the Hindu religious beliefs, including asceticism
   and the Hindu world view, the Brahman orthodox doctrines, the rise and
   fall of Buddhism in India, the Hindu restoration, and the evolution of
   the guru. Weber asks the question whether religion had any influence
   upon the daily round of mundane activities, and if so, how it impacted
   economic conduct. He notes the idea of an immutable world order
   consisting of the eternal cycles of rebirth and the deprecation of the
   mundane world, and finds that the traditional caste system, supported
   by the religion, slowed economic development; in other words, the
   "spirit" of the caste system militated against an indigenous
   development of capitalism.

   Weber concludes his study of society and religion in India by combining
   his findings with his previous work on China. He notes that the beliefs
   tended to interpret the meaning of life as otherworldly or mystical
   experience, that the intellectuals tended to be apolitical in their
   orientation, and that the social world was fundamentally divided
   between the educated, whose lives were oriented toward the exemplary
   conduct of a prophet or wise man, and the uneducated masses who
   remained caught in their daily rounds and believed in magic. In Asia,
   no Messianic prophecy appeared that could have given "plan and meaning
   to the everyday life of educated and uneducated alike". He argues that
   it was the Messianic prophecies in the countries of the Near East, as
   distinguished from the prophecy of the Asiatic mainland, that prevented
   Western countries from following the paths of China and India, and his
   next work, Ancient Judaism was an attempt to prove this theory.

Ancient Judaism

   In Ancient Judaism, his fourth major work on the sociology of religion,
   Weber attempted to explain the "combination of circumstances" which
   resulted in the early differences between Oriental and Occidental
   religiosity. It is especially visible when the interworldly asceticism
   developed by Western Christianity is contrasted with mystical
   contemplation of the kind developed in India. Weber noted that some
   aspects of Christianity sought to conquer and change the world, rather
   than withdraw from its imperfections. This fundamental characteristic
   of Christianity (when compared to Far Eastern religions) stems
   originally from the ancient Jewish prophecy. Stating his reasons for
   investigating ancient Judaism, Weber wrote that "Anyone who is heir to
   the traditions of modern European civilisation will approach the
   problems of universal history with a set of questions, which to him
   appear both inevitable and legitimate. These questions will turn on the
   combination of circumstances which has brought about the cultural
   phenomena that are uniquely Western and that have at the same time (…)
   a universal cultural significance".

   "For the Jew (…) the social order of the world was conceived to have
   been turned into the opposite of that promised for the future, but in
   the future it was to be overturned so that Jewry could be once again
   dominant. The world was conceived as neither eternal nor unchangeable,
   but rather as being created. Its present structure was a product of
   man's actions, above all those of the Jews, and God's reaction to them.
   Hence the world was a historical product designed to give way to the
   truly God-ordained order (…). There existed in addition a highly
   rational religious ethic of social conduct; it was free of magic and
   all forms of irrational quest for salvation; it was inwardly worlds
   apart from the path of salvation offered by Asiatic religions. To a
   large extent this ethic still underlies contemporary Middle Eastern and
   European ethic. World-historical interest in Jewry rests upon this
   fact. (…) Thus, in considering the conditions of Jewry's evolution, we
   stand at a turning point of the whole cultural development of the West
   and the Middle East".

   Weber analyses the interaction between the Bedouins, the cities, the
   herdsmen and the peasants, including the conflicts between them and the
   rise and fall of the United Monarchy. The time of the United Monarchy
   appears as a mere episode, dividing the period of confederacy since the
   Exodus and the settlement of the Israelites in Canaan from the period
   of political decline following the Division of the Monarchy. This
   division into periods has major implications for religious history.
   Since the basic tenets of Judaism were formulated during the time of
   Israelite confederacy and after the fall of the United Monarchy, they
   became the basis of the prophetic movement that left a lasting
   impression on the Western civilisation.

   Weber discusses the organisation of the early confederacy, the unique
   qualities of the Israelites' relations to Yahweh, the influence of
   foreign cults, types of religious ecstasy, and the struggle of the
   priests against ecstasy and idol worship. He goes on to describe the
   times of the Division of the Monarchy, social aspects of Biblical
   prophecy, the social orientation of the prophets, demagogues and
   pamphleteers, ecstasy and politics, and the ethic and theodicity of the
   prophets. Weber notes that Judaism not only fathered Christianity and
   Islam, but was crucial to the rise of modern Occident state, as its
   influence were as important to those of Hellenistic and Roman cultures.
   Reinhard Bendix, summarising Ancient Judaism, writes that "free of
   magic and esoteric speculations, devoted to the study of law, vigilant
   in the effort to do what was right in the eyes of the Lord in the hope
   of a better future, the prophets established a religion of faith that
   subjected man's daily life to the imperatives of a divinely ordained
   moral law. In this way, ancient Judaism helped create the moral
   rationalism of Western civilisation".

Sociology of politics and government

   In the sociology of politics and government, one of Weber's most
   significant contribution is his Politics as a Vocation essay. Therein,
   Weber unveils the definition of the state that has become so pivotal to
   Western social thought: that the state is that entity which possesses a
   monopoly on the legitimate use of physical force, which it may
   nonetheless elect to delegate as it sees fit. In this essay, Weber
   wrote that politics is to be understood as any activity in which the
   state might engage itself in order to influence the relative
   distribution of force. Politics thus comes to be understood as deriving
   from power. A politician must not be a man of the "true Christian
   ethic", understood by Weber as being the ethic of the Sermon on the
   Mount, that is to say, the injunction to turn the other cheek. An
   adherent of such an ethic ought rather to be understood to be a saint,
   for it is only saints, according to Weber, that can appropriately
   follow it. The political realm is no realm for saints. A politician
   ought to marry the ethic of ultimate ends and the ethic of
   responsibility, and must possess both a passion for his avocation and
   the capacity to distance himself from the subject of his exertions (the
   governed).

   Weber distinguished three pure types of political leadership,
   domination and authority: charismatic domination (familial and
   religious), traditional domination ( patriarchs, patrimonalism,
   feudalism), and legal domination (modern law and state, bureaucracy).
   In his view, every historical relation between rulers and ruled
   contained such elements and they can be analysed on the basis of this
   tripartite distinction. He also notes that the instability of
   charismatic authority inevitably forces it to "routinize" into a more
   structured form of authority. Likewise he notes that in a pure type of
   traditional rule, sufficient resistance to a master can lead to a
   "traditional revolution". Thus he alludes to an inevitable move towards
   a rational-legal structure of authority, utilising a bureaucratic
   structure. Thus this theory can be sometimes viewed as part of the
   social evolutionism theory. This ties to his broader concept of
   rationalisation by suggesting the inevitability of a move in this
   direction.

   Weber is also well-known for his critical study of the
   bureaucratisation of society, the rational ways in which formal social
   organisations apply the ideal type characteristics of a bureaucracy. It
   was Weber who begun the studies of bureaucracy and whose works led to
   the popularization of this term.Many aspects of modern public
   administration go back to him, and a classic, hierarchically organised
   civil service of the Continental type is called "Weberian civil
   service", although this is only one ideal type of public administration
   and government described in his magnum opus Economy and Society (1922),
   and one that he did not particularly like himself – he only thought it
   particularly efficient and successful. In this work, Weber outlines a
   description, which has become famous, of rationalisation (of which
   bureaucratisation is a part) as a shift from a value-oriented
   organisation and action (traditional authority and charismatic
   authority) to a goal-oriented organisation and action (legal-rational
   authority). The result, according to Weber, is a "polar night of icy
   darkness", in which increasing rationalisation of human life traps
   individuals in an " iron cage" of rule-based, rational control. Weber's
   bureaucracy studies also led him to his analysis – correct, as it would
   turn out – that socialism in Russia would, due to the abolishing of the
   free market and its mechanisms, lead to over-bureaucratisation
   (evident, for example, in the shortage economy) rather than to the
   "withering away of the state" (as Karl Marx had predicted would happen
   in communist society). In defense of Marx's 'prediction', however, it
   should be noted that Russian society at the time of the Russian
   revolution was not the 'advanced capitalist' type of society in which
   Marx had said true communism would arise and flourish.

Economics

   While Max Weber is best known and recognised today as one of the
   leading scholars and founders of modern sociology, he also accomplished
   much in other fields, notably economics. During his life no such
   distinctions really existed, and Weber considered himself a historian
   and an economist first, sociologist distant second.

   From the point of view of the economists, he is a representative of the
   "Youngest" German historical school of economics. His most valued
   contributions to the field of economics is his famous work, The
   Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. This is a seminal essay
   on the differences between religions and the relative wealth of their
   followers. Weber's work is parallel to Sombart's treatise of the same
   phenomenon, which however located the rise of Capitalism in Judaism.
   Weber's other main contribution to economics (as well as to social
   sciences in general) is his work on methodology: his theories of "
   Verstehen" (known as understanding or Interpretative Sociology) and of
   antipositivism (known as humanistic sociology).

   The doctrine of Interpretative Sociology is one of the main
   sociological paradigms, with many supporters as well as critics. This
   thesis states that social, economic and historical research can never
   be fully inductive or descriptive as one must always approach it with a
   conceptual apparatus, which Weber termed " Ideal Type". The idea can be
   summarised as follows: an ideal type is formed from characteristics and
   elements of the given phenomena but it is not meant to correspond to
   all of the characteristics of any one particular case. Weber's Ideal
   Type became one of the most important concepts in social sciences, and
   led to the creation of such concepts as Ferdinand Tönnies' " Normal
   Type".

   Weber conceded that employing "Ideal Types" was an abstraction but
   claimed that it was nonetheless essential if one were to understand any
   particular social phenomena because, unlike physical phenomena, they
   involve human behaviour which must be interpreted by ideal types. This,
   together with his antipositivistic argumentation can be viewed as the
   methodological justification for the assumption of the " rational
   economic man" ( homo economicus).

   Max Weber formulated a three-component theory of stratification, with
   Social class, Social status and party (or politicals) as conceptually
   distinct elements.
     * Social class is based on economically determined relationship to
       the market (owner, renter, employee etc.).
     * Status is based on non-economical qualities like honour, prestige
       and religion.
     * Party refers to affiliations in the political domain.

   All three dimensions have consequences for what Weber called " life
   chances".

   Weber's other contributions to economics were several: these include a
   (seriously researched) economic history of Roman agrarian society, his
   work on the dual roles of idealism and materialism in the history of
   capitalism in his Economy and Society (1914) which present Weber's
   criticisms (or according to some, revisions) of some aspects of
   Marxism. Finally, his thoroughly researched General Economic History
   (1923) can be considered the Historical School at its empirical best.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Max_Weber"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
