   #copyright

Meander

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geology and geophysics

   Meanders in a river
   Enlarge
   Meanders in a river

   A meander is a bend in a river, also known as an oxbow loop. A stream
   or river flowing through a wide valley or flat plain will tend to form
   a meandering stream course as it alternatively erodes and deposits
   sediments along its course. The result is a snaking pattern as the
   stream meanders back and forth across its floodplain. When a meander
   gets cut off from the main stream body, an oxbow lake is formed.

   A meander is formed because the river flows faster on the outside edge
   of any small curve and slower along the inside edge. Deposition of
   sediment occurs on the inner edge because the river, moving slowly,
   cannot carry its sediment load, creating a slip-off slope. The faster
   moving current on the outside bend has more erosive ability and the
   meander tends to grow in the direction of the outside bend, forming a
   river cliff. This can be seen in areas where willows grow on the banks
   of rivers; on the inside of meanders, willows are often far from the
   bank, whilst on the outside of the bend, the roots of the willows are
   often exposed and undercut, eventually leading the trees to fall into
   the river. This demonstrates the river's movement.
   View of an incised meander in the Meuse in the French Ardennes
   Enlarge
   View of an incised meander in the Meuse in the French Ardennes
   Meanders and oxbow lakes in the Songhua River
   Enlarge
   Meanders and oxbow lakes in the Songhua River

   If the region later undergoes tectonic uplift, the meandering stream
   will again resume downward erosion. The meandering pattern will remain
   as a deep valley known as an incised meander. Rivers in the Colorado
   Plateau and streams in the Ozark Plateau are noted for these incised
   meanders.

   Sometimes an incised, also known as entrenched, meander is cut off.
   When it is, the resulting landform is called a rincon. They are created
   when a river erodes through the narrow neck of land between the ends of
   a loop, leaving the loop without an active cutting stream. One dramatic
   rincon on Lake Powell is called "The Rincon."

Origin of term

   The term derives from the Maeander River in Turkey, characterised by a
   very convoluted path. As such, early usage of the term, from the late
   1500s, referred to convoluted and windy speech and ideas, as well as
   the geomorphological feature. The river in Turkey is called Menderes
   River, south of Izmir, near the ancient Greek town of Miletos.

Meander ratio

   Meander ratio is a means of quantifying how much a river or stream
   meanders (how much its course deviates from the shortest possible
   path). It is calculated as the length of the stream divided by the
   length of the valley. A perfectly straight river would have a meander
   ratio of 1 (it would be the same length as its valley), while the
   higher this ratio is above 1, the more the river meanders.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meander"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
