   #copyright

Mercantilism

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Economics; Politics and
government


   This is a featured article. Click here for more information.
   A painting of a French seaport from 1638, at the height of
   mercantilism.
   Enlarge
   A painting of a French seaport from 1638, at the height of
   mercantilism.

   Mercantilism is an economic theory that holds that the prosperity of a
   nation depends upon its supply of capital, and that the global volume
   of trade is "unchangeable." Capital, represented by bullion (gold or
   silver) held by the state, is best increased through a positive balance
   of trade with other nations (exports over imports). Mercantilism
   suggests that the ruling government should advance these goals by
   playing a protectionist role in the economy, by encouraging exports and
   discouraging imports, especially through the use of tariffs. The
   economic policy based upon these ideas is often called the mercantile
   system.

   Mercantilism was the dominant school of economics throughout the early
   modern period (from the 16th to the 18th century, which roughly
   corresponded to the emergence of the nation-state). Domestically, this
   led to some of the first instances of significant government
   intervention and control over the economy, and it was during this
   period that much of the modern capitalist system was established.
   Internationally, mercantilism encouraged the many European wars of the
   period, and fueled European imperialism, as the European powers fought
   over "available markets". Belief in mercantilism began to fade in the
   late 18th century, as the arguments of Adam Smith, and the other
   classical economists won favour in the British Empire among such
   advocates as Richard Cobden and to a lesser degree in the rest of
   Europe with the notable exception of Germany where the Historical
   school of economics was favored throughout the 19th and early 20th
   century. Interestingly, the once former British colonies, the United
   States of America did not adhere to classical economics but to what is
   called the " American School" (a form of neo-mercantilism) in the
   policies of Hamilton, Clay, Lincoln and later Republican Party economic
   practices, that were mirrored in the policies of the Historicists in
   Germany by such economists as Friedrich List, until the emergence of
   the New Deal and the modern era. Today, mercantilism as a whole is
   rejected by many economists, though some elements are looked upon
   favorably by some economists including Ravi Batra, Pat Choate, Eammon
   Fingleton, and Michael Lind.

Theory

   Early mercantilist writers embraced bullionism, the belief that that
   quantities of gold and silver were the measure of a nation's wealth.
   Later mercantilists developed a somewhat more sophisticated view.
   Enlarge
   Early mercantilist writers embraced bullionism, the belief that that
   quantities of gold and silver were the measure of a nation's wealth.
   Later mercantilists developed a somewhat more sophisticated view.

   European economists between 1500 and 1750 are today generally
   considered mercantilists; however, these economists did not see
   themselves as contributing to a single economic ideology. The term was
   coined by the Marquis de Mirabeau in 1763, and was popularized by Adam
   Smith in 1776. The word comes from the Latin word mercari, which means
   "to run a trade," from merx, meaning "commodity." It was initially used
   solely by critics, such as Mirabeau and Smith, but was quickly adopted
   by historians. Originally, the standard English term was mercantile
   system. The word mercantilism was introduced into English from German
   in the early 20th century.

   Mercantilism as a whole cannot be considered a unified theory of
   economics. There were no mercantilist writers presenting an overarching
   scheme for the ideal economy, as Adam Smith would later do for
   classical economics. Rather, each mercantilist writer tended to focus
   on a single area of the economy. Only later did non-mercantilist
   scholars integrate these "diverse" ideas into what they called
   mercantilism. Some scholars thus reject the idea of mercantilism
   completely, arguing that it gives "a false unity to disparate events".
   To a certain extent, mercantilist doctrine itself made a general theory
   of economics impossible. Mercantilists viewed the economic system as a
   zero-sum game; where a gain by one party requires a loss by another.
   Thus, any system of policies that benefited one group would by
   definition "harm the other", and there was no possibility of economics
   being used to maximize the commonwealth, or "common good".
   Mercantilists' writings were also generally created to 'justify'
   particular practices, rather than as investigations into the best
   policies.

   Mercantilist domestic policy was more fragmented than its trade policy.
   While Adam Smith presented mercantilism as supporting strict controls
   over the economy, many mercantilists disagreed. The early modern era
   was one of letters patent and government-imposed monopolies. Some
   mercantilists supported these; but others acknowledged the corruption
   and inefficiency of such systems. Many mercantilists also realized the
   inevitable result of quotas and price ceilings were black markets. One
   element mercantilists agreed upon was the economic oppression of the
   working population. Laborers and farmers were to live at the "margins
   of subsistence". The goal was to maximize production, with no concern
   for consumption. Extra money, free time, or education for the " lower
   classes" was seen to inevitably lead to 'vice' and laziness, and would
   result in 'harm' to the economy.

   Scholars are divided on why mercantilism was the dominant economic
   ideology for two and a half centuries. One group, represented by Jacob
   Viner, argues that mercantilism was simply a straightforward,
   common-sense system that the people of the time simply did not have the
   analytical tools to discover was actually deeply fallacious. The second
   school, supported by scholars such as Robert B. Ekelund, contends that
   mercantilism was not a mistake, but rather the best possible system for
   those who developed it. This school argues that mercantilist policies
   were developed and enforced by rent-seeking merchants and governments.
   Merchants benefited greatly from the enforced monopolies, bans on
   foreign competition, and poverty of the workers. Governments benefited
   from the high tariffs and payments from the merchants. Whereas later
   economic ideas were often developed by academics and philosophers,
   almost all mercantilist writers were merchants or government officials.

   Mercantilism developed at a time when the European economy was in
   transition. Isolated feudal estates were being replaced by centralized
   nation-states as the locus of power. Technological changes in shipping
   and the growth of urban centers led to a rapid increase in
   international trade. Mercantilism focused on how this trade could best
   aid the states. Another important change was the introduction of
   double-entry bookkeeping and modern accounting. This accounting made
   extremely clear the inflow and outflow of trade, contributing to the
   close scrutiny given to the balance of trade. Of course the impact of
   the discovery of America can not be ignored. New markets and new mines
   propelled foreign trade to previously inconceivable heights. The latter
   led to “the great upward movement in prices” and an increase in “the
   volume of merchant activity itself.” Prior to mercantilism, the most
   important economic work done in Europe was by the medieval scholastic
   theorists. The goal of these thinkers was to find an economic system
   that was compatible with Christian doctrines of piety and justice. They
   focused mainly on microeconomics and local exchanges between
   individuals. Mercantilism was closely aligned with the other theories
   and ideas that were replacing the medieval worldview. This period saw
   the adoption of Niccolò Machiavelli's realpolitik and the primacy of
   the raison d'état in international relations. The mercantilist idea
   that all trade was a zero sum game, in which each side was trying to
   best the other in a ruthless competition, was integrated into the works
   of Thomas Hobbes. This dark view of human nature also fit well with the
   Puritan view of the world, and some of the most stridently mercantilist
   legislation, such as the Navigation Acts, was introduced by the
   government of Oliver Cromwell.

Criticisms

   Much of Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations is an attack on mercantilism
   Enlarge
   Much of Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations is an attack on mercantilism

   A number of scholars found important flaws with mercantilism long
   before Adam Smith developed an ideology that could fully replace it.
   Critics like Dudley North, John Locke, and David Hume undermined much
   of mercantilism, and it steadily lost favour during the eighteenth
   century. Mercantilists failed to understand the notions of comparative
   advantage (although this idea was only fully fleshed out in 1817 by
   David Ricardo) and the benefits of trade. For instance, Portugal was a
   far more efficient producer of wine than England, while in England it
   was relatively cheaper to produce cloth. Thus if Portugal specialized
   in wine and England in cloth, both states would end up better off if
   they traded. In modern economic theory, trade is not a zero-sum game of
   cutthroat competition, as both sides could benefit. By imposing
   mercantilist import restrictions and tariffs instead, both nations
   ended up poorer.

   David Hume famously noted the impossibility of the mercantilists' goal
   of a constant positive balance of trade. As bullion flowed into one
   country, the supply would increase and the value of bullion in that
   state would steadily decline relative to other goods. Conversely, in
   the state exporting bullion, its value would slowly rise. Eventually it
   would no longer be cost-effective to export goods from the high-price
   country to the low-price country, and the balance of trade would
   reverse itself. Mercantilists fundamentally misunderstood this, long
   arguing that an increase in the money supply simply meant that everyone
   gets richer.

   The importance placed on bullion was also a central target, even if
   many mercantilists had themselves begun to de-emphasize the importance
   of gold and silver. Adam Smith noted that bullion was just the same as
   any other commodity, and there was no reason to give it special
   treatment. Gold was nothing more than a yellow metal that was valuable
   only because there was not much of it.

   The first school to completely reject mercantilism were the Physiocrats
   of France. Their theories also had several important problems, and the
   replacement of mercantilism did not come until Adam Smith published The
   Wealth of Nations in 1776. This book outlines the basics of what is
   today known as classical economics. Smith spends a considerable portion
   of the book rebutting the arguments of the mercantilists, though often
   these are simplified or exaggerated versions of mercantilist thought.

   Scholars are also divided over the cause of mercantilism's end. Those
   who believe the theory was simply an error hold that its replacement
   was inevitable as soon as Smith's ideas that are more accurate were
   unveiled. Those who feel that mercantilism was rent-seeking hold that
   it ended only when major power shifts occurred. In Britain mercantilism
   faded as the Parliament gained the monarch's power to grant monopolies.
   While the wealthy capitalists who controlled the House of Commons
   benefited from these monopolies, Parliament found it difficult to
   implement them because of the high cost of group decision making.

   Mercantilist regulations were steadily removed over the course of the
   eighteenth century in Britain, and during the 19th century the British
   government fully embraced free trade and Smith's laissez-faire
   economics. On the continent, the process was somewhat different. In
   France economic control remained in the hands of the royal family and
   mercantilism continued until the French Revolution. In Germany
   mercantilism remained an important ideology in the nineteenth and early
   twentieth centuries, when the historical school of economics was
   paramount.

Legacy

   In the English-speaking world, Adam Smith's utter repudiation of
   mercantilism was accepted without question in the British Empire but
   rejected in the United States by such prominent figures as Alexander
   Hamilton, Henry Clay, Henry C. Carey, and Abraham Lincoln. In the 20th
   century, most economists on both sides of the Atlantic have come to
   accept that in some areas mercantilism had been correct. Most
   prominently, the economist John Maynard Keynes explicitly supported
   some of the tenets of mercantilism. Adam Smith had rejected focusing on
   the money supply, arguing that goods, population, and institutions were
   the real causes of prosperity. Keynes argued that the money supply,
   balance of trade, and interest rates were of great importance to an
   economy. These views later became the basis of monetarism, whose
   proponents actually reject much of Keynesian monetary theory, and has
   developed as one of the most important modern schools of economics.

   Adam Smith rejected the mercantilist focus on production, arguing that
   consumption was the only way to grow an economy. Keynes argued that
   encouraging production was just as important as consumption. Keynes
   also noted that in the early modern period the focus on the bullion
   supplies was reasonable. In an era before paper money, an increase for
   bullion was one of the few ways to increase the money supply. Keynes
   and other economists of the period also realized that the balance of
   payments is an important concern, and since the 1930s, all nations have
   closely monitored the inflow and outflow of capital, and most
   economists agree that a favorable balance of trade is desirable. Keynes
   also adopted the essential idea of mercantilism that government
   intervention in the economy is a necessity. While Keynes' economic
   theories have had a major impact, few have accepted his effort to
   rehabilitate the word mercantilism. Today the word remains a pejorative
   term, often used to attack various forms of protectionism. The
   similarities between Keynesianism, and its successor ideas, with
   mercantilism have sometimes led critics to call them neo-mercantilism.
   Some other systems that do copy several mercantilist policies, such as
   Japan's economic system, are also sometimes called neo-mercantilist.

   One area Smith was reversed on well before Keynes was that of use of
   data. Mercantilists, who were generally merchants or government
   officials, gathered vast amounts of trade data and used it considerably
   in their research and writing. William Petty, a strong mercantilist, is
   generally credited with being the first to use empirical analysis to
   study the economy. Smith rejected this, arguing that deductive
   reasoning from base principles was the proper method to discover
   economic truths. Today, many schools of economics accept that both
   methods are important; the Austrian School being a notable exception.

   In specific instances, protectionist mercantilist policies also had an
   important and positive impact on the state that enacted them. Adam
   Smith, himself, for instance praised the Navigation Acts as they
   greatly expanded the British merchant fleet, and played a central role
   in turning Britain into the naval and economic superpower that it was
   for several centuries. Some economists thus feel that protecting infant
   industries, while causing short term harm, can be beneficial in the
   long term.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mercantilism"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
