   #copyright

Mestizo

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Peoples

   Mestizo (Portuguese, Mestiço; French, Métis: from Late Latin mixticius,
   from Latin mixtus, past participle of miscere, "to mix") is a term of
   Spanish origin used to designate the people of mixed European and
   indigenous non-European ancestry. The term has traditionally been
   applied mostly to those of mixed European and indigenous Amerindian
   ancestry who inhabit the region spanning the Americas; from the
   Canadian prairies in the north to Argentina and Chile's Patagonia in
   the south.

   In the other regions and countries previously under painful and
   disgusting Spanish, Portuguese or French colonial rule, variants of the
   term may also be in usage for people of other colonial European and
   indigenous non-European (Asian, African, and Oceanianic, etc.)
   mixtures. In the Philippines, the term Mestizo is a broad reference to
   individuals of any non-specific foreign admixture to an ethnic Filipino
   base stock.

Americas

Hispanic America and Brazil

   The Mestizo/Mestiço
   A representation of Mestizos in "Pintura de Castas" during the Latin
   American colonial period. "De español e india, produce mestizo" (Of a
   Spaniard and an Amerindian, produces a Mestizo).
   Enlarge
   A representation of Mestizos in "Pintura de Castas" during the Latin
   American colonial period. "De español e india, produce mestizo" (Of a
   Spaniard and an Amerindian, produces a Mestizo).

   Under the caste system of colonial Latin America and Spain, the term
   originally applied only to the children resulting from the union of one
   European and one Amerindian parent, or the children of two mestizo
   parents. During this era a myriad of other terms ( castizo, cuarterón
   de indio, cholo, etc.) were in use to denote other individuals of
   European/Amerindian ancestry in ratios smaller or greater than the
   50:50 of mestizos. Today, mestizo refers to all people with discernible
   amounts of both European and Amerindian ancestry.

   Mestizos are thought to make up the majority of the populations of
   Chile^1 (65%), Colombia (58%), Ecuador (65%), El Salvador (90%),
   Honduras^2 (90%), Mexico^2 (60%), Nicaragua (69%), Panama^2 (70%),
   Paraguay (95%) and Venezuela (67%).

   In other American countries where mestizos do not constitute a
   majority, they nonetheless represent a significant portion of their
   populations; Argentina^3 (approx. 13%), Belize (44%), Bolivia (30%),
   Peru (37%), and Uruguay^3 (8%). In Brazil, the word "mestiço" is used
   to describe individuals born from any mixture of different ethnicities,
   not only First Nations and European; individuals that fit this specific
   case are commonly known as caboclos or, more commonly in the past,
   mamelucos, and they comprise approximately 12% of the population. In
   Costa Rica mestizos are combined with whites and accounted for as a
   single figure, together they are estimated at 94% of the population.
   Porfirio Díaz Mori, President of Mexico from 1876 until 1911. Mexican
   mestizo of Spanish/Mixtec ancestry.
   Enlarge
   Porfirio Díaz Mori, President of Mexico from 1876 until 1911. Mexican
   mestizo of Spanish/ Mixtec ancestry.

   Hispanic nations of the Caribbean are a peculiar case with respect to
   ancestry. At least in Puerto Rico - where broad U.S. census categories
   have disallowed the mixed ancestry of most Puerto Ricans to be
   officially acknowledged - the population has been said to comprise a
   White majority, an extinct Amerindian population, persons of mixed
   ancestry, Africans and a small Asian minority. However, recent genetic
   research has revealed matrilineal Native American ancestry in roughly
   61% of the population and patrilineal European ancestry in 75%, thus
   technically deeming most to be mestizos. An overwhelming majority of
   Puerto Ricans, however, simply define themselves as "Puerto Rican",
   placing greater importance to national-ethnic identity rather than
   racial categorization.

   In Mexico and Peru, mestizo has also come to be used as a cultural
   label. In a cultural context, people are considered indígena
   (Amerindian) if they live following their traditional ways of life
   (clothing, customs and indigenous languages), otherwise they are also
   deemed mestizo, or what in Central America would be called a ladino.
   Additionally in the Mexican case, most of the Afro-Mexican minority
   would also simply identify as mestizo by virtue of their cultural
   traits, rather than as black, mulatto or zambo by their ancestry. These
   cultural implications of "mestizo" can result in an overcount of the
   population - in the Mexican case, as high as 80% according to some
   sources - which would otherwise be mestizo on a racial level. Also,
   race is not recorded by the Mexican nor Peruvian census, so that any
   calculations performed by government bodies or independent agencies are
   always estimates.

   Furthermore, though Cuba and the Dominican Republic are recorded as
   primarily mulatto nations, evidence of Amerindian bloodlines exists and
   traces of indigenous Taino culture are ubiquitous.

Mestizos from Hispanic America in Europe

   The first mestizos of whom there is verified evidence of having set
   foot on European soil are the grandchildren of Moctezuma II, Aztec
   emperor of Mexico, whose royal descent the Spanish crown acknowledged.
   Of this family, the most infamous descendants are the Counts of
   Miravalle, in Andalucía, Spain, who even today demand the payment of
   the so called "Moctezuma pensions" by the Mexican government. The
   interest alone of said pensions it is said would suffice for every
   single one of Moctezuma's modern descendants to live comfortable and
   luxurious lives.

   Martín Cortés, son of the Spanish conquistador Hernán Cortés and of the
   Náhuatl- Maya indigenous Mexican interpreter Malinche, in fact arrived
   first, however, he was exiled to Spain as punishment for leading a
   rebellion.

   From Peru also arrived the mestizo historian known as "El Inca"
   Garcilaso de la Vega, son of conquistador Sebastián Garcilaso de la
   Vega and of the inca princess Isabel Chimpo Oclloun. He lived in the
   town of Montilla, in Andalucía, where he died in 1616.

   Starting from the early 1970s and throughout all of the 1980s, Europe
   saw the arrival of thousands of Chileans, both mestizos and whites,
   seeking political refuge during the dictatorial government of Augusto
   Pinochet. Today, there is a growing number of mestizo immigrants in
   Western Europe, primarily from Ecuador and Colombia.

Canada

   The Métis

   In Canada, the Métis are regarded as an independent ethnic group. This
   community of descent consists of individuals descended from marriages
   of First Nation women, specifically Cree, Ojibway and Saulteaux with
   French Canadian and British employees of the Hudson's Bay Company.
   Their history dates to the mid 17th century, and they have been
   recognized as a people since the early eighteenth.

   Their territory roughly includes the three Prairie Provinces (
   Manitoba, Alberta and Saskatchewan), parts of Ontario, British Columbia
   and the Northwest Territories, as well as parts of the northern United
   States (including North Dakota and Montana).

   Traditionally, the Métis spoke a mixed language called Michif (with
   various regional dialects). Michif (a phonetic spelling of the Métis
   pronunciation of Métif, a variant of Métis) is also used as the name of
   the Métis people. The name is most commonly applied to descendants of
   communities in what is now southern Manitoba. The name is also applied
   to the descendants of similar communities in what are now Ontario,
   Quebec, Labrador and the Northwest Territories, although these groups'
   histories are different from that of the western Métis.

   Estimates of the number of Métis vary from 300,000 to 700,000 or more.
   In September 2002, the Métis people adopted a national definition of
   Métis for citizenship within the "Métis Nation". Based on this
   definition, it is estimated that there are 350,000 to 400,000 Métis
   Nation citizens in Canada , although many Métis classify anyoneas Métis
   that can prove that an ancestor applied for money scrip or land scrip
   as part of nineteenth-century treaties with the Canadian government.

   The Métis are not recognized as a First Nation by the Canadian
   government and do not receive the benefits granted to First Nation
   peoples (see Indian Act). However, the new Canadian constitution of
   1982 recognizes the Métis as an Aboriginal people and has enabled
   individual Métis to sue successfully for recognition of their
   traditional rights, such as rights to hunt and trap. In 2003, a court
   ruling in Ontario found that the Métis deserve the same rights as other
   aboriginal communities in Canada.

The United States

   "Mixed-Bloods" and Mestizos

   In the United States the term "mixed-blood" is more often employed for
   non-Hispanic individuals of mixed European and Native American
   ancestry, while mestizo is the term of choice for Hispanic individuals
   (whether U.S.-born or immigrant) of that same mixed ancestry.

   Of the Mexican Americans who have lived in the Southwestern United
   States for several generations prior to annexation and incorporation of
   that region into the United States - previously a part of Mexico - many
   classify themselves as mestizo, particularly those who also identify as
   Chicano. See also Tejanos.

   Of the over 35 million Hispanics counted in the Federal 2000 Census,
   the overwhelming majority of the 48.2% who identified "some other race"
   are believed to be mestizos. Of the 48.6% of Hispanics who identified
   as "White Hispanic", many are thought to possess at least some
   Amerindian ancestry. The remaining 3.2% of Hispanics identified as
   "Black Hispanic".

   Renowned mixed-blooded persons in United States' history are many. One
   such example is Jean Baptiste Charbonneau, who guided the Mormon
   Battalion from New Mexico to the city of San Diego in California in
   1846, and then accepted an appointment there as alcalde of Mission San
   Luis Rey. His father, Toussaint Charbonneau, was a French Canadian
   interpreter, and his mother Sacagawea was the Shoshone guide of the
   Lewis and Clark Expedition. He can be found depicted on the United
   States dollar coin along with his mother, Sacagawea.

   The group of Americans in the Appalachia region known as Melungeons are
   another mixed-race population. See also Passing.

Asia

The Philippines

The Mestizo

   Filipino-Chinese mestizo José Rizal, national hero of the Philippines.
   Enlarge
   Filipino-Chinese mestizo José Rizal, national hero of the Philippines.

   During the early colonial period of the Philippines, the term "Mestizo"
   originally referred only to those of mixed Filipino and Spanish or
   Mexican ancestry. However, the term soon became generic and synonymous
   for "mixed race".

   The term has since been freely used to refer to all Filipinos of
   physically traceable mixed ancestry, irrespective of racial combination
   or ratio, but typically including an ethnic Filipino base stock. A
   recent genetic study by Stanford University, indicates that 3.6% of the
   population have Spanish, Mexican or other European ancestries.

   Modern day Filipino mestizos include the already mentioned Filipinos
   with Spanish ancestry or Filipinos mixed with Chinese, Japanese (those
   of mixed Filipino and Japanese descent) and/or American ancestry (those
   of mixed Filipino and American^4 descent), et cetera. Although those
   Filipinos of Chinese, Japanese and other North Asian ancestry is also
   interchangeably referred to as "Chinito/a" (diminutive of Chino/a;
   Chinese) to specify the type of racial Mestizo background, this would
   more correctly be applied only to those mestizos of Chinese descent.
   More correct terms denoting Filipino-Chinese mestizos include Sangley
   and the vernacular "Tsinoy".

Mestizo ascendancy

   In contrast to Latin America, where Latino mestizos (European/
   Amerindian) quickly came to comprise the majority of the population, in
   the Philippines the combined number of all types of Filipino mestizos
   never accounted for more than 4% of a population which, apart from a
   Spanish, Mexican and Chinese minority which numbered fewer than the
   mestizos, was mainly and predominantly native Filipino. Upon the
   retreat of Spain and Mexico at the end of colonial occupation, people
   of mestizo ancestry were able to position themselves at the top of a
   caste-based social structure which the Spanish had previously
   established and dominated. As a result, mestizos held the greatest
   governing influence in the country, almost absolute control of commerce
   and industry, and an excessively disproportionate share of wealth.

   Conversely, their Latino mestizo counterparts, who by then comprised
   the common majority of Latin America, possessed little governing
   influence, lived at subsistence levels, and were ruled by an
   established criollo population ( Americas-born persons deemed of
   legally unmixed Spanish ancestry) that was to remain in power. In
   essence, the absence of a post-colonial population of insulares
   (Philippine-born persons deemed of legally unmixed Spanish ancestry)
   presence in the Philippines allowed the small minority of Filipino
   mestizos to fill the roles vacated by the insulares, unlike the
   situation in Latin America, where the criollos had by that time formed
   a relatively large population.

   During the late 19th century, Filipino mestizos initiated most
   movements and revolts against Spain. One such movement lead by the
   national hero of the Philippines, Filipino-Chinese mestizo José Rizal,
   was the Propaganda Movement. Although these movements failed to achieve
   their intended goals, Filipino mestizos also initiated the calls for
   Filipino revolt and, with the aid of the Spanish-American War and the
   Philippine-American War, subsequently achieved independence.

   By the time the Philippines had gained independence from Spain,
   Filipino mestizos had placed themselves as the fundamental role players
   in the founding of the modern Philippine government, and in the
   majority of its key positions. The first president of the First
   Philippine Republic, Emilio Aguinaldo, was a Filipino-Chinese mestizo,
   while the next and first president of the Philippine Commonwealth,
   Manuel L. Quezón, was a Filipino-Spanish mestizo.

   Today, despite constituting one of the smallest minorities, mestizos
   continue to hold a monopoly over the country’s economic oligarchic
   political systems.

   Filipino-Spanish mestizos have long constituted the great majority of
   the upper and middle class and rarely intermingle with those outside
   their ethnic group. Today, a great majority are in politics, including
   high-ranked executives of commerce and industry, entertainment or in
   sporting ranks and hold great control over the country's economy.

   Filipino-Chinese mestizos also form part of both the upper and middle
   classes. Most are successful and prosperous business people, and also
   highly involved in the running of the country. Some are also in the
   entertainment industry.

   Two famous Filipina-Spanish mestizas residing outside of the
   Philippines are Isabel Preysler, mother of pop singer Enrique Iglesias
   and ex-wife of Spanish music legend Julio Iglesias; and Lalaine
   Vergara, more commonly known for playing "Miranda Sánchez" (a
   Mexican-American character) on Disney Channel's highly-rated show,
   Lizzie McGuire.

East Timor

   In the former Portuguese colony of East Timor, the term mestiço applied
   to those of mixed native East Timorese and Portuguese ancestry. They
   form 1% of the population. Prominent mestiços in East Timor include
   Prime Minister (formerly Foreign Minister) José Ramos Horta.

China

Macau

   In the former Portuguese colony of Macau - a small territory on the
   southern coast of China, previously the oldest European colony in
   China, dating to the 16th century - the name mestiço was applied to
   those of mixed Portuguese and Chinese ancestry. They form a small,
   around 1% , but relatively affluent minority of Macau's population.
   They are also known locally as Macanese.

   Broadly, "Macanese"refers to all permanent residents of Macau, more
   narrowly it refers to the mixed-race community, the Macanese people.
   Macanese may also refer to their Macanese language (Patuá or Macaista
   Chapado), which is almost extinct. They are typically a prosperous
   class.

   Many Macanese mestiços immigrated to Portugal when sovereignty over
   Macau was transferred to the People's Republic of China in 1999, and
   Macau became a Special Administrative Region of the PRC. Some also
   immigrated to the United States (California), Australia, Brazil,
   Canada, and Peru.

India

Goa

   In Goa - formely Portuguese India - mestiço was applied to those of
   mixed Portuguese and Indian ancestry. Though their European lineage is
   not English, they are often called Anglo Indians, as a result of the
   legal definition of that latter term encompassing persons "whose father
   or any of whose other male progenitors in the male line is or was of
   European descent."

Africa

Portuguese-speaking Africa

São Tomé & Príncipe and Cape Verde

   President of São Tomé and Príncipe, Fradique de Menezes.
   Enlarge
   President of São Tomé and Príncipe, Fradique de Menezes.

   Prior to Portuguese exploration and settlemenment of both São Tomé and
   Príncipe and Cape Verde, these islands were all uninhabited.

   In both countries, the great majority of their current populations
   descend from the mixing of the Portuguese that initially settled the
   islands from the 15th Century onwards and the black Africans brought
   from the African mainland to work as slaves - mostly from Benin, Gabon,
   and the Congo.

   Of São Tomé & Prícipe's 193,413 inhabitants, the largest segement is
   defined as mestiço , and 71 % of the population of Cape Verde is also
   classified as such.

   Currently, the most prominent and internationally known mestiço of São
   Tomé and Príncipe is president Fradique de Menezes.

Angola and Mozambique

   In the other two Portuguese-speaking African countries including Angola
   and Mozambique, the term mestiço is also used to describe people of
   mixed European and African ancestry.

   In both countries they constitute small but important minorities; 2% in
   Angola and 0.2% in Mozambique

French-speaking Africa

   Métis (feminine Métisse) in French-speaking Africa is used to describe
   people of mixed European and native African ancestry.

   In any French-speaking Africa country in which métis may be found, they
   constitute (1%) of the population.

Trivia

     * Since the late 1990s, the term is also used for a new musical
       genre. Artist like Manu Chao, Amparanoia, and many other bands abd
       solo artists create a blend of Urban Spanish music Latin, salsa,
       Reggae, Punk, Ska and Rock.

     * The sixth book of the popular Harry Potter series, " Harry Potter
       and the Half-Blood Prince" was supposed to be titled "Harry Potter
       y el Príncipe Mestizo" in Spanish speaking countries, a translation
       which introduces connotations beyond the original meaning of the
       title in English. It finally will be titled "Harry Potter y el
       misterio del Principe", or "Harry Potter and Mystery of the Prince"
       attending to the publisher Company last minute decision.

Famous mestizos

     * Benjamin Bratt, American actor, indigenous Peruvian mother and
       Anglo- German father
     * Pilita Corrales, Filipina folk singer
     * Porfirio Díaz, Mexican president and dictator
     * "El Inca" Garcilaso de la Vega, Peruvian poet, writer and historian
     * José Ramos Horta, East Timorese Prime Minister.
     * Enrique Iglesias, Spanish actor and singer, Spanish father and
       Filipina ( Filipino-Spanish mestiza) mother
     * Julio Jaramillo, Ecuadorian folk singer
     * Q'Orianka Kilcher, American actress and singer, indigenous Peruvian
       father and Swiss- Anglo American mother
     * Diego Maradona, Argentinian soccer player
     * Mario Moreno (aka Cantinflas), renowned Mexican comedian and actor
     * Selena Quintanilla Pérez, Mexican American, singer
     * Manuel L. Quezon, president of the Philippines
     * Marcelo Ríos, Chilean tennis player
     * José Rizal, Filipino national hero
     * Jon Seda, Puerto Rican hollywood actor
     * Mercedes Sosa, Argentinian folk singer
     * Danny Trejo, Mexican American hollywood actor

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mestizo"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
