   #copyright

Michael Ramsey

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Religious figures and
leaders

                                                   CAPTION: Michael Ramsey

                                   Denomination          Church of England
                                           Senior posting
                                            See                 Canterbury
                                          Title   Archbishop of Canterbury
                               Period in office                1961 — 1974
                                    Predecessor            Geoffrey Fisher
                                      Successor              Donald Coggan
                                          Religious career
                            Priestly ordination                       1929
                            Previous bishoprics          Bishop of Durham,
                                                        Archbishop of York
                                  Previous post         Archbishop, Bishop
                                              Personal
                                  Date of birth           14 November 1904
                                 Place of birth         Cambridge, England

   Arthur Michael Ramsey, Baron Ramsey of Canterbury ( 14 Nov 1904 – 23
   April 1988) was the one hundredth Archbishop of Canterbury. He was
   appointed 31 May 1961, and took office from June 1961 to 1974.

   Michael Ramsey was born at Cambridge, educated at Repton School (one of
   his tutors at Repton was his predecessor the 99th Archbishop of
   Canterbury, Geoffrey Francis Fisher) and Magdalene College, Cambridge,
   where he was President of the Cambridge Union Society. Before
   Canterbury, he had previously been Bishop of Durham and Archbishop of
   York. He was a significant academic theologian. A member of the High
   Church group, he was active in the ecumenical movement.
   Archbishop Ramsey (left) meets Pope Paul VI. During his visit to Rome
   the Pope presented him with the episcopal (bishop's) ring he had worn
   as Archbishop of Milan[1].
   Enlarge
   Archbishop Ramsey (left) meets Pope Paul VI.
   During his visit to Rome the Pope presented him with the episcopal
   (bishop's) ring he had worn as Archbishop of Milan .

   Like most twentieth century Archbishops of Canterbury, Michael Ramsey
   presided over a period of numerical decline in the Church of England.
   He was nonetheless liked and respected both in the church and more
   widely, perhaps more so than either his immediate predecessors or
   successors; he had the reputation of being humane, principled, and
   discreet. After retiring as Archbishop in 1974 he was created a life
   peer, as Baron Ramsey of Canterbury, of Canterbury in Kent, enabling
   him to remain in the House of Lords where he had previously sat as one
   of the Lords Spiritual.

   He gave his name to Ramsey House, a residence of St Chad's College,
   University of Durham: he was a Governor of the college; and he
   regularly worshipped and presided at the college's daily Eucharist. He
   also gave his name to Archbishop Michael Ramsey Secondary School in
   Farmers Road, Camberwell, South East London .

   Michael Ramsey's elder brother, Frank P. Ramsey (b.1903, d.1930) was a
   brilliant mathematician and philosopher.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Ramsey"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
