   #copyright

Milan

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: European Geography

                      Comune di Milano
              Coat of arms of Comune di Milano
   Municipal coat of arms
   Country                            Italy Italy
   Region                             Lombardy
   Province                           Milan (MI)
   Mayor                              Letizia Moratti
   Elevation                          120 m
   Area                               182 km²
   Population
    - Total (as of December 31, 2004) 1,308,311
    - Density                         6,988/km²
   Time zone                          CET, UTC+1
   Coordinates                        45°28′N 09°10′E
   Gentilic                           Milanesi or Meneghini
   Dialing code                       02
   Postal code                        20100, 20121-20162
   Patron                             St. Ambrose
    - Day                             December 7

   Location of Milano in Italy

                Website: www.comune.milano.it

   Milan ( Italian: Milano; Milanese: Milán (listen)) is the main city of
   northern Italy, located in the plains of Lombardy. The city proper
   (Comune di Milano) has about 1,308,500 inhabitants (2004). The
   population of the urban area ( Greater Milan La Grande Milano),
   comprising the core of Lombardy, is estimated, as of 2006, to be about
   4,280,820 people.
   The Duomo is the symbol of Milan.
   Enlarge
   The Duomo is the symbol of Milan.

   In European terms, Milan's metropolitan area is a part of the so called
   Padan Megalopolis. By population, Milan is Italy's largest city and the
   3rd Metro Area of the EU. Municipal borders wrap a relatively small
   area—about one-eighth that of Rome—because of the historical high
   density of population centers in agriculturally rich Lombardy. The
   heavily urbanized area centered in Milan includes some Swiss
   territories in southern Canton Ticino: this does not imply any kind of
   administrative unity, though. Milan is an alpha world full service city
   in GaWc inventory.

   Milan's province (due to be dissolved sooner or later into the
   Metropolitan City, a new administrative unit not yet implemented) lies
   in the western part of Lombardy; it covers an area of 1,981 square
   kilometers and has a population of 3,839,216 (2005); in 1991, the
   population was 3,738,685. The province comprises 188 communes, ranging
   in population (2001) from Milan (1,308,311) to Nosate (638); between
   1991 to 2001, the city of Milan has lost 113,084 inhabitants (8.3
   percent) mostly due to suburban sprawl and expulsion of population from
   the inner city centre, which is now almost fully dedicated to offices
   and commerce. On November 2006 for the first time was certificated the
   official population of Milan Metro Area, in an area of more than 9,000
   square kilometers, live 7,4 Millions.

   The city is one of the world's major commercial and financial centers,
   and one of the wealthiest cities in the European Union. Milan is one of
   the world capitals of fashion — along with New York City, Paris,
   London, Tokyo— and design. Indeed the English word milliner is derived
   from the name of the city. The Lombard metropolis is famous for fashion
   firms and shops ( via Montenapoleone) and the Galleria Vittorio
   Emanuele in the Piazza Duomo, reputed to be the world's oldest shopping
   mall. Another famed Milanese product is the traditional Christmas sweet
   cake, called Panettone. Milan is also famous for the Alfa Romeo
   motorcar and for its silk production; but on the whole relies on its
   directional functions for the whole of Lombardy, its once proud and
   strong industrial base having been externalized throughout the region
   in the 60s-70s of the last century. The city hosted among other events
   the World Exposition in 1906, the football World Cup in 1934 and 1990,
   the football Euro Cup in 1980, and plans to host the World Expo of
   2015.

   Inhabitants of Milan are referred to as "Milanese" (Italian: Milanesi
   or informally Meneghini or Ambrosiani).

Name

   Milan's name comes from the Celtic Medelhan, meaning "in the middle of
   the plain", due either to its location in a plain close to the
   confluence of two small rivers, the Olona and the Seveso, or perhaps to
   its being close to, and roughly equidistant from, two major rivers, the
   Ticino and the Adda. Its Latin name, Mediolanum, roughly meaning "wool
   in the middle", also built on Celtic lore: Celts saw the boar as a
   mythical animal and according to a prophecy the site for the settlement
   would have been indicated to a Celtic king by the appearance of a wild
   pig or boar with a ridge of hair along its back, as reported by Cardano
   around 1626:

          Nel fabricar de le superbe mura
          De la prima Città ch'abbian gl'Insubri
          Uscì da i fondamenti un gran Cinghiale,
          Mezzo di pel setoso, e mezzo ignudo,
          Onde MILAN chiamossi
          Da gli Hedui, o Borgognoni, o pur da i Franchi,
          Da cui l'origine hebbe,
          Che altri di MEZZA LANA dir potrebbe

   Translated:

          While building the majestic wall
          Of the first Town of Insubres
          From the foundation a big boar came
          Half with silk hair, and half bare
          Therefore MILAN was called
          From Hedui, or Burgundians or even from Franks
          From which the origin came
          That other could call of half wool

   Today the boar is still sometimes used as a symbol of the city.
   According to another explanation, Mediolanum comes from a corruption of
   In medio lanorum meaning between the rivers - actually Milan still
   includes the two small Olona and Seveso rivers.

   The German name for the city is Mailand, while in the local Western
   Lombard dialect, the city's name is Milán, pronounced quite as in
   French.

History

   Piazza del Duomo - Milan's central square
   Enlarge
   Piazza del Duomo - Milan's central square
   Castello Sforzesco - Sforza's castle.
   Enlarge
   Castello Sforzesco - Sforza's castle.
   Teatro alla Scala, major opera house.
   Enlarge
   Teatro alla Scala, major opera house.
   View of Milan from the Duomo.
   Enlarge
   View of Milan from the Duomo.
   Naviglio Grande.
   Enlarge
   Naviglio Grande.
   Building in Via Turati.
   Enlarge
   Building in Via Turati.
   Milan's Central Station.
   Enlarge
   Milan's Central Station.

   It is presumed Milan was originally founded by the Celts of Northern
   Italy around 600 BC and was conquered around 222 BC by the Romans, who
   gave it the name of Mediolanum. In the 4th century, at the time of the
   bishop Saint Ambrose and Emperor Theodosius I, the city was briefly the
   capital of the Western Roman Empire. At that time Milan was the second
   largest city in Europe, with more than 300,000 inhabitants. St Ambrose
   is now the Patron Saint of the city. With the Visigoth menace mounting,
   Milan lost its capital role to Ravenna in 402. Attila plundered the
   city in 452 during his invasion of Italy, then the Ostrogoths of Uraia
   ravaged it in 541, during the disastrous Greco-Gothic war. The ghost of
   a city was then taken by the Lombards in 569; the main Byzantine
   officials, both civilian and religious, fled to Genoa for safety. The
   Lombards made Milan capital of one of their main duchies, and the city
   slowly but surely recovered a role, if overshadowed by neighbouring
   Pavia and Monza.

11th century

   In the eleventh century the city regained its importance and began to
   impose its power. Milan became a prosperous, if seldom quiet, comune.
   The eleventh century saw the birth and growth of several papal and
   church reform movements, such as the Peace and Truce of God and the
   Gregorian reforms. Milan itself, the powerful but corrupt church was
   put under siege by the reformers of the so-called pataria, a local
   movement led by both religious and secular figures. In the latter half
   of the century, Milan and its province suffered ecclesiastical schism
   and confusion as well as violence and war as the patarini struggled to
   reform the clergy. With peace and order attained in the early 1090s,
   Milan enterred the wider struggle between the power of the popes and
   the emperors. In the twelfth century, she led the other Italian cities
   in gaining semi-independence from the Holy Roman Empire in the wars of
   the Lombard League against Frederick Barbarossa, culminating in the
   glorious Battle of Legnano ( 1176). Thus, during the Middle Ages Milan
   became one of the most rich and powerful cities of Europe (due to its
   commerce and industries) conquering and influencing at times great part
   of northern Italy.

   At the beginning of the 11th Century, Milan experienced several civil
   outbreaks. The main conflicts were between the Nobles and Plebeians.
   Therefore, a tripartite polity was formed, creating a compromise
   between the great nobles, lesser nobles, and plebeians, led by a
   podestà. There was also fighting between the Guelphs and Ghibellines,
   who supported the pope and emperor respectively. The ruling family of
   Milan, the Viscontis, supported the Ghibellines, and the emperor
   acknowledged Ottone Visconti as the Archbishop. The Visconti House went
   on to peacefully conquer Pavia, Piacenza, Bergamo, Brescia, and Parma.
   They gained support from their citizens by treating them charitably. In
   1354, power fell into the hands of brothers Galeazzo and Bernab
   Visconti. Originally they split the city in two to share the power, but
   rejoined in 1359 to defeat Pavia. Pavia then became Galeazzo's city,
   where be built a university. When he died in 1387, he left his land to
   his son, Gian Galeazzo Visconti. However, Bernab was a different child.
   He ruled under strict laws, was threatened with excommunication, and
   became greedy after his brother's death. In 1385, when he attempted to
   take all the land back under one rule, Gian imprisoned him. Gian went
   on to be a powerful ruler, who expanded his empire arcoss northern
   Italy, gathering land as he went. The only northern city-state to avoid
   his conquest was Venice. He died from illness while trying to conquer
   Florence in 1402. His sons, Giovanni Maria Visconti and Filippo Maria
   Visconti split up the land, which then either became independent or was
   conquered by Venice. Giovanni became duke, but in 1412 was assassinated
   amid political controversy. Filippo had no sons, ending the Visconti
   line. He died in 1447, when a popular government was established.

   Filippo did have a daughter, who married Francesco Sforza. He later was
   hired to protect the city state with the creation of the popular
   government, but instead took over, creating the Sforza line. Francesco
   died in 1466, leaving the land to Galeazzo Maria Sforza. He was
   disliked because of his cruelty, and assassinated in 1476. His
   7-year-old son, Gian Galeazzo Sforza, with Galeazzo Maria's brother,
   Ludovico Sforza (Ludovico the Moor), becoming the de facto ruler of
   Milan. Ludovico was very cultural, adding much to universities and
   architecture, but when Gian Galeazzo married Princess Isabella of
   Naples, Ludovico's persuasion of Gian came to an end. Isabella disliked
   the amount of power Ludovico had, and turned to her family in Naples
   for help. In return, Ludovico turned to Charles VIII of France, who
   could claim Naples through the House of Anjou.

14th century

   It is estimated that at the start of 14th century the city may have
   touched the number of 200,000 inhabitants. During the Plague of 1349
   Milan was one of the few places in Europe that was spared by the
   epidemic, but it was deeply affected by the plagues of 1402 (50,000
   deaths), 1542 (80,000), 1576 (17,000) and 1629 (also known as Great
   Plague of Milan, 70,000 deaths). In the meantime its power was checked
   by Florence and Venice; thus last city conquered eastern Lombardy after
   the battle of Maclodio and kept it for centuries. During the
   Renaissance Milan was ruled by dukes of the Visconti (1272-1447) and
   later Sforza (1449-1499, 1512-1515, 1521-1535) families, who had great
   artists like Leonardo da Vinci and Bramante at their service. After
   trying to conquer the rest of northern Italy in the late 14th and 15th
   century, Milan was conquered by France, and then later on by emperor
   Charles V, who took it in 1535 as a dependency of his Spanish
   possessions. The Spanish domination (up to 1700) is remembered as an
   epoch of bad rule and decline, but this is debatable, since the economy
   still flourished and textile industry kept growing in the countryside
   around the city.

18th century

   In the 18th century Austria replaced Spain as Milan's overlord, because
   the Spanish line of Habsburgs had died out: the Austrians provided a
   sound administration who did much to help the city. But the French
   Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars saw the city annexed into the French
   satellite states of the Cisalpine Republic, which later became the
   Kingdom of Italy. After this period, Milan was part of the Kingdom of
   Lombardy-Venetia under Austrian rule. By this time nationalism and
   liberalism were on the rise, and the Austrians were no more welcome.
   Milan eventually became one of the main centers of the Risorgimento,
   with notable moments as the Cinque Giornate, a victorious revolt
   against the Austrian garrison in 1848.

   In 1859 (after the second of the Wars of Italian Independence) Austrian
   rule was ended by the Kingdom of Sardinia (which transformed into the
   kingdom of Italy in 1861). The newly formed Savoy monarchy encouraged
   the use of the Neo-Renaissance style as a way to express patriotism, an
   excellent example of which is the Bagatti Valsecchi Museum in via Gesù,
   5, . The city began a steady growth in population and industrial
   output, soon gaining unrivalled leadership in Italy.

World War II

   As a critical industrial centre of Italy, Milan was the target of
   continuous carpet bombing during World War II. The city was bombed even
   after Pietro Badoglio surrendered to the allied forces in 1943 - Milan
   was part of Mussolini's Italian Social Republic puppet state, and an
   important command centre of the German Army stationed in Italy. When
   war in Italy was finally over, April 25, 1945, Milan had been heavily
   damaged and entire neighborhoods such as Precotto and Turro were
   destroyed. After the war, the city was reconstructed and has again
   become an important financial and industrial centre of Italy. More than
   the 30% of the buildings were completely destroyed and another 30% were
   so heavily damaged that they were demolished in the first years after
   the war. Most of those buildings are located in the city centre.
   Hundreds of buildings built in the last 1,000 years were lost.

Climate

   Milan has a continental climate , with relatively nothing to share with
   the rest of Italy which is famous for a comfortable Mediterranean
   climate. Milan winters are typically damp and chilly, while summers are
   hot and humid. Average temperatures range between -1° and 10° C (30°
   and 50° F) in January, occasionally reaching -5/-10°C (23/14°F), and
   between 20° and 30° C in August, when they can soar up to 35/37°C
   (95-99°F). Snowfalls are common between December and February, usually
   averages about 40 cm (15 in) each year. Humidity is quite high during
   the whole year and yearly rain averages 1000 mm (40 in). In the
   stereotypical image the city is often shrouded in fog, characteristic
   of the Po Basin, although the removal of rice fields from the southern
   neighbourhoods has reduced the phenomenon in recent years.

Economy

   Milan is one of the major financial and business centres of the world.
   The city is the seat of the Italian Stock Exchange (la Borsa Italiana)
   and its hinterland is an avant-garde industrial area.

   Fiera Milano, the city's Exhibition Centre and Trade Fair complex, is
   notable. This new fairground, in the north-western suburb of Pero and
   Rho (opened in April 2005), is Europe's largest open construction
   project, making Fiera Milano the largest trade fair complex in the
   world. Milan is one of the world capital for fashion and the world
   leader for design. The town is also one of the richest cities in the
   European Union.

   Milan was included in a list of ten "Alpha world cities" by Peter J.
   Taylor and Robert E. Lang of the Brookings Institution in the economic
   report "U.S. Cities in the 'World City Network'" ( Key Findings, Full
   Report)..;

Famous firms in Milan

     * Aermacchi
     * Alemagna
     * Alfa Romeo
     * Giorgio Armani
     * Arnoldo Mondadori Editore
     * Banca Intesa
     * Bugatti
     * Corriere della Sera/RCS
     * Dolce & Gabbana
     * Eni
     * Ferrovie Nord Milano
     * Fiera Milano
     * Giangiacomo Feltrinelli Editore
     * Mediaset
     * Mediobanca
     * Motta
     * Pirelli
     * Prada
     * Snamprogetti
     * Techint
     * Telecom Italia
     * UniCredit
     * Gianni Versace

Culture and art

   Milan is one of the major artistical centres of northern Italy. An
   incomplete list of landmarks include:
     * The Duomo, the second largest cathedral of the world and the
       world's largest collection of marble statues.
     * The Castello Sforzesco
     * The Basilica of Sant'Ambrogio
     * The Palaeo-Christian Basilica of San Lorenzo
     * The Biblioteca Ambrosiana, containing drawings and notebooks by
       Leonardo da Vinci among its vast holdings of books, manuscripts,
       and drawings, and is one of the main repositories of European
       culture. The city is also the home of the Brera Academy of Fine
       Arts.
     * The church of Santa Maria delle Grazie, housing one of the most
       famous paintings of Leonardo da Vinci, The Last Supper.
     * The Pinacoteca di Brera, Pinacoteca Ambrosiana, Poldi Pezzoli and
       the Musei del Castello galleries, which host a great number of
       pictorial masterpieces.

   Milan is also one of the most important centres in the world for Opera
   lirica, with its famous Teatro alla Scala ( La Scala).

Education

Universities

   Milan is home to many universities and other institutions of higher
   learning. This is a list of institutions of higher learning in Milan.
     * Politecnico di Milano
     * Università Statale
     * Università Statale Milano-Bicocca
     * Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore
     * Università Bocconi
     * Scuola Superiore di Direzione Aziendale - Bocconi
     * Università I.U.L.M.
     * Università C. Cattaneo L.I.U.C.
     * Università Vita-Salute San Raffaele
     * L.U.C. Beato Angelico
     * Accademia delle Belle Arti di Brera
     * Conservatorio Superiore "G. Verdi" di Milano
     * Istituto Europeo di Design
     * I.S.E.F.
     * Scuola Politecnica Di Design

Transportation

Airports

   The city has a large international airport known as Malpensa
   International Airport (MXP), located near the industrial towns of Busto
   Arsizio and Gallarate and connected to the downtown with the "Malpensa
   Express" railway service (from Cadorna Station). Malpensa was designed
   by the famous Ettore Sottsass. Milan also has the Linate Airport (LIN)
   within the city limits (for European and domestic traffic), connected
   with bus line 73 (from S. Babila). A third airport is Orio al Serio
   (BGY), close to the city of Bergamo. Vergiate, Venegono, Bresso,
   Voghera and Montichiari are further airports in the region.

Subways, tramways, and buses

   Milan has 3 subway lines (M1 - red, M2 - green, M3 - yellow) and the
   system, called Milan Metro - "M", running for more than 80 km. There is
   also a light metro-service, "Metrò S. Raffaele", connecting the San
   Raffaele Hospital with Cascina Gobba station (M2). Extensions of lines
   1, 2 and 3 are under construction, to create more than 15 km of track
   with 10 new stations. Line 5 is also under construction, to be finished
   in the first half of 2008. Lines 4 (linking downtown with Linate
   Airport) and 6 are in planning stages.

   Greater Milan also has one of the most extensive tramway systems in the
   world, with more than 286 km of track, and 20 lines.

   Ninety-three bus lines cover over 1,070 km between them. The local
   transportation authority (ATM) transported more than 600 million
   passengers in 2003 .

National railway

   Inside Vittorio Emanuele II Gallery
   Enlarge
   Inside Vittorio Emanuele II Gallery
   Brera Astronomical Observatory
   Enlarge
   Brera Astronomical Observatory
   San Lorenzo church
   Enlarge
   San Lorenzo church
   Garibaldi-Repubblica financial district
   Enlarge
   Garibaldi-Repubblica financial district
   Brera Museum courtyard
   Enlarge
   Brera Museum courtyard
   San Siro Stadium, one of Europe's biggest
   Enlarge
   San Siro Stadium, one of Europe's biggest
   Liceo Beccaria - Beccaria High School
   Enlarge
   Liceo Beccaria - Beccaria High School
   Il Giorno newspaper headquarter
   Enlarge
   Il Giorno newspaper headquarter

   Milan is the second railway hub of Italy, and the five major stations
   of Milan are among Italy's busiest:
     * Milano Centrale (passenger station - the second busiest Italian
       station)
     * Milano P.ta Garibaldi (passenger station)
     * Milano Lambrate (passenger station)
     * Milano Rogoredo (passenger station and cargo station)
     * Milano Greco (passenger station)
     * Milano San Cristoforo (passenger and cargo station)
     * Milano Porta Romana (passenger and cargo station)
     * Milano Certosa (passenger station)
     * Milano Villapizzone (passenger station)
     * Milano Lancetti (passenger station)
     * Milano Repubblica (passenger station)
     * Milano Porta Venezia (passenger station)
     * Milano Dateo (passenger station)
     * Milano Porta Vittoria (passenger station)
     * Milano Smistamento/Scalo Farini (cargo-trains)
     * Milano Romolo (passenger station).

   Other new stations for passenger service are under construction:
     * Milano Tibaldi
     * Milano/Rho Fiera

   High speed train lines are under construction all across Italy, and new
   lines will open from Milan to Rome and Naples, and from Milan to
   Torino. The stations for the TAV (Treni ad Alta Velocità - High Speed
   Trains) will be:
     * Milano Rogoredo (for the south)
     * Milano Certosa and Milano/Rho Fiera (for the west)

   A line from Milan to Venice and then to Trieste is under construction.
   At the end of the work, the TAV station for Milan to the east will be:
     * Milano Pioltello

Regional-Metropolitan Railway services

   The Suburban Railway Service ( "S" Lines, a service similar to the
   French RER and German S-Bahn), composed of eight suburban lines and ten
   more scheduled for 2008, connects the "Greater Milan" to cities such as
   Como and Varese. The Regional Railway Service ("R"), instead, links
   Milan with the rest of Lombardy and the national railway system. The
   "Passante ferroviario" is an underground railway serving a couple of
   "S" lines and is very much like another subway line (and is even marked
   as such on subway maps), except that it is connected to LeNord and
   Trenitalia suburban networks.

Taxis

   Milan has a taxi service operated by private companies and licensed by
   the City of Milan (Comune di Milano). All taxis are the same colour,
   white. Prices are based on time elapsed and distance traveled. As the
   number of licences is kept low by lobbying of present taxi drivers,
   prices are fairly high (significantly higher than, for example, in New
   York) and finding a taxi may be difficult in rush hours.

Sports

   Football is the most important sport in Italy, and Milan is home to two
   world-famous football teams: A.C. Milan and Internazionale. The former
   is normally referred to as "Mìlan" (notice the stress on the first
   syllable, unlike the English and Milanese name of the city), the latter
   as "Inter".

   Milan is the only city in Europe whose teams have won both the European
   Cup and the Intercontinental Cup. Both teams play at Giuseppe Meazza -
   San Siro Stadium (85,700). Many of the strongest Italian football
   players were born in Milan, in the surrounding metropolitan area, or in
   Lombardy: Valentino Mazzola, Paolo Maldini, Giuseppe Meazza, Giacinto
   Facchetti, Luigi Riva, Gaetano Scirea, Giuseppe Bergomi, Walter Zenga,
   Antonio Cabrini, Roberto Donadoni, Gianluca Vialli, Silvio Piola,
   Giampiero Boniperti, Gabriele Oriali, Giovanni Trapattoni and Franco
   Baresi as well as many others.
     * The famous Monza Formula One circuit is located near the city,
       inside a wide park. It is one of the world's oldest car racing
       circuits, and one of the most famous. The capacity for the F1 races
       is currently around 137,000 spectators, although in the 1950s the
       stands could hold more than 250,000. It has hosted an F1 race
       nearly every year since the first year of competition, exception
       made of 1980.
     * Olimpia Milano is a successful European basketball team that have
       won 3 European Cups, a World Cup, 3 Winners' Cups, 2 Korac Cups and
       25 National Championships. It is the most important Italian team
       and one of the top 5 in Europe. Olimpia play at the Forum (capacity
       14,000).
     * Rhinos Milano American Football Club is the oldest American
       football club in Milan, the team have won 4 Italian Superbowl and
       was one of the five Italian Football League founding fathers
     * The Amatory Rugby Club Milano have won 18 National Championships
       and are the most famous and important Rugby team in Italy.
     * Different ice hockey teams from Milan have won 30 National
       Championships between them. The Vipers Milano have won the last 4
       national championships, the Alpenliga and several Coppa Italia, and
       are the leaders of that sport in Italy. They play at the Agora
       Stadium (capacity 4,500) during the regular season, and at the
       Forum during playoffs .
     * Every year, Milan hosts the Bonfiglio Trophy Under 18 Tennis
       Tournament. It is the most important youth tournament in the world,
       and is played at the Milan Tennis Club. The central court has a
       capacity of 8000. Past winners include Tacchini, Jan Kodes, Adriano
       Panatta, Corrado Barazzutti, Moreno, Björn Borg, Smid, Ivan Lendl,
       Guy Forget, Jim Courier, Goran Ivanišević, Yevgeny Kafelnikov, and
       Guillermo Coria.

   Milan and Lombardy are candidates for the Summer Olympic Games of 2020
   ("Milan-Lombardy 2020").^[ citations needed]

Stadiums

     * Autodromo Nazionale Monza - car and motorcycle racing - 137,000
     * San Siro - only football - 85,700
     * Arena Civica - Athletic, Rugby, Football, American Football 30,000
     * Brianteo - Athletic, Football - 18,568
     * Ippodromo del Trotter - Horse Racing - 16,000
     * Ippodromo del Galoppo - Horse Racing - 15,000
     * Forum di Assago - Basketball, Ice Hockey, Volleyball, Music -
       13,000 to 16,000
     * MazdaPalace - Basketball, Volleyball - 13,500
     * Velodromo Vigorelli - Cycling, American Football - 12,000
     * PalaLido - Basketball - 5,000
     * Agorà - Ice Hockey - 4,000
     * Nuovo Giuriati - Rugby - 4,000

   There are other stadiums and multiuse palaces located in the
   metropolitan area, the biggest being Monza Brianteo Stadium (18,000
   seats), the PalaDesio (10,000) and Geas Stadium (8,500).

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Milan"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
