   #copyright

Milkshake

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Drink

   A strawberry milkshake
   A strawberry milkshake
       Milkshake (American/fast food)
   Nutritional value per 100 g (3.527 oz)
          Energy 140 kcal   580 kJ

   Carbohydrates                  18–27 g
   - Sugars  18–27 g
   Fat                            3–9 g
   - saturated  2–5 g
   - monounsaturated  1–3 g
   - polyunsaturated  0–1 g
   Protein                        3.5 g
   Pantothenic acid (B5)  0.5 mg  10%
   Calcium  130 mg                13%
        100 g corresponds to 95 ml.
   Percentages are relative to US
   recommendations for adults.
   Source: USDA Nutrient database

   A milkshake is:
     * in the United Kingdom and the New England region of the United
       States, a beverage which is made from milk and flavourings.
     * in Canada and most regions of the United States, a beverage which
       is made from milk, ice cream, and other flavourings such as fruit
       and chocolate sauce. This usage is also common in the United
       Kingdom, alongside the above.

   A milkshake made with ice cream, as in North America, is also known as:
   a thick milkshake in the United Kingdom, a frappe (pronounced "frap")
   in parts of New England and Canada, and a cabinet in Rhode Island .

   Throughout the United States, especially in fast food and casual dining
   restaurants, a milkshake may be referred to simply as a shake. When an
   ice cream milkshake is made with malted milk, it is generally called a
   "malt" or a "malted."

   A milkshake is usually prepared in some sort of blender rather than
   being simply stirred. There are machines which are specifically
   designed for the blending of milk shakes. Often, these machines mix
   ingredients and insert air into the milkshake mix, causing the
   consistency to become smooth and the shake to thicken up as it is
   blended. Some outlets use machines where milk and mix are frozen and
   mixed together inside a container within the machine, while others
   prepare and mix the shake "by hand" within a special stainless steel
   cup, often called a malt cup or mixing can.

   The most common flavours of milkshake are vanilla, chocolate, and
   strawberry, though other ingredients such as bananas or Oreos may be
   used. In Rhode Island and Southeastern Massachusetts (Fall River and
   New Bedford areas) coffee syrup is used as a flavouring with coffee
   flavoured ice cream to make the local "coffee frappe" or "coffee
   cabinet" favorite. A common additive is malted milk, which makes a
   malted milkshake. Fast food restaurants and soda fountains often sell
   milkshakes. Some milkshake recipes call for ice cream in the flavour of
   the milkshake, while others call for vanilla ice cream plus a flavour
   additive, such as a syrup or fruit. These different methodologies often
   result in a surprisingly large difference in taste, and many people
   have a distinct preference for one method over the other. Recipes which
   rely heavily on fresh fruit and are made without ice cream are called
   smoothies.

   Milkshakes can be made from ordinary milk mixed with powder or
   concentrate although these drinks would simply be considered "
   flavoured milks" in most places. Common brands include Nesquik, Crusha
   and Dinkum for the mobile vendor market in the UK. Bottled milkshake is
   also common, commonly being sold in 330ml, 500ml or 1 litre bottles.
   Milk Chug, Gulp!, FRijj, Yazoo, Big M, and Mars are well known brands
   of bottled milkshake.

   Milkshakes are particularly popular in Latin America, where they are
   called batido.

History

   A chocolate Milkshake
   A chocolate Milkshake

   A printed reference, from 1885, to a "milkshake" containing some whisky
   is the first known use of the term . The malted milkshake includes a
   malted milk powder (containing dried milk, malted barley and wheat
   flour) which was invented in 1897 by William Horlick, but added to
   milkshakes for the first time by Ivar Coulson in 1922. The drink was
   designed as a restorative for invalids and children. Original versions
   of the drinks were more of an egg nog version than modern versions.
   Milkshakes began to take their modern form after the invention of the
   electric blender or drink mixer by Steven Poplawski in 1922 ].

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Milkshake"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
