   #copyright

MINI (BMW)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Road transport

   MINI
   2004 MINI Cooper S, electric blue/white
   Manufacturer: BMW
    Production:  2001-present
   Predecessor:  Mini
      Class:     Supermini/ Hot hatch
    Body style:  3-door hatchback
                 2-door convertible
      Engine:    1.4 l Toyota Diesel
                 1.4 l Tritec
                 1.6 l Tritec
                 1.6 l Tritec Supercharged
   Transmission: 5-speed manual
                 6-speed manual
                 CVT
                 Automatic
    Wheelbase:   2.46 m
      Length:    3.60 m
      Width:     1.69 m
      Height:    1.39 m
   Curb weight:  1050 kg

   MINI is both the name of a United Kingdom subsidiary of BMW, and a car
   produced by that subsidiary since 2001. The car is marketed as a "
   retro" redesign of the original Mini, which was manufactured by the
   British Motor Corporation and its successors from 1959 to 2000. To
   distinguish it from its predecessor, the 'classic Mini', the brand name
   for the new car is 'MINI', written in all capital letters . It is
   sometimes called 'The BMW MINI' (despite MINI being a separate
   subsidary like Jaguar is to Ford), 'The New MINI', or simply 'MINI'.
   The MINI is manufactured in Cowley, Oxford, United Kingdom, in what was
   historically the Morris car plant.

Models

   The MINI is available in seven models: the MINI One D, the MINI One,
   the MINI One Convertible, the MINI Cooper, the MINI Cooper S, the MINI
   Cooper Convertible and the MINI Cooper S Convertible. In Portugal, the
   MINI One is powered by a 1.4 l version of the Tritec engine but all
   other petrol powered MINIs use the 1.6 l version. Since 2004, a
   soft-top convertible option has been available across the entire range.

   There are numerous styling and badging differences between the models,
   perhaps the most obvious being that the Cooper S has a distinctive
   scoop cut into the bonnet to provide airflow over the top mounted
   intercooler. The Cooper S also has twin exhausts which exit under the
   centre of the rear valance. The (non-S) Cooper has more chrome parts
   than the MINI One and has a single exhaust. The MINI One/D has no
   visible exhaust pipes at all.

   In some markets, such as Australia and the US, only the MINI Cooper and
   Cooper S are sold because the MINI One's engine was considered to
   deliver insufficient power to run an air conditioner - a necessary
   feature in those climates. However, the only difference between the
   engines in the 'One' and the 'Cooper' models is a software change
   within the engine control unit which is tuned for optimum fuel economy
   on the MINI One and for a compromise between power and economy on the
   Cooper. Almost fifty percent of all MINIs sold in Australia and about
   seventy percent of those sold in the US are the top-of-the-range Cooper
   S model.

   The names Cooper and Cooper S echo the names used for the sportier
   version of the classic Mini which in turn come from the involvement of
   John Cooper and the Cooper Car Company. The Cooper heritage is further
   emphasised with the John Cooper Works (JCW) range of tuning options
   that are available with the MINI. John Cooper also created a one off
   racing model of the MINI one named the MINI one s works. This car
   features many extras which help to improve performance such as a racing
   exhaust and air filter as well as uprated suspension. The car also has
   one of a kind 17 inch racing wheels..

Technology

   2003 MINI Cooper S and Mk III classic Mini.
   Enlarge
   2003 MINI Cooper S and Mk III classic Mini.
   A 2006 MINI Cooper S Checkmate
   Enlarge
   A 2006 MINI Cooper S Checkmate

   The MINI One, Cooper and Cooper S use a Brazilian-built Tritec engine
   while the MINI One D uses a Toyota-built diesel engine. In August 2006,
   BMW announced that engines would in future be built in the UK, making
   the car essentially British-built again (as well as the final assembly
   at Cowley, the body pressings are made in nearby Swindon).

   While the modern MINI uses none of the engineering of the original
   Mini, it does capture much of the spirit of the classic car. Like the
   original, it uses a transversely-mounted four-cylinder engine driving
   the front wheels. All four wheels are pushed to the corners of the body
   which is a 'two-box' or ' hot hatch' design. The styling of the car,
   like that of the Volkswagen New Beetle, is a retro design that is
   deliberately reminiscent of the original Mini with contrasting roof
   colours, optional bonnet stripes, optional rally lights and with black
   trim around the wheel arches and rocker panels that mimic the wide
   wheel flares found on many classic Minis.

   The recent new R56 MINI uses the BMW-PSA 1.4/1.6 Prince 4 cylinder
   engine. This engine uses a system known as VALVETRONIC to control
   valves for optimum performance and/or efficiency. The 2006 MINI uses a
   drivetrain architecture based on that of the Peugeot 207 and the
   Citroen C3 replacement.

   The MINI One and MINI Cooper are available with a continuously variable
   transmission or with a conventional Getrag five-speed manual
   transmission. The Cooper S comes with a six-speed Getrag manual or
   (from the 2005 model year onwards) a fully automatic transmission with
   paddle shifters.

   Technical innovations include an electrically driven power steering
   system that avoids taking power directly from the engine, equal length
   driveshafts to eliminate torque steer, and a sophisticated multi-link
   rear suspension usually found only on rear wheel drive cars. The MINI
   has a ' drive by wire' electronic throttle, electronic brakeforce
   distribution, cornering brake control, and electronic stability control
   to improve control and handling in adverse conditions.

   Adding a supercharger to the Cooper S model required that the battery
   be relocated into the rear of the car — leaving no room for a spare
   tyre. Hence this model comes with run flat tyres as standard.

Convertible

   A 2005 MINI Cooper S Convertible (Hot Orange/Black) and a 2003 MINI
   Cooper S (British Racing Green/White)
   Enlarge
   A 2005 MINI Cooper S Convertible (Hot Orange/Black) and a 2003 MINI
   Cooper S (British Racing Green/White)

   At the ' Salon International de l'Auto' ( Geneva Motor Show) in 2004,
   MINI introduced a cabriolet ( convertible) model which was released in
   the 2005 model year and available in One, Cooper and Cooper S versions.

   The convertible roof is fully automatic — an unusual feature in such a
   small car — and can be opened partially to act as a sunroof whilst the
   car is driving at speed. The convertible model forsakes the rear hatch
   of the hardtop MINI — replacing it with a drop down 'tailgate' design
   reminiscent of the classic Mini and incorporating similarly prominent
   external hinges. The convertible also adds two small power windows for
   the rear seat passengers which are retracted automatically as the roof
   opens. The roof is made from a heavy cloth with many layers of
   insulation; the rear window is of glass and has a heater/defroster but
   no washer or wiper.

   As a joke, (and undoubtedly as a part of MINI's viral marketing
   approach) purchasers of the MINI convertible were asked to sign a
   'contract' promising that they'd drive the car with the roof open at
   least 90% of the time. MINI also set up a telephone hotline (in the
   USA: 1-888-DO NOT CLOSE) which one may call to report convertible
   owners who are driving with the roof up inappropriately. The automated
   system offers such helpful advice as how to administer a wedgie to the
   offender.

The Works GP MINI

   The last version to be made with the Tritec engine is the "MINI Cooper
   S Works GP", a lightweight, race-prepped John Cooper Works model.
   Hand-finished by Bertone in Italy, it was produced as a
   limited-production run of 2000 cars in 2006, with around 400 of those
   ear-marked for both the US and UK markets. The 'GP' features more
   bolstered front seats but has no rear seats, which along with reduced
   sound-deadening, deleting the rear wash-wipe, offering optional
   air-conditioning and making other steps to reduce the overall weight,
   resulted in a weight saving of around 40 kg over a Cooper S.
   Additionally, the car has enhanced braking and suspension, as well as
   218 horsepower from the John Cooper Works engine modification package.
   In place of the rear seats there is additional body stiffening and
   below-floor storage areas. There are many unique styling points such as
   the red door mirrors, a carbon fibre rear spoiler, unique body kit,
   bespoke (2 kg lighter) 4-spoke alloy wheels and specialised badging.
   Available in just one colour scheme, Thunder Blue with a Pure Silver
   roof, each car is individually numbered and features a decal on the
   roof along with a plaque on the dashboard. The last of the supercharged
   MINIs and a genuine Limited Edition model, it is expected that the MINI
   Cooper S Works GP will become a collectors' item.

Success story

   MINI owners were invited to bring their cars to the world premiere of
   The Italian Job
   Enlarge
   MINI owners were invited to bring their cars to the world premiere of
   The Italian Job

   Whilst the car has been criticized for its poor space-efficiency
   compared with the original Mini (despite its significantly larger
   size), its faithfulness to the original's razor sharp handling
   characteristics and its unique styling has seen the MINI become a sales
   success in Europe and (from 2002) in the U.S..

   BMW has received a significant backlog of orders throughout the life of
   the car and the Cowley factory is currently expanding to reach a
   capacity of around 240,000 cars per year; all of this with little
   conventional advertising.

   The car has featured in many movies, most notable of which is the 2003
   remake of The Italian Job. (See also: List of movies in which Mini cars
   are featured.)

   As with the classic Mini, the new MINI has a widespread club and
   enthusiast following and strong after-market support for performance
   upgrades and styling enhancements. Such community support keeps the
   brand highly valued and shows BMW's decision to relaunch the MINI as a
   successful business strategy. The MINI Cooper/Cooper S won the North
   American Car of the Year award for 2003.

Criticism

   Dr. Alex Moulton, designer of the suspension system for the original
   classic Mini, is reported to have said of the new MINI, in an interview
   with MiniWorld magazine ―"It’s enormous — the original Mini was the
   best packaged car of all time — this is an example of how not to do it…
   it’s huge on the outside and weighs the same as an Austin Maxi. The
   crash protection has been taken too far. I mean, what do you want, an
   armoured car? It is an irrelevance in so far as it has no part in the
   Mini story."

   Many classic Mini enthusiasts are sharply critical of the new MINI,
   citing the fact that it is two feet longer, a foot wider and almost
   twice the weight of the classic car — yet it has less rear leg room and
   less luggage space. Undoubtedly much of this is to do with modern crash
   protection requirements and the desire to incorporate features such as
   air conditioning, a supercharged engine with modern emissions controls
   and a higher level of front-seat comfort than the classic Mini was
   capable of. This opinion is far from universal and other classic Mini
   enthusiasts have embraced the modern MINI as a natural evolution of the
   original concept with many of them owning both kinds of car.

   Some MINI convertible owners criticise the poor rear visibility in the
   convertible. With the roof up the wide areas of cloth down the sides of
   the car block visibility to the rear quarters and the lack of
   washer/wiper on the small rear window — combined with the tendency of
   all MINIs to accumulate dirt on the back end — effectively eliminates
   all rear visibility. Even with the roof down, the large roll-protection
   bars above the back seats and the bunched up cloth of the folded roof
   tends to block a significant fraction of rearward visibility. In an
   attempt to counter this problem when reversing the car, the MINI
   convertible comes with rear-mounted proximity sensors as standard
   equipment (these are available as an option on the hardtop MINI).

The MkII MINI

   MINI is introducing a new version of the car for the 2007 model year,
   on a reengineered platform with many stylistic and engineering changes.
   This architecture is shared with PSA Peugeot Citroën and will be more
   flexible. The engineering will be done in the United Kingdom by
   MINI/BMW Group UK Engineering.

   The so-called 'Mk II MINI' (echoing the 'mark number' naming of the
   classic Mini) is being introduced in January 2007 in the Cooper and
   Cooper S badges and the range will be completed in 2007 with the
   arrival of the Mk II MINI One and a diesel variant . The MINI
   convertible will continue to use the Mk I platform for at least a year.

   Though the Mk II has a familiar look, every panel on the new car will
   be changed from the old model. New safety requirements mean that the
   overall length has increased by 60 mm, the front end raised and the
   indicators have been repositioned inside the headlights. The headlights
   themselves are now fixed to the front quarter panels rather than being
   housed within the bonnet so that they are not raised up with it when
   the bonnet opens. The car will feature a restyled grille and larger
   rear light clusters. The Cooper S will retain the bonnet scoop in order
   to keep an association with the outgoing model - although the
   relocation of the intercooler to the front of the engine means that the
   scoop is now purely decorative. The C pillars are no longer encased in
   glass and have been shaped to improve aerodynamics and to reduce the
   tendency for dirt to accumulate on the back of the car. Much criticised
   for the lack of rear legroom, MINI has added more space for rear
   passengers by creating sculpted cut-outs in the rear of the front
   seats. An engine starter button will replace the conventional ignition
   key.

   The Cooper and Cooper S models will offer a new rear axle and aluminium
   components to reduce the car's weight and a Sports kit option
   comprising harder springs, damper and anti-roll bars is offered with
   both variants. Another key difference is the introduction of an
   upgraded electric power steering system, the sharpness of which can be
   increased by pressing a Sport button on the dashboard – which also
   adjusts the response of the accelerator.

   As for engines, the Tritec engine will be replaced in the Cooper model
   with a 120 bhp 1.6-litre Prince engine with infinitely variable valve
   timing, developed with Peugeot. It is reported in early road tests that
   this takes the car from 0-62 mph in a claimed 9.1 seconds and has top
   speed of 125 mph. Fuel economy of 48.7 mpg on the combined cycle is
   nearly 8 mpg better. The more powerful 175 bhp Cooper S will see the
   supercharger replaced by a new twin scroll turbocharger in the
   interests of efficiency, and will feature gasoline direct injection.
   This engine also has an "overboost" function which temporarily raises
   the torque by 15 lb•ft (20 Nm) under hard acceleration. As a result,
   0-62 mph is covered in a claimed 7.1 seconds, and top speed is 140 mph.
   It achieves similar improvements in fuel economy to the Cooper,
   returning 40.9mpg combined. Both cars will come with six-speed manual
   or automatic gearboxes. The turbocharged engine is the same (although
   with some French engineering modifications) as the one in the Peugeot
   207 GTi/RC.

   All models of the Mk II will have the option of "Hill Assist", a new
   feature which prevents the car from rolling back on an incline by
   holding the brakes on after you lift your foot from the brake pedal
   until you press the accelerator.

   The interior of the Mk II echoes the style of the earlier model but is
   in fact a complete redesign. The boot of the new car will have an
   additional 10 litres of load space.

   The Mk II MINI will be built by MINI's Production Triangle - Plant
   Swindon (body panels), Plant Hams Hall (engine) and finally Plant
   Oxford, where final assembly work is completed.

Prototype and concept cars

   BMW first showed the MINI as a concept car that looked very different
   from the production cars. It had circular headlamps, huge wheel flares
   and a much more rounded appearance overall compared to the production
   design.

   Before the first sales of the MINI, prototype versions were shown at
   the 2000 Paris Auto Show. These were essentially identical to the
   version that was finally sold except that the colours used ('Candy
   Blue' and 'Flamenco Orange') have never been used in production cars.

   BMW demonstrated a hydrogen-powered internal combustion technology in
   some of their concept cars in 2000 and 2001, and MINI showcased a
   hydrogen powered concept car in 2001 at the Frankfurt Auto Show. The
   car differs from electric-motor hydrogen concepts, such as the Honda
   FCX in that it uses a cylinder-based internal combustion engine.

   An all-electric MINI is in use at the British Embassy in Mexico that
   uses around 200 kg of Lithium Ion batteries. Three electric MINIs were
   also made for use in some subway scenes in the 2003 movie The Italian
   Job to satisfy the subway authorities concerns over possible carbon
   monoxide poisoning.

   With higher powered engines, the standard front wheel drive MINI tends
   to produce more wheel spin instead of more acceleration — a four wheel
   drive would be a natural solution to that problem. Getrag (who make the
   MINI's gearbox) demonstrated a four wheel drive version of the MINI in
   2004.
   MINI Traveller concept car at the 2006 Detroit Auto Show
   Enlarge
   MINI Traveller concept car at the 2006 Detroit Auto Show

   At the Frankfurt Motor show in 2005, MINI revealed a retro version of
   the classic 'Mini Traveller' station wagon. Based on a stretched
   wheelbase with two side-hinged rear doors and separate rear seats
   replacing the split bench seat of the standard MINI. At the Tokyo show,
   the same basic concept reappeared with some fanciful additions — a
   circular roof section could be removed to form a picnic table with four
   folding chairs. The rear side windows were replaced with fold-down
   storage containers containing cutlery, cups and plates. In Detroit, a
   further version was presented without the table and chairs — but with a
   radically restyled interior.

   Additional MINI models, including a four-door version, a two-seat
   roadster and a dune buggy have been shown as computer-graphic mock-ups
   at various times.

Racing

   The Mini is currently used in the Grand Am Cup Series. As of 13
   September 2006, the Mini is seventh in the standings for the Sport
   Tourer class.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MINI_%28BMW%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
