   #copyright

Minnesota

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: North American Geography

   CAPTION: State of Minnesota


   Flag of Minnesota State seal of Minnesota
   Flag of Minnesota Seal of Minnesota
   Nickname(s): North Star State,
   The Land of 10,000 Lakes, The Gopher State
   Motto(s): L'Etoile du nord
   Map of the United States with Minnesota highlighted
   Capital Saint Paul
   Largest city Minneapolis
   Area^  Ranked 12^th
    - Total 87,014 sq mi
   (225,365 km²)
    - Width 250 miles (400 km)
    - Length 400 miles (645 km)
    - % water 8.4
    - Latitude 43°34'N to 49°23'50.26"N
    - Longitude 89°34'W to 97°12'W
   Population^  Ranked 21^st
    - Total ( 2000) 4,919,479
    - Density 61.80/sq mi
   23.86/km² (31^st)
    - Median income^  $55,914 (5^th)
   Elevation
    - Highest point Eagle Mountain
   2,301 ft  (701 m)
    - Mean 1,198 ft  (365 m)
    - Lowest point Lake Superior
   602 ft  (183 m)
   Admission to Union^  May 11, 1858 (32^nd)
   Governor Tim Pawlenty ( R)
   U.S. Senators Mark Dayton ( D)
   Norm Coleman ( R)
   Time zone Central: UTC-6/ -5
   Abbreviations MN US-MN
   Web site www.state.mn.us
   Minnesota welcome sign
   Enlarge
   Minnesota welcome sign

   Minnesota ( IPA: [ˌmɪnəˈsoʊtə]) ( Audio (US) ) is a state in the
   Midwestern region of the United States. It is the 12^th largest state
   in the U.S., and the 21^st most populous, with over five million
   residents. Minnesota was carved out of the eastern half of the
   Minnesota Territory and admitted to the Union as the 32^nd state in
   1858. While the state's residents have been primarily white, Northern
   European, and Lutheran, substantial influxes of African, Asian, and
   Hispanic immigrants have joined the descendants of European immigrants
   and Native American descendants of its original inhabitants.

   Nearly three out of five Minnesota residents live in the Twin Cities
   metropolitan area, which is the centre of transportation, business, and
   industry, and home to an internationally known arts community. The
   remainder of the state, often referred to as Greater Minnesota,
   consists of western prairies now given over to intensive agriculture;
   eastern deciduous forests, also heavily farmed and settled; and the
   less-populated northern boreal forest. The state is known as the "Land
   of 10,000 Lakes", and those lakes and the other waters for which the
   state is named, together with state and national forests and parks,
   offer residents and tourists a vigorous outdoor lifestyle.

   The extremes of the climate contrast with the moderation of Minnesota’s
   people. The state is known for its moderate-to-progressive politics and
   social policies, its civic involvement, and high voter turnout. It
   ranks among the healthiest states by a number of measures, and has one
   of the most highly educated and literate populations.

Origin of the name

   The word Minnesota comes from the Dakota name for the Minnesota River,
   mnisota. Mni (sometimes mini, or minne) can be translated as "water".
   Mnisota is then translated as sky-tinted water or somewhat clouded
   water. Native Americans demonstrated the name to early settlers by
   dropping milk into water and calling it mnisota. The names of many
   locations in the state contain the Dakota word for water, such as
   Minnehaha Falls ("waterfall", not "laughing waters" as is commonly
   thought), Minneiska ("white water"), Minnetonka ("big water"),
   Minnetrista ("crooked water"), and Minneapolis, which is a combination
   of mni and polis, the Greek word for "city".

Geography

   Minnesota, showing roads and major bodies of water
   Enlarge
   Minnesota, showing roads and major bodies of water

   Minnesota is the northernmost state except for Alaska; its Northwest
   Angle is the only part of the 48 contiguous states lying north of the
   49^th Parallel. Minnesota is in the U.S. region known as the Upper
   Midwest. The state shares a Lake Superior water border with Michigan on
   the northeast; the remainder of the eastern border is with Wisconsin.
   Iowa is to the south, North Dakota and South Dakota are west, and the
   Canadian provinces of Ontario and Manitoba are north. With
   87,014 square miles (225,365 km²), or approximately 2.25% of the United
   States, Minnesota is the 12^th largest state, and is the second-largest
   of the Midwestern states.

Geology and terrain

   Tilted beds of the Middle Precambrian Thompson Formation in Jay Cooke
   State Park
   Enlarge
   Tilted beds of the Middle Precambrian Thompson Formation in Jay Cooke
   State Park

   2.7 billion years ago, the first pieces of volcanic rock that would
   form the land of Minnesota began to rise out of an ancient ocean.
   Today, this rock forms the Canadian Shield. Following a period of
   volcanism 1.1 billion years ago, Minnesota's geological activity has
   been relatively quiet. During this quiet period there has been no
   volcanism, no new mountains have formed, and there has been little
   earthquake activity. In the intervening millennia Precambrian seas and
   recent periods of glaciation have taken once mountainous Minnesota and
   flattened it out. The roots of these mountains with the action of the
   seas formed the Iron Range of northern Minnesota. Massive glaciers at
   least 1,000 meters thick have ravaged the landscape beginning 600,000
   years ago. The last of the four major glaciations, the Wisconsin
   glaciation left Minnesota 12,000 years ago. The extent of these
   glaciers reached all of Minnesota except the far southeast and
   southwest portions. The southeastern area is known as the Driftless
   Zone. It is characterized by low rolling hills and streams that cut
   into the bedrock. The glaciers left their remains across the whole
   state with most areas having 15 meters or more of glacial till. As the
   last glaciers retreated, gigantic Lake Agassiz formed in northwest
   Minnesota; its outflow carved the valley of the Minnesota River and its
   lake-bottom created the fertile lands of the Red River valley.
   Cliffs on the North Shore of Lake Superior
   Enlarge
   Cliffs on the North Shore of Lake Superior

   The action of a billion years of glaciations and erosion have left
   Minnesota a relatively flat state. The state's high point is Eagle
   Mountain at 2,301 ft (701 m), only 13 miles from the low of 602 ft
   (183 m) at the shore of Lake Superior. Two continental divides meet in
   the northeastern part of Minnesota, creating three watersheds. Rain
   falling in the state can follow the Mississippi River south to the Gulf
   of Mexico, the St. Lawrence Seaway east to the Atlantic Ocean, or the
   Hudson Bay watershed to the Arctic Ocean.

   The state's nickname, The Land of 10,000 Lakes, is no exaggeration, as
   there are 11,842 lakes over 10 acres in size. The Minnesota portion of
   Lake Superior is the largest (962,700 acres) and deepest (1,290 feet)
   body of water in the state. Minnesota has 6,564 natural rivers and
   streams that traverse a total of 69,000 miles. The Mississippi River
   begins a 680 mile journey through Minnesota from its headwaters at Lake
   Itasca. It is joined at Fort Snelling by the Minnesota River, and in
   the southeast by many trout streams. The Red River, in the bed of
   glacial Lake Agassiz, drains the northwest part of the state northward
   toward Canada's Hudson Bay.

Flora and fauna

   A groundhog seen in Minneapolis
   Enlarge
   A groundhog seen in Minneapolis

   Three of the biomes of North America converge in Minnesota: the Great
   Plains of the west, the Big Woods deciduous forest of the southeast,
   and the Northern Boreal forest of the Canadian Shield. The northern
   coniferous forests are a vast wilderness of pine and spruce forests
   mixed with patchy stands of birch and poplar. Much of Minnesota's
   northern forest was logged, leaving only a few patches of old growth
   forest today such as in the Chippewa National Forest and the Boundary
   Waters Canoe Area Wilderness, but regrowth keeps about one third of the
   state forested, though logging continues. While loss of habitat has
   created troubles for native animals such as the pine marten, elk,
   buffalo, cougar, woodland caribou, and bobcat, the state contains the
   nation's largest population of timber wolves outside Alaska and
   supports healthy populations of black bear, moose and whitetail deer.
   Located on the Mississippi Flyway, the state hosts migratory waterfowl
   such as geese and ducks, as well as game birds such as grouse,
   pheasants, and turkeys. The state also has bird of prey species
   including the bald eagle, red-tailed hawk, and snowy owl. Minnesota's
   lakes teem with the sport fish of the region including walleye, bass,
   muskellunge, and northern pike. The streams in the southeast are
   populated with brook trout, brown trout, and rainbow trout.

Climate

   A summertime view of the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis campus
   Enlarge
   A summertime view of the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis campus

   Minnesota endures temperature extremes characteristic of its
   continental climate; with cold winters and hot summers, together the
   record high and low span 174 degrees. Meteorological events include
   rain, snow, hail, blizzards, polar fronts, tornadoes, thunderstorms,
   and high-velocity straight-line winds. The growing season varies from
   90 days per year in the Iron Range to 160 days in southeast Minnesota
   near the Mississippi River, and mean average temperatures range from
   36^oF to 49^oF. Dewpoints range from about 6^oF to 70^oF. Annual
   average precipitation ranges from 19 inches to 35 inches, and droughts
   occur every 10 to 50 years, depending on location.

Protected lands

   Saganaga Lake in the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness
   Enlarge
   Saganaga Lake in the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness

   Minnesota is home to a wide variety of public open space and park
   lands. Minnesota's first state park, Itasca State Park, which is the
   official source of the Mississippi River, was established in 1891.
   Today Minnesota has 71 State Parks. The state has two national forests,
   the Chippewa National Forest and the Superior National Forest. Inside
   of the Superior National Forest on the northeastern border of the
   state, lies the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness, which
   encompasses over a million acres and 1000 lakes. The state also has 53
   state forests and numerous other wildlife preserves and regional parks.
   The Minnesota Department of Natural Resources is in charge of managing
   state parks and forests.

History

   Map of Minnesota Territory 1849–1858
   Enlarge
   Map of Minnesota Territory 1849–1858

   Before European settlement, Minnesota was populated by the Anishinaabe,
   the Sioux, and other Native Americans. European presence began with the
   arrival of French fur traders in the 1600s. During this century, the
   Ojibwe Indians migrated westward to Minnesota, and this caused tensions
   with the Sioux. Explorers such as Daniel Greysolon, Sieur du Lhut,
   Father Louis Hennepin, Jonathan Carver, Henry Schoolcraft, and Joseph
   Nicollet, among others, mapped out the state.

   In 1805, Zebulon Pike acquired land at the confluence of the Minnesota
   and Mississippi rivers. This was followed by the construction of Fort
   Snelling between 1819 and 1825.

   The soldiers built a grist mill and a sawmill at Saint Anthony Falls,
   and as industry later sprung up around the falls, the city of
   Minneapolis grew up around it. Meanwhile, squatters, government
   officials, and tourists had settled in the vicinity of the fort. In
   1839, the Army forced them to move downriver, and they settled in an
   area that became St. Paul. Minnesota Territory was formed on March 3,
   1849. By 1858, thousands of people had come to build farms and cut
   timber, and Minnesota became the 32nd U.S. state on May 11, 1858.

   Treaties with the Sioux and Ojibwe gradually forced them off their land
   and onto smaller reservations. As conditions became less favorable for
   the Sioux, tensions rose, and the Sioux Uprising of 1862 resulted. The
   result of the six-week war was the execution of 38 Indians, the largest
   mass execution in United States history, and the exile of most of the
   rest of the Sioux to the Crow Creek Reservation in Nebraska.
   Fort Snelling played a pivotal role in Minnesota's history and in the
   development of the cities of Minneapolis and Saint Paul.
   Enlarge
   Fort Snelling played a pivotal role in Minnesota's history and in the
   development of the cities of Minneapolis and Saint Paul.

   The early economy of Minnesota was based on logging and farming. The
   sawmills at Saint Anthony Falls, as well as logging centers like Marine
   on St. Croix, Stillwater, and Winona processed a large amount of
   lumber. These cities were well-situated on rivers that were ideal for
   transportation. Later, Saint Anthony Falls was tapped to provide power
   for flour mills. Innovations by Minneapolis millers led to the
   production of Minnesota "patent" flour, widely regarded as the finest
   bread flour of its time. By 1900, Minnesota mills, led by Pillsbury and
   the Washburn-Crosby Company (a forerunner of General Mills), were
   grinding 14.1% of the nation's grain.

   Minnesota became established as an iron mining state with the discovery
   of iron in the Vermilion Range and the Mesabi Range in the 1880s,
   followed by the discovery of iron in the Cuyuna Range in the early
   1900s. The iron was shipped by rail to Two Harbors and Duluth, then
   loaded onto ships and transported eastward through the Great Lakes.

   As a result of industrial development and the rise of manufacturing,
   the population gradually shifted from rural areas to cities during the
   early 1900s. Nevertheless, farming remained prevalent throughout the
   state. During the years of the Great Depression, the Minnesota economy
   was hit hard, resulting in lower prices paid to farmers, layoffs among
   iron miners, and various instances of labor unrest. Compounding the
   adversity, western Minnesota and the Dakotas were hit by drought from
   1931 through 1935. New Deal programs provided some economic turnaround.
   The Civilian Conservation Corps and other programs around the state
   established jobs for Indians on their own reservations. The Indian
   Reorganization Act of 1934 provided a self-government mechanism for the
   Indian tribes. This had the effect of providing more of a voice within
   the state and promoting more respect for tribal customs, as religious
   ceremonies and native languages were no longer suppressed.

   After World War II, the pace of industrial development quickened.
   Technological developments increased productivity on farms, such as
   automation of feedlots for hogs and cattle, machine milking at dairy
   farms, and raising chickens in large buildings. Planting became more
   specialized with hybridization of corn and wheat, and mechanical
   equipment such as tractors and combines became the norm. University of
   Minnesota professor Norman Borlaug contributed to this knowledge as
   part of the Green Revolution. During this time, suburban development
   accelerated as a result of postwar housing demand, convenient
   transportation, and increased mobility to more specialized jobs.

   Minnesota became a centre of technology after the war. Engineering
   Research Associates was formed in 1946 to develop computers for the
   United States Navy. It later merged with Remington Rand, and then
   became Sperry Rand. William Norris left Sperry in 1957 to form Control
   Data Corporation (CDC). Cray Research was formed when Seymour Cray left
   CDC to form his own company. Medical device maker Medtronic also got
   its start in the Twin Cities in 1949.

Cities and towns

   National Farmers Bank in Owatonna by Louis Sullivan
   Enlarge
   National Farmers Bank in Owatonna by Louis Sullivan

   The capital city of Minnesota is Saint Paul, located in the
   east-central part of the state along the banks of the Mississippi
   River. Saint Paul is adjacent to Minnesota's largest and most populous
   city, Minneapolis; together they and their suburbs are known as the
   Twin Cities metropolitan area, the 16^th largest metropolitan area in
   the United States and home to about 60% of the state's population as of
   April 1, 2005. The remainder of the state is known as Greater Minnesota
   or Outstate Minnesota.

   Minnesota cities with estimated 2005 populations above fifty thousand
   are, in descending order: Minneapolis, Saint Paul, Rochester, Duluth,
   Bloomington, Brooklyn Park, Plymouth, Eagan, St. Cloud, Coon Rapids,
   Burnsville, Eden Prairie, Maple Grove, Woodbury, Blaine, Lakeville, and
   Minnetonka. Of these, only Rochester, Duluth, and St. Cloud are outside
   the Twin Cities metropolitan area.

   While Minnesota's population continues to grow, most of that growth is
   in the urban centers. The populations of metropolitan Sherburne and
   Scott doubled between 1980 and 2000, while 40 of the state's 87
   counties lost population over those two decades.

Demographics

   Minnesota Population Density Map
   Enlarge
   Minnesota Population Density Map

Population

   From less than 6,100 in 1850, the population to grew to over
   1.75 million in 1900. For the next six decades the population grew 15%
   per decade, reaching 3.41 million in 1960. Growth thereafter slowed,
   rising 11% to 3.8 million in 1970, and 9% average over the next three
   decades to 4.91 million in the 2000 census. As of 2005 the population
   was estimated to be 5,132,799 by the U.S Census Bureau, and 5,205,091
   by the State Demographer. The rate of increase and age and gender
   distributions approximate the national average, but Minnesota's
   minorities, although growing, form a significantly smaller proportion
   than in the nation as a whole. The centre of population of Minnesota is
   located in Hennepin County, in the city of Rogers.

Race and ancestry

   Over 75% of the population is of Western European descent, with the
   largest reported ancestries being German (37.3%), Norwegian (17.0%),
   Irish (12.2%), and Swedish (10.0%). As of 2004, 6.1% of Minnesota
   residents were foreign-born, compared to 12% for the nation. The state
   had a reputation of being relatively homogeneous, but that is changing.
   The Hispanic population of Minnesota is increasing rapidly, and recent
   immigrants have come from all over the world, including Hmongs,
   Somalis, Vietnamese, Indians, Middle Easterners, and emigrants from the
   former Soviet bloc.

   The racial makeup of the state as of 2005 was:
   Cathedral of St. Paul in the city of St. Paul
   Enlarge
   Cathedral of St. Paul in the city of St. Paul
     * 86.3% White (non-Hispanic)
     * 4.1% Black (non-Hispanic)
     * 3.6% Hispanic, a category that includes people of any race
     * 3.4% Asian/Pacific Islander
     * 1.1% Native American/Alaskan Native
     * 1.5% Mixed Race
     * 1.8% Other races

Religion

   A 2001 survey shows a statewide breakdown of Roman Catholics at 25%,
   Lutherans at 24%, Baptists at 5%, Methodists at 4%, Assembly of God at
   2%, Church of God at 2%, and Presbyterians 2%. Christians with unstated
   or other denominational affiliations including other Protestants total
   13%, bringing the total Christian population to 77%. Non-Christian
   religions including Judaism, Islam, Buddhism, and Hinduism make up 3%
   of the population. People who answered "No religion" on the survey
   total 14%, and 6% refused to answer.

Economy

   Phelps Mill in Otter Tail County
   Enlarge
   Phelps Mill in Otter Tail County

   The state's economy has transformed in the past 200 years from one
   based on raw materials to one based on finished products and services.
   Perhaps the most significant characteristic of the economy is its
   diversity, which closely matches that of the nation as a whole. The
   economy of Minnesota produced 234 billion dollars of gross domestic
   product in 2005. Thirty-six companies in the top 1000 U.S.
   publicly-traded companies (by revenue in 2006) are headquartered in
   Minnesota. This includes such diverse companies as Target, UnitedHealth
   Group, 3M, Medtronic, General Mills, U.S. Bancorp, and Best Buy. The
   largest privately owned U.S. company, Cargill is also headquartered in
   Minnetonka. The Per capita personal income in 2004 was $36,184, 8^th in
   the nation. The median household income in 2005 was approximately
   $52,024, ranking eleventh in the nation.

Industry and commerce

   The IDS Tower, designed by Philip Johnson and Minnesota's tallest
   building, reflecting César Pelli's Art Deco-style Wells Fargo Center
   Enlarge
   The IDS Tower, designed by Philip Johnson and Minnesota's tallest
   building, reflecting César Pelli's Art Deco-style Wells Fargo Centre

   Minnesota's earliest industries were fur trading and agriculture; the
   city of Minneapolis was built around the flour mills clumped around St.
   Anthony Falls. Agriculture is still a major part of the economy even
   though only a small percentage of the population, less than 1%, are
   employed in the farming industry. The state is still the U.S.'s largest
   producer of sugar beets, sweet corn, and green peas for processing, and
   farm-raised turkeys. Forestry, another early industry, remains strong
   with logging, pulpwood processing, forest products manufacturing, and
   paper production. Minnesota was famous for its soft-ore iron mines
   which produced a significant portion of the world's iron ore for over a
   century. Although the high-grade ore is now depleted, taconite mining
   remains strong using processes developed locally to save the industry.
   In 2004 the state produced 75% of the usable iron ore in the country.
   The port of Duluth was created by the mining boom and today continues
   to be an important shipping port for ore, coal, and agricultural
   products. The manufacturing sector now includes strong technology and
   biomedical firms in addition to the older food processing, forestry,
   and heavy industries. The nation's first indoor shopping mall was
   Edina's Southdale Centre and its largest, the Mall of America, is
   located in Bloomington.

Energy use and production

   Ethanol fuel is produced in the state, and a 10% mix of ethanol ( E10)
   has been mandated since 1997, making Minnesota the first U.S. state
   with such a mandate. A 20% ethanol mix (E20) will be mandated in 2013.
   Minnesota has nearly 300 gas stations supplying E85 fuel. A 2%
   biodiesel blend has also been required in diesel fuel since 2005.
   Electricity-producing wind turbines have become popular, particularly
   in the windy southwest region on the Buffalo Ridge. As of November
   2006, the state is the country's fourth-largest wind energy producer,
   with 812  megawatts installed and an additional 82 MW planned.

State taxes

   Minnesota has a slightly progressive income tax structure, with three
   brackets of state income tax rates, 5.35%, 7.05% and 7.85%. The sales
   tax in Minnesota for most items is 6.5%, however the state does not
   charge sales tax on clothing, prescription medications, some services,
   or food items for home consumption. Municipalities may be allowed by
   the State Legislature to institute local sales taxes and special local
   taxes, such as the 0.5% additional sales tax in Minneapolis. The cities
   of St. Paul, Rochester, Duluth and St. Cloud have similar taxes. Excise
   taxes are levied on alcohol, tobacco, and motor fuel. The state also
   imposes a use tax on items purchased elsewhere but used within
   Minnesota. Owners of real property in Minnesota also pay property tax
   to their county, municipality, school district, and special taxing
   districts.

Culture

Fine and performing arts

   Minneapolis Institute of Arts original building designed by McKim,
   Mead, and White
   Enlarge
   Minneapolis Institute of Arts original building designed by McKim,
   Mead, and White

   The Twin Cities area is considered the capital for the arts in the
   upper Midwest. Major fine art museums include the Weisman Art Museum,
   the Walker Art Centre, and the Minneapolis Institute of Arts. The Saint
   Paul Chamber Orchestra and Minnesota Orchestra are full-time
   professional musical ensembles providing concerts and educational
   programs to the community. Attendance at theatrical, musical, and
   comedy events across the area is strong, which may be attributed to the
   cold winters, the large number of colleges and universities, and a
   generally vibrant economy. The Guthrie Theatre boasts three separate
   stages in its new (2006) building overlooking the Mississippi River. In
   the United States, the Twin Cities rank behind only New York City in
   number of theater seats per capita; in 2000, 2.3 million theatre
   tickets were sold. The Minneapolis Fringe Festival is an annual
   celebration of theatre, dance, improvisation, puppetry, kids' shows,
   visual art, and musicals. The festival consists of over 800
   performances in 11 days in the summer and is the largest non-juried
   performing arts festival in the United States.

Literature

   The rigors and rewards of pioneer life on the prairie were the subject
   of Giants in the Earth by Ole Rolvaag and the Little House series of
   children's books by Laura Ingalls Wilder. Small town life was savaged
   by Sinclair Lewis in Main Street and more gently and affectionately
   satirized by Garrison Keillor in his tales of Lake Wobegon. St. Paul
   native F. Scott Fitzgerald wrote of the the social insecurities and
   aspirations of the young city in stories such as Winter Dreams and The
   Ice Palace (published in Flappers and Philosophers).

Entertainment

   First Avenue nightclub, the heart of Minnesota's music community
   Enlarge
   First Avenue nightclub, the heart of Minnesota's music community

   Minnesotan musicians from all genres have been popular over the years,
   producing such nationally-known acts artists as Andrews Sisters, Bob
   Dylan, Jimmy Jam & Terry Lewis, Prince, and Semisonic. Minnesota has
   also produced cult favorites The Replacements, Hüsker Dü and
   Atmosphere.

   Minnesota and Wisconsin have also contributed significantly to comedy
   in its different forms. Ole and Lena jokes can't be fully appreciated
   unless delivered in the accent of Scandinavian-Americans. Garrison
   Keillor is known around the country for resurrecting the old-style
   radio comedy with A Prairie Home Companion which has been on the air
   since the 1970s. Local television had the satirical show The Bedtime
   Nooz in the 1960s, while area natives Lizz Winstead and Craig Kilborn
   helped create the increasingly influential Daily Show decades later.
   Joel and Ethan Coen have produced many films featuring dark comedy, and
   numerous others brought the offbeat cult shows Mystery Science Theatre
   3000 and Let's Bowl to the national cable-waves from the Twin Cities.

Popular culture

   A youth fiddle performance at the Minnesota State Fair
   Enlarge
   A youth fiddle performance at the Minnesota State Fair

   Stereotypical Minnesotan traits include Minnesota nice, Lutheranism, a
   strong sense of community and shared culture, and a distinctive Upper
   Midwestern accent sprinkled with Scandinavian-sounding words such as
   uff da. Potlucks, usually with a variety of hotdish casseroles, are
   popular at community functions, especially for church-related
   activities. Minnesota's Norwegian and Scandinavian heritage makes
   lutefisk a traditional holiday dish. The radio show A Prairie Home
   Companion and the book How to Talk Minnesotan lampoon Minnesotan
   culture, speech and mannerisms.

   The Minnesota State Fair, advertised as The Great Minnesota
   Get-Together, is an icon of state culture. Its 2006 attendance of
   nearly 1.7 million visitors, in a state of 5.1 million people, lends
   credence to to its significance. Although the fair covers a wide swath
   of genres including fine art, science, agriculture, food preparation,
   4H displays, music, the midway, and corporate merchandising, the
   Minnesota state fair is known for the displays of seed art, butter
   sculptures of dairy princesses, the birthing barn, and dozens of
   varieties of food on a stick (such as Hot Dog on a Stick). On a smaller
   scale, these same attractions are offered at Minnesota's numerous
   county fairs.

   Other large annual festivals include the Saint Paul Winter Carnival,
   Minneapolis' Aquatennial and Mill City Music Festival, and Detroit
   Lakes' 10,000 Lakes Music Festival and WE Fest.

Outdoor recreation

   Fishing is popular in Minnesota; more than 36% of Minnesotans fish,
   which is second only to Alaska. During the winter, ice fishing is
   popular, as it has been since the arrival of early Scandinavian
   immigrants. Hunting is another common activity. Families frequently own
   or share cabins on central and northern tracts of land in forests and
   adjoining lakes, and weekend trips out to these properties are common,
   particularly in the summer. A concern for environmentalism is shared by
   most state residents in one form or another, which is sometimes
   attributed to the popularity of these outdoor activities.

   Minnesota's 71 state parks, which protect diverse landscapes, are quite
   popular. As with other North Woods states (such as Wisconsin, Michigan,
   and Maine), residents like to joke that the mosquito is the state bird
   because of their high populations in these areas. In reality,
   Minnesota's state bird is the common loon.

Socio-economic

   The Richardsonian Romanesque Pillsbury Hall is the second oldest
   building on the University of Minnesota Minneapolis campus .
   Enlarge
   The Richardsonian Romanesque Pillsbury Hall is the second oldest
   building on the University of Minnesota Minneapolis campus .

Education

   One of the first acts of the Minnesota Legislature when it opened in
   1858 was the creation of a normal school at Winona. Since then,
   Minnesota has remained among the ten strongest states in the United
   States in education in most surveys. It ranks 13^th on the 2006–2007
   Morgan Quitno Smartest State Award and first on the percentage of its
   residents with a high school diploma or higher. Minnesota ranks 5^th in
   the nation in high school graduation, with an 84% graduation rate.
   While Minnesota has steered clear of movements in education such as
   school vouchers and the teaching of intelligent design, it is home to
   one of the first charter schools.

   The state supports a network of public universities and colleges,
   currently comprised of 32 institutions in the Minnesota State Colleges
   and Universities System and five major campuses of University of
   Minnesota. The state is also home to more than 20 private colleges and
   universities, six of which rank in the top 100 liberal arts colleges
   according to U.S. News and World Report.

Health

   The Mayo Clinic in Rochester
   Enlarge
   The Mayo Clinic in Rochester

   The University of Minnesota Medical School is a highly-rated teaching
   institution which has made a number of significant breakthroughs in
   treatment, and its research activities significantly contribute to the
   state's growing biotechnology industry. The Mayo Clinic, a
   world-renowned medical practice, is based in Rochester. Mayo and the
   University are partners in the Minnesota Partnership for Biotechnology
   and Medical Genomics, a state-funded program which conducts research
   projects in cancer, Alzheimer’s disease, heart health, obesity, and
   other areas.

   Minnesota ranks first in the percentage of residents engaging in
   regular physical exercise, and second in three crucial indices: low
   infant mortality, long life expectancies, and death rate per 100,000.
   According to the U.S. Census Bureau, 91.3% of Minnesotans have health
   insurance coverage, higher than any other state. These and other
   measures have led one group to rank Minnesota as the healthiest state
   in the nation, and another to rank it fourth.

Transportation

   The Aerial Lift Bridge at Duluth
   Enlarge
   The Aerial Lift Bridge at Duluth

   Transportation in Minnesota is overseen by the Minnesota Department of
   Transportation. Principal transportation corridors radiate out from the
   Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area and Duluth. Major Interstate
   highways are I-35, I-90, and I-94, with I-35 and I-94 passing through
   the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area, and I-90 going east-west at
   the southern edge of the state. In 2006 a Constitutional Amendment was
   passed in the state, requiring sales and use taxes levied on motor
   vehicles to be dedicated to transportation, specifying at least 40%
   toward public transit. There are nearly two dozen rail corridors within
   the State, most of which go to or through Minneapolis-St. Paul or
   Duluth. There is water transportation along the Mississippi River
   system and from Lake Superior ports.
   A Hiawatha Line vehicle in Minneapolis
   Enlarge
   A Hiawatha Line vehicle in Minneapolis

   Minnesota's principal airport is Minneapolis-St. Paul International
   Airport (MSP), the headquarters and a major passenger and freight hub
   for Northwest Airlines, and headquarters and the major hub of Sun
   Country Airlines. The airport also is served by most other domestic
   carriers. Large commercial jet service is also provided at Duluth and
   Rochester, with scheduled commuter service to six smaller cities via
   Eagan-based Mesaba Airlines.

   Amtrak's Empire Builder runs through Minnesota, making stops at Midway
   Station in St. Paul and five other stations. Intercity bus service is
   provided by Greyhound, Jefferson Lines, and Coach USA.

   Public transit in Minnesota is currently limited to bus systems in the
   larger cities and the Hiawatha Line light rail corridor in the
   Minneapolis-St. Paul area.

Law and government

   As in the federal government of the United States, power in Minnesota
   is divided into three branches: Executive, Legislative, and Judicial.

Executive

   The executive branch is headed by the governor, currently Tim Pawlenty,
   a Republican, whose 1st term began 6 January 2003, and who was narrowly
   re-elected in 2006. The current lieutenant governor of Minnesota is
   Carol Molnau. Molnau also currently serves as the head of the Minnesota
   Department of Transportation. The offices of governor and lieutenant
   governor have four-year terms. The governor has a cabinet consisting of
   the leaders of various government agencies in the state, called
   commissioners. The other constitutional offices are secretary of state,
   attorney general and state auditor.
   Minnesota State Capitol building in Saint Paul designed by Cass Gilbert
   Enlarge
   Minnesota State Capitol building in Saint Paul designed by Cass Gilbert

Legislative

   The Minnesota Legislature is a bicameral body consisting of the Senate
   and the House of Representatives. The state has 67 districts, each
   covering about 60,000 people. Each district has one senator and two
   representatives (each district being divided into A and B sections).
   Senators serve for four years and representatives for two years. In the
   November 2006 election, the Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party gained 19
   house seats, giving them control of the Minnesota House of
   Representatives by 85-49. The Minnesota Senate is also controlled by
   the DFL, who in 2006 gained 6 seats to expand their majority to 44-23.

Judicial

   Minnesota's court system has three levels. Most cases start in the
   district courts, which are courts of general jurisdiction. There are
   272 district court judges in ten judicial districts. Appeals from the
   trial courts and challenges to certain governmental decisions are heard
   by the Minnesota Court of Appeals, consisting sixteen judges who
   typically sit in three-judge panels. The seven-justice Minnesota
   Supreme Court hears all appeals from the Tax Court, the Worker's
   Compensation Court, first-degree murder convictions, and discretionary
   appeals from the Court of Appeals; it also has original jurisdiction
   over election disputes.

   Two specialized courts within administrative agencies have been
   established, the Tax Court which deals with non-criminal tax cases, and
   the Workers' Compensation Court of Appeals.

Regional

   Below the city and county levels of government found in the United
   States, Minnesota has other entities that provide governmental
   oversight and planning. Some actions in the Twin Cities metropolitan
   area are coordinated by the Metropolitan Council, and many lakes and
   rivers are overseen by watershed districts and soil and water
   conservation districts.

   There are seven Anishinaabe reservations and four Dakota communities in
   Minnesota. These communities govern themselves independently.

Federal

   Minnesota's two U.S. senators are Norm Coleman and Mark Dayton. The
   state has eight congressional districts; they are represented by Gil
   Gutknecht ( 1st district), John Kline ( 2nd), Jim Ramstad ( 3rd), Betty
   McCollum ( 4th), Martin Sabo ( 5th), Mark Kennedy ( 6th), Collin
   Peterson ( 7th), and James Oberstar ( 8th).

   Federal court cases are heard in the United States District Court for
   the District of Minnesota, which holds court in Minneapolis, St. Paul,
   Duluth, and Fergus Falls. Appeals are heard by the Eighth Circuit Court
   of Appeals based in St. Louis, Missouri and St. Paul.

Politics

          Hubert Humphrey

          Enlarge
          Hubert Humphrey

   Minnesota is known for a politically active citizenry, with populism
   being a longstanding force among the state's political parties.
   Minnesota has consistently high voter turnout; in the 2004 U.S.
   presidential election 77.2% of eligible Minnesotans voted, the highest
   of any U.S. state (with a national average of 60.93%), due in part to
   its liberal voter registration laws. Previously unregistered voters can
   register on election day, at their polls, with evidence of residency.

   Hubert Humphrey brought national attention to the state following his
   address at the 1948 Democratic National Convention and Eugene
   McCarthy's anti-war stance and popularity prior to the 1968 Democratic
   National Convention likely convinced Lyndon Johnson to drop out of the
   race. Minnesotans have voted for Democratic presidential candidates
   ever since 1976, longer than any other state, but in the 108^th and
   109^th congresses, Minnesota's congressional delegation was split with
   4 Democratic and 4 Republican members of congress and the state's
   senate seats have also generally been split since the early 1990s. See
   United States Congressional Delegations from Minnesota.

   In the 2006 mid-term election, Democrats were elected to all state
   offices except for governor and lieutenant governor, where Republicans
   Tim Pawlenty and Carol Molnau narrowly won reelection. The DFL also
   posted double-digit gains in both houses of the legislature, elected
   DFLer Amy Klobuchar to the U.S. Senate, and increased the Democratic
   U.S. House caucus by one.

   The state has had active third party movements. The Reform Party was
   able to elect the former mayor of Brooklyn Park, and former
   professional wrestler, Jesse Ventura to the governorship in 1998. The
   state's Green Party has elected city council members and other local
   office-holders in Duluth, Minneapolis and Winona, and has made strong
   runs for state legislature during the past two election cycles. In
   2000, Green Party candidate Ralph Nader received just over 5% of the
   presidential votes cast, gaining Major Party status for the Green Party
   of Minnesota. The Independence Party has also received sufficient
   support to receive major party status.

Sports

   A faceoff between the University of North Dakota Fighting Sioux and the
   Saint Cloud State University Huskies during the 2006 WCHA Final Five at
   the Xcel Energy Center
   Enlarge
   A faceoff between the University of North Dakota Fighting Sioux and the
   Saint Cloud State University Huskies during the 2006 WCHA Final Five at
   the Xcel Energy Centre

   Minnesota is home to nine professional sports teams, including teams in
   all four major professional leagues. Minnesota's professional baseball
   team, the Minnesota Twins, plays in the American League of Major League
   Baseball. The franchise began in 1901 as the Washington Senators and
   moved to Minnesota in 1961. Since moving to Minnesota they have won the
   1987 and 1991 World Series. The Minnesota Vikings professional football
   team plays in the National Football League. They joined the league in
   1961 as an expansion team and have appeared in four Super Bowls, but
   have yet to win the championship. The Twins and the Vikings both play
   home games in the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome. The Minnesota Wild,
   Minnesota's professional hockey team, joined the National Hockey League
   in 2000 as an expansion team. The Wild play their home games at the
   Xcel Energy Centre, and as of October 2006 all 230 games that they have
   played in that building have been sold out. The Minnesota Timberwolves
   of the National Basketball Association were an expansion team in 1989.

   There are also several minor league professional or semi-professional
   teams. Minor league baseball is represented both by major league
   sponsored teams and independent teams such as the popular St. Paul
   Saints.

   The U.S. Hockey Hall of Fame is located in Eveleth, on the Iron Range.
   The United States won the Olympic gold medal for Hockey in 1980 coached
   by Minnesota native Herb Brooks with eleven of the twenty players on
   the roster from Minnesota beating the long dominant USSR team in what
   is known as the Miracle on Ice.

   The University of Minnesota (U of M) Minneapolis competes entirely in
   NCAA Division I sports. Several U of M satellite colleges and colleges
   in the Minnesota State Colleges and Universities System compete in the
   Division I Western Collegiate Hockey Association. There are ten NCAA
   Division II colleges represented by the North Central Conference and
   the Northern Sun Intercollegiate Conference in Minnesota, and sixteen
   NCAA Division III colleges represented by the Minnesota Intercollegiate
   Athletic Conference and Upper Midwest Athletic Conference.

State symbols

   The Common Loon
   Enlarge
   The Common Loon

   Minnesota has state symbols that represent its history, love of the
   outdoors, and diverse landscapes. Minnesota's best known state symbol
   is the state bird, the Common Loon. Its distinctive cry can often be
   heard during the summer months in the northern part of the state and
   can even on occasion be found as far south as the lakes of Minneapolis.

   State Symbols:
     * State bird: Common Loon
     * State butterfly: Monarch
     * State drink: Milk
     * State fish: Walleye
     * State flower: Pink and White Showy Lady Slipper
     * State fruit: Honeycrisp apple, which was developed at the
       University of Minnesota.
     * State gemstone: Lake Superior agate
     * State grain: Wild rice
     * Territory Motto (actual): Quo sursum velo videre ("I cover to see
       what is above" is the closest translation)
     * Territory Motto (intended): Quae sursum volo videre ("I wish to see
       what is beyond")
     * State motto: L'Étoile du Nord ("Star of the North")
     * State muffin: Blueberry, which was adopted as part of a school
       project on how a bill becomes law.
     * State mushroom: Morel
     * State photograph: Grace
     * State song: " Hail! Minnesota"
     * State tree: Norway Pine
     * Nicknames:
          + "Land of 10,000 Lakes"
          + "North Star State"
          + "Gopher State"
          + "Land of Sky-Blue Waters"
          + "Bread and Butter State"

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minnesota"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
