   #copyright

Mistle Thrush

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

                  iMistle Thrush

                             Conservation status

   Least Concern (LC)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Aves
   Order:   Passeriformes
   Family:  Turdidae
   Genus:   Turdus
   Species: T. viscivorus

                                Binomial name

   Turdus viscivorus
   Linnaeus, 1758

   The Mistle Thrush (Turdus viscivorus) is a common member of the thrush
   family Turdidae.

   It is found in open woods and cultivated land over all of Europe and
   much of Asia. Many northern birds move south during the winter. The
   Mistle Thrush averages about 27 cm long, larger than the similar Song
   Thrush. The sexes are similar, with plain greyish brown backs and
   neatly round-spotted underparts. The breast has much less buff than the
   Song Thrush.

   It is omnivorous, eating a wide range of insects, earthworms, and
   berries. A Mistle Thrush will defend a berry-bearing tree against other
   thrushes in winter. Migrating birds sometimes form small flocks.

   They nest in trees, laying several eggs in a neat cup-shaped nest lined
   with grass.

   The male sings its loud melodious song from a tree, rooftop or other
   elevated perch, often during bad weather or at night, and starting
   relatively early in the spring — hence the Mistle Thrush's old name of
   "Stormcock". The song is like a harder and simpler version of the
   Blackbird's. The alarm call is said to sound like a football rattle (a
   form of musical ratchet) or machine gun.

   public domain image from a 1905 field guide
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mistle_Thrush"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
