   #copyright

Mixed-breed dog

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mammals

   A healthy 13-year-old mixed-breed dog shows hybrid vigor.
   Enlarge
   A healthy 13-year-old mixed-breed dog shows hybrid vigor.

   A mixed-breed dog (also called a bastard, mutt, crossbreed, mongrel,
   tyke, cur, or random-bred dog) is a dog that is a mixture of two or
   more breeds, or a descendant of feral or pariah dog populations. Dogs
   interbreed freely, except where extreme variations in size exist, so
   mixed-breed dogs vary in size, shape, and colour, making them hard to
   classify physically. Historically, all purebred dogs have been selected
   from a mixed-breed population.

Terms for mixed-breed dogs

   There is a profusion of words and phrases used for dogs that are not
   purebred . The words cur, tyke, and mongrel are generally viewed as
   derogatory in America, whereas in the United Kingdom mongrel is the
   unique technical word for a mixed-breed dog, so is not a term of
   disparagement. Many American owners prefer mixed-breed. Mutt is also
   used (in the U.S.A and Canada), sometimes in an affectionate manner. In
   Hawaii, mixed breed dogs are referred to as poi dog, and in the
   Bahamas, they call them Pot Cakes (referring to the table-leftovers
   they are fed). Some American registries and dog clubs that accept
   mixed-breed dogs use the breed name All American, referring to the
   United States' reputation as a melting pot of different nationalities.
   In South Africa, the tongue-in cheek expression pavement special is
   sometimes used as a description for a mixed-breed dog. Random-bred dog,
   mutt, and mongrel are often used for dogs who result from breeding
   without the supervision or planning of humans, especially after several
   generations, whereas mixed breed and crossbreed often imply mixes of
   known breeds, sometimes deliberately mated.

   In Brazil and the Dominican Republic, the name for mixed-breed dogs is
   vira-lata (vira: to turn, to bring down; lata: tin can, trash can)
   because there are dogs without owners that feed on urban garbage on the
   streets, and often knock over trash cans to reach the food. Therefore,
   by having stray dogs it seems to increase the amount of "mixed-breed"
   dogs.

   Slang terms are also common. Heinz 57 is often used for dogs of
   uncertain ancestry, in a playful reference to the "57 Varieties" slogan
   of the H. J. Heinz Company. In some countries, bitsa (or bitzer) is
   common, meaning "bits o' this, bits o' that". A fice or feist is a
   small mixed-breed dog.

   To complicate matters, many owners of crossbred dogs identify
   them—often facetiously—by an invented breed name constructed from parts
   of their parents' breed names. For example, a cross between a Pekingese
   and a Poodle is called a Peekapoo, possibly a play on peek-a-boo, along
   with the Golden Doodle, a cross between a poodle and a golden
   retriever. As another example, one of the UK's Queen Elizabeth's famous
   Corgis mated with her sister's Dachshund, and the resulting offspring
   are referred to as Dorgis.

   Some cross-breeds are bred for certain positive traits, such as a
   Golden Doodle being a Golden Retriever looking dog, that shares the
   trait of not shedding with Poodles. Shedding is a pet-peeve from many
   pet owners, because the fallen hair can increase the number of times a
   house must be cleaned in order to look presentable, and may be a family
   allergen.

Appearance

   This "yellow" mix between a German Shepherd and a Golden Retriever does
   not closely resemble either parent but has traits of both.
   Enlarge
   This "yellow" mix between a German Shepherd and a Golden Retriever does
   not closely resemble either parent but has traits of both.

   All possible body shapes, ear types, and tail styles can appear in
   mixed breeds. Extremes in appearance, such as the flattened face of the
   English Bulldog or the extremely curled tail of the Pug, seldom survive
   even the first crossbreeding. Mixed-breeds also tend to have a size
   between that of their parents.

   Mixed-breed dogs can be any size, weight, or colour, but some colors
   are more common than others. No matter their parents' colors,
   mixed-breeds are often a light-to-medium brown or black, frequently
   with a white chest and other white markings. The light-brown coat is
   sometimes called yellow, as personified by the fictional dog Old
   Yeller. A brown coat with black across the top and sides is also quite
   common.

   Predicting the adult appearance of a mixed-breed puppy is difficult.
   Even purebred puppies do not look much like the adult dogs they will
   become, and with mixed-breed puppies it is nearly impossible. If one
   knows the breeds of the parents, some characteristics can be ruled out;
   for example, a cross between two small purebreds will not result in a
   dog the size of a Great Dane. Some breeds tend to pass on their
   physical traits to mixes more than others. Border Collies and some
   Spaniels, for example, often produce offspring with similar coats and
   ears. The crossbred offspring of German Shepherds usually have Shepherd
   faces and other characteristics.

   With each generation of indiscriminate mixing, the offspring move
   closer to the genetic norm. Dogs that are descended from many
   generations of mixes are typically light brown or black and weigh about
   18 kg (40 lb). They typically stand between 38 and 57 cm (15 and 23
   inches) tall at the withers.

   Guessing a mixed-breed's unknown ancestry is difficult for even
   knowledgeable dog observers, because mixed breeds have much more
   genetic variation than among purebreds. For example, two white
   mixed-breed dogs might have recessive genes that produce a black coat
   and, therefore, produce offspring looking unlike their parents.

Health

   The theory of hybrid vigor suggests that dogs of mixed ancestry will be
   healthier than their purebred counterparts. In some cases this might be
   true, because inbreeding among purebreds has made some breeds prone to
   various genetic health problems. Mixed-breed dogs are sometimes less
   likely to have certain genetic disorders, as their parents come from a
   more diverse genetic pool so that detrimental recessive genes are less
   likely to occur in both parents. For example, large dogs such as German
   Shepherd Dogs often suffer from hip dysplasia. Mating a German Shepherd
   carrier of the faulty gene with a dog from a breed not known to suffer
   genetic hip problems reduces the likelihood of producing offspring with
   the problem. On the other hand, breeding the Shepherd with another
   Shepherd whose ancestors do not have the genetic problem also has this
   effect.

   Hybrid vigor is not guaranteed in a mixed-breed dog, however. Breeding
   a German Shepherd who carries hip dysplasia with a Golden Retriever who
   carries hip dysplasia will give mixed breed puppies who carry or have
   hip dysplasia. Since most genetic defects are common to many different
   breeds, it is impossible to guarantee that a breeding of any two dogs
   will not result in defects unless you know the health history of those
   two dogs' ancestors and/or have had genetic testing on the dogs.
   Because of this, the most common genetic problems are nearly as common
   in the mixed breed population as they are in the purebred population.

   Some purebred dog breeds have difficulties associated simply with the
   exaggerated physical traits of the breed. For example, the French
   Bulldog has such small hips and such a large head that artificial
   insemination and Caesarean section are usually required to produce
   puppies. Crossing such a dog with another breed will likely produce
   dogs without these reproductive difficulties, although most authorities
   on dog populations discourage reproduction among crossbreeds and mixed
   breeds because there are already so many purebreds available for
   adoption in addition to mixed breeds.

   There is no guarantee of good genetic health of any dog, purebred or
   otherwise, as not all damaging genes are recessive. Also, of course,
   purebred and mixed-breed dogs are equally susceptible to nongenetic
   ailments, such as rabies, distemper, injury, and infestation by
   parasites.

Types of mixed breeding

   All dog breeds are a result of human selection: dogs were traditionally
   bred for specific functions. Most existing dog breeds began as mixed
   breeds, either by random occurrence or by deliberate crosses of
   existing breeds. Encouraging desirable traits and discouraging others,
   breeders sought to create their ideal appearance or behavior, or both,
   for dogs, and, additionally, to ensure that the dogs could consistently
   produce offspring with the same appearance or behavior. Some consider
   mixed breeds undesirable, but mixing breeds can lead to desirable
   results, especially in the hands of an expert breeder. On the other
   hand, inexperienced crossbreeders can produce disastrous results. For
   example, the offspring of an obsessive Border Collie and an energetic,
   destructive Terrier could be dogs whose behaviour is so erratic that
   would make the dog a liability.
   The Cockapoo results from deliberate crossbreeding.
   Enlarge
   The Cockapoo results from deliberate crossbreeding.

   Mixed-breed dogs can be divided roughly into three types:
     * Crossbred dogs, which are mixtures of two known breeds. Some
       crossbreeds have traits that make them popular enough to be
       frequently bred deliberately, such as the Cockapoo—a cross between
       a Poodle and a Cocker Spaniel—and the Labradoodle, which mixes a
       Labrador Retriever with a Poodle. A Miniature Schnauzer/Poodle
       crossbeeds is called a Schnoodle. Other crossbreeds occur when
       breeders are hoping to create new breeds to add and reinforce
       characteristics from one breed into another breed. Most
       crossbreedings, however, occur accidentally.

     * Mixes among more than two breeds, such as when a crossbred dog
       mates with a purebred dog or with another crossbreed.

     * The generic Canis lupus familiaris, seen in feral or pariah dog
       populations, where mixed breeding has occurred over many
       generations. These dogs tend to be yellow to light brown and of
       medium height and weight. This "genetic average" might also
       represent the appearance of the modern dog's ancestor.

   There is no scientific justification for the belief that a purebred
   bitch is in any way tainted after mating with a dog of another breed.
   Future matings with dogs of the same breed will produce purebred
   puppies.

Mixed breeds in dog sports

   A mixed-breed dog demonstrates dog agility.
   Enlarge
   A mixed-breed dog demonstrates dog agility.

   Mixed-breed dogs can excel at dog sports, such as obedience, dog
   agility, flyball, and frisbee. Often, highly energetic mixed-breeds are
   left with shelters or rescue groups, where they are sought by owners
   with the caring, patience, and drive to train them for dog sports,
   turning unwanted dogs into healthy, mentally and physically stimulated
   award winners.

   Until the early 1980s, mixed-breed dogs were always included in
   obedience competitions. However, starting with the American Mixed Breed
   Obedience Registry (AMBOR) and the Mixed Breed Dog Club of America
   (MBDCA), which created obedience venues in which mixed-breed dogs could
   compete, more opportunities have opened up for all dogs in all dog
   sports. Most dog agility and flyball organizations have always allowed
   mixed-breed dogs to compete. Today, mixed breeds have proved their
   worth in many performance sports.

   Some kennel clubs, whose purpose is to promote mixed breed dogs. The
   AKC and the FCI are two prominent hold-outs of pure bred dogs. However,
   the AKC does allow mixed breed dogs to earn their Canine Good Citizen
   award.

Advantages and drawbacks

   The mature appearance and behaviour of purebred puppies is more
   predictable than that of mixed breeds, including cross-breeds. With
   purebred dogs, the genetic variations are well documented and a breeder
   has a fair estimation of what type of offspring a given pair will
   produce. Even still, there is variation within breeds; for example, two
   champion sheep-herding Border Collies might produce offspring with no
   interest in sheep herding.

   Overall, mixed breed dogs tend to be healthier. They have more genetic
   variations than purebred dogs. Often, breeds can be associated with
   specific health problems. Breeding dogs who are prone to similar health
   problems greatly increases the chance of health problems in the
   offspring. By breeding dogs who are prone to different problems, the
   chances are lowered of serious health problems. Genetic variety
   increases health.

   Mixed breed dogs are said to be, on average, no more intelligent than
   purebred dogs, and both sets feature both slow learners and dogs with
   high learning capacity. For example, Benji, the hero in a series of
   films named for him, was a mixed-breed terrier. However, it is more
   difficult to predict the trainability of mixed-breed dogs when they are
   very young. This is controversial, since there's a difference between
   intelligence and plain subservience. Most Golden Retrievers are eager
   to please, but a mix of a Golden with the independent Siberian Husky
   could inherit either dog's trainability—or could result in a dog with
   the endurance and athleticism of the Siberian and the trainability of
   the Golden.
   This small black mixed breed's parents could have been a Labrador
   Retriever and a Pomeranian—or almost anything else.
   Enlarge
   This small black mixed breed's parents could have been a Labrador
   Retriever and a Pomeranian—or almost anything else.

   Many people enjoy owning mixed breeds, valuing their unique appearance
   and characteristics; while dogs of some breeds, such as the Tervueren,
   exhibit little variability of appearance, mixed-breed dogs exhibit
   often unique appearances. Although some dog owners have a specific
   breed of dog they wish to acquire, and will never accept a mixed-breed,
   many others enjoy mixed-breed dogs that exhibit characteristics similar
   to their favorite breeds; in fact, with a mixed-breed, they can enjoy
   some aspects of appearance and personality of two favorite breeds with
   a single dog.

   There is usually an abundant supply of mixed-breed dogs wanting owners,
   available at negligible prices, while pedigreed dogs can cost hundreds
   or thousands of dollars and reputable breeders can be hard to find.

   Some owners value a dog's pedigree as a status symbol and, therefore,
   have no use for mixed-breed dogs, whose market value is effectively
   zero; others particularly appreciate the physical or behavioural traits
   of certain breeds; still others ignore pedigree and, instead, value a
   dog's personality and health. In short, most dog owners believe that
   their dog's breed—and specifically his or her own dog—is the best sort
   of dog there is.

   Local animal shelters adopt out dogs of both pure and mixed ancestry,
   emphasizing each dog's personality and suitability as a companion for
   each potential owner's lifestyle rather than the purity of each dog's
   ancestry.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mixed-breed_dog"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
