   #copyright

Monarda didyma

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Plants

                iMonarda didyma
   Monarda didyma
   Monarda didyma
           Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Plantae
   Division: Magnoliophyta
   Class:    Magnoliopsida
   Order:    Lamiales
   Family:   Lamiaceae
   Genus:    Monarda
   Species:  M. didyma

                                Binomial name

   Monarda didyma
   L.

   Monarda didyma (Bergamot, Scarlet beebalm, Scarlet Monarda, Oswego Tea,
   or Crimson Beebalm) is an aromatic herb in the family Lamiaceae, native
   to eastern North America from Maine west to Ohio and south to northern
   Georgia. Its name is derived from its odour which is considered similar
   to that of the bergamot orange. The scientific name comes from Nicolas
   Monardes, who described the first American flora in 1569.
   U.S. range of Scarlet beebalm
   Enlarge
   U.S. range of Scarlet beebalm

   This hardy perennial plant grows to 0.7-1.5 m in height, with the stems
   square in cross-section. The leaves are opposite, 6-15 cm long and 3-8
   cm broad, and dark green with reddish leaf veins and a coarsely-toothed
   margin; they are glaborous or sparsely pubescent above with spreading
   hairs below. It has ragged, bright red tubular flowers 3-4 cm long,
   borne on showy heads of about 30 together, with reddish bracts. It
   grows in dense clusters along stream banks, thickets and ditches,
   flowering from July to late August.

Cultivation and uses

   Bergamot is extensively grown as an ornamental plant both within and
   outside its native range; it is naturalized further west in the United
   States and also in parts of Europe and Asia. It grows best in full sun,
   but tolerates light shade and will thrive in any moist soil that is
   well-drained. Several cultivars have been selected for different flower
   colour, ranging from white through pink to dark red and purple.

   The name Oswego Tea comes from the Oswego Indians who taught the
   immigrants how to use it for tea after the Boston tea party in 1773.
   Besides its medicinal qualitites, the flowers and leaves are good
   ingredients for potpourri making.

   Note that the bergamot herb is not the source of bergamot oil, used to
   flavor Earl Grey tea; that comes from the bergamot orange, a
   Mediterranean citrus fruit.

   Purple Monarda didyma
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monarda_didyma"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
