   #copyright

Monaco

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; European
Countries

   Principauté de Monaco
   Principality of Monaco

   Flag of Monako Coat of arms of Monako
   Flag           Coat of arms
   Motto: Deo Juvante
   (Latin: "With God's Help")
   Anthem: Hymne Monégasque
   Location of Monako
   Capital No official capital ^1
   43°44′N 7°24′E
   Most populated quartier Monte Carlo
   Official languages French^2
   Government Constitutional monarchy
   (Principality)
    - Prince Albert II
    - Minister of State Jean-Paul Proust
   Independence
    - beginning of rule by the House of Grimaldi 1419
   Area
    - Total 1.637 km² ( 231st)
   0.75 sq mi
    - Water (%) 0.0
   Population
    - 2006 estimate 35,657 ( 210th)
    - 2000 census 32,020
    - Density 18,285/km² ( 1st)
   47,358/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2000 estimate
    - Total $870 million ( 177th)
    - Per capita $21,000 ( 13)
   HDI  (2003) n/a (n/a) ( unranked)
   Currency Euro ( EUR)
   Time zone CET ( UTC+1)
    - Summer ( DST) CEST ( UTC+2)
   Internet TLD .mc
   Calling code +377
   ^1Monaco is a city-state.
   ^2Monégasque and Italian also spoken widely.

   The Principality of Monaco (French: Principauté de Monaco; Monégasque:
   Principatu de Múnegu; Occitan: Principat de Mónegue; Italian:
   Principato di Monaco), more commonly known as Monaco, is a
   constitutional monarchy and city-state in Western Europe located along
   the French Riviera between the Mediterranean Sea and France. Affluent
   Monaco is one of five European microstates.

   Monaco is the most densely populated country in the world and the
   world's second-smallest independent country, with a population of just
   32,410 and an area of 1.95 square kilometers (481.9  acres). It has
   more millionaires per capita than any other country in the world. It is
   the smallest French-speaking country in the world.

Geography

   Map of Monaco
   Enlarge
   Map of Monaco

   The Principality of Monaco is the second-smallest independent state in
   the world, after Vatican City. It is located on the Mediterranean
   coast, 18 kilometers (11  mi) east of Nice and near the Italian border.
   It is surrounded on three sides by the Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur
   Région of France. It consists of a narrow strip along the coast at the
   bottom of the foothills of the Alps and its highest point is "Le
   Rocher" at 140 meters (459  ft).

   The principality is noted for its natural scenery and mild, sunny
   climate. The average minimum temperature in January and February is 8 °
   C (47 ° F); in July and August the average maximum temperature is 26 °C
   (78 °F).

   Monaco is a narrow coastal strip. Its physical geography includes a
   long beach which accounts for a vast part of Monaco's border, and steep
   cliffs that rise vertically upwards to heights of 63 meters (206 ft)
   above sea level.

Administrative divisions

   Monaco is divided into four quarters (quartiers): Monaco-Ville, the old
   city on a rocky promontory extending into the Mediterranean, known as
   the Rock of Monaco; La Condamine, the northwest section including the
   port area; Monte Carlo, the principal residential and resort area with
   the casino in the east; and Fontvieille, a newly constructed area
   reclaimed from the sea. La Condamine quartier is further subdivided
   into La Condamine proper (the port area); Moneghetti; Les Revoires,
   containing the Jardin Exotique; and La Colle, on the western border
   with Cap d`Ail. Monte Carlo quartier is also subdivided into several
   neighborhoods: Monte Carlo proper (the casino and resort area);
   Larvotto, a beach area to the east of the principality; Saint Roman/
   Tenao on the northeast corner; and the central residential area of
   Saint Michel.

History

   Monaco apparently first gained its name from the nearby Phocaean Greek
   colony of Marseille, in the 6th century BC, which referred to the
   Ligurians as Monoikos, from the Greek Μόνοικος — μόνος + οίκος, "single
   house", which bears the sense of a people either settled in a "single
   habitation" or of "living apart" from others. According to an ancient
   myth, Hercules passed through the Monaco area. A temple was constructed
   there by Phoceans, the temple of Hercules Monoikos.
   Memorial of François Grimaldi disguised as a monk with a sword under
   his frock
   Enlarge
   Memorial of François Grimaldi disguised as a monk with a sword under
   his frock

   Following a land grant from Emperor Henry VI in 1191, Monaco was
   re-founded in 1228 as a colony of Genoa. Monaco has been ruled by the
   the House of Grimaldi since 1297, when François Grimaldi (Milaza) and
   his men captured the fortress protecting the famous Rock of Monaco
   while he was dressed as a Franciscan monk (Monaco in Italian);

   From 1793 to 1814, Monaco was under French control. The Congress of
   Vienna designated Monaco as a protectorate of the Kingdom of Sardinia
   from 1815 until 1860 when the Treaty of Turin ceded to France the
   surrounding county of Nice (as well as Savoy). During this time there
   was unrest in the towns of Menton and Roquebrune, which declared
   independence, hoping for annexation by Sardinia. The unrest continued
   until the ruling prince gave up his claim to the two towns (some 95% of
   the country) to France in return for 4 million francs. This transfer
   and Monaco's sovereignty was recognised by the Franco-Monegasque Treaty
   of 1861.

   Until the 1911 constitution, the princes of Monaco ruled absolutely. In
   July 1918, a treaty was signed providing for limited French protection
   over Monaco. The treaty, part of the Treaty of Versailles, established
   that Monegasque policy would be aligned with French political,
   military, and economic interests.

   Rainier III, Prince of Monaco acceded to the throne following the death
   of his grandfather, Prince Louis II, in 1949. A new constitution,
   proclaimed in 1962, abolished capital punishment, provided for women's
   suffrage, and established a Supreme Court to guarantee fundamental
   liberties. In 1993, Monaco became a member of the United Nations, with
   full voting rights.

   In 2002, a new treaty between France and Monaco clarifies that if there
   are no heirs to carry on the dynasty, the principality will remain an
   independent nation rather than revert to France. Monaco's military
   defence, however, is still the responsibility of France.

   Prince Albert, Marquis of Baux took over the royal duties on 31 March
   2005, because his father Prince Rainier III was too ill to exercise his
   royal functions. On 6 April 2005, Prince Rainier died and his son
   succeeded him as Albert II of Monaco. Prince Albert II of Monaco
   formally became the ruler of Monaco on 12 July 2005, in a celebration
   that began with a solemn Mass at the cathedral where his father was
   buried three months before, after a reign of 56 years. His accession to
   the throne was a two-step event with another ceremony drawing heads of
   state for an elaborate ceremony held on 19 November 2005. He is the son
   of the late actress and princess Grace Kelly.

Law and government

   Monaco has been governed as a constitutional monarchy since 1911, with
   the Sovereign Prince of Monaco as head of state. The executive branch
   consists of a Minister of State (the head of government), who presides
   over a four-member Council of Government (the Cabinet). The minister of
   state is a French citizen appointed by the prince from among candidates
   proposed by the French government. Under the 1962 constitution, the
   prince shares his power with the unicameral National Council
   (parliament). The 24 members of this legislative body are elected from
   lists by universal suffrage for five-year terms.
     * The principality's local affairs are directed by the Communal
       Council, which consists of 15 elected members and is presided over
       by the mayor.

   Monaco received its first ambassador from abroad on 16 February 2006,
   from France. This is despite having had representation abroad and in
   the United Nations for many years.

   On both a per-capita and per-area basis, Monaco has the largest police
   force and police presence in the world.

   The Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince (Prince's Company of
   Carabiniers) is the military force of Monaco. Although Monaco's defence
   is the responsibility of France, it maintains a small force for the
   protection of the Sovereign Prince of Monaco. It was formed by Prince
   Honoré IV in 1817 for the protection of the Principality. The company
   numbers approximately 100 officers and men; while the NCOs and soldiers
   are local, the officers have generally served in the French Army.
   Together with the local fire service, the Caribiniers form Monaco's
   total public forces. In addition to their guard duties, the company
   patrols the Principality's beaches and coastal waters, as well as other
   duties around the Palace in Monaco-Ville.

Economy

   Monaco city and harbour view.
   Enlarge
   Monaco city and harbour view.

   One of Monaco's main sources of income is tourism; each year many are
   attracted to its casino and pleasant climate. In 2001, a major new
   construction project extended the pier used by cruise ships in the main
   harbour. The principality has successfully sought to diversify into
   services and small, high-value-added, non-polluting industries such as
   cosmetics and biothermics.

   As befits a world leader in glamour and money, Monaco is one of the
   most expensive places on Earth. The principality is often regarded as a
   tax haven, and most of its inhabitants are millionaires from other
   countries. The glamour and prestige associated with Monaco and its
   style-conscious people can be seen in the number of high class cars,
   designer fashion boutiques such as Chanel, trendy restaurants, and its
   royal family, especially since the marriage of Prince Rainer to Grace
   Kelly, later HSH Princess Grace of Monaco.

   The state has no income tax for individuals. The state retains
   monopolies in numerous sectors, including tobacco and the postal
   service. The telephone network used to be owned by the state; now,
   Monaco Telecom is 49% owned by Cable and Wireless, 45% by the state and
   6% by Compagnie Monégasque de Banque, but it is still a monopoly.
   Living standards are high, roughly comparable to those in prosperous
   French metropolitan areas.

   The lack of personal income tax has led to a considerable number of
   wealthy "tax refugee" residents from European countries, who earn the
   majority of their income from activity outside Monaco; celebrities like
   Formula One drivers attract most of the attention, but the majority of
   them are business people.

   In 2000, a report by French parliamentarians Arnaud Montebourg and
   Vincent Peillon alleged that Monaco has lax policies with respect to
   money laundering, including within its famed casino, and that the
   government of Monaco puts political pressure on the judiciary so that
   alleged crimes are not properly investigated. In response, the
   Government of Monaco ordered reports to OECD and the Financial Action
   Task Force on Money Laundering. These reports revealed most of these
   allegations to be untrue.

   Monaco is not a member of the European Union but is very closely linked
   to it via a customs union with France, and as such its currency is the
   same as France's: the euro. Prior to 2002, Monaco minted their own
   franc coins, the Monegasque franc. Monaco has acquired the right to
   mint euro coins with Monegasque designs on their national side.

   Monaco's major exports are chemicals, pharmaceuticals, beauty-care
   products, ceramics, metal works, textiles, plastics, and instruments.

Education

Schools

   Monaco has ten state-operated schools, including seven nursery and
   primary schools, one secondary school (Collège Charles III), one lycée
   that provides general and technological training (Lycée Albert 1er,
   which compares favorably to those in neighboring southern France), and
   one lycée that provides vocational and hotel training.

   There are also two grant-aided denominational private schools
   (including Institution François d'Assise Nicolas Barré and Ecole des
   Sœurs Dominicaines) and one international school ( International School
   of Monaco).

   State schools include: School

Colleges and universities

     * International University of Monaco

Demographics

   View of Monacoville
   Enlarge
   View of Monacoville

   Monaco's population is unusual in that the native Monegasques are a
   minority in their own country. The largest proportion of residents are
   French nationals (47%), while Monegasque and Italian nationals
   represent 16% each, and the remaining 21% belong to one of the other
   125 nationalities that make up Monaco's international population. With
   an average age of 45, Monaco has the highest in the world.

Languages

   French is the only official language, but Italian, English, and the two
   local languages, Monégasque (a descendant of Genoese) and Occitan, are
   also spoken. The literacy rate is 99%.

Religion

   Roman Catholicism is the official religion, with freedom of other
   religions guaranteed by the constitution.

Security

   Monaco has no army and air force, but has a small coast guard
   consisting of 3 small patrol boats armed with small cannons. Security
   is provided by a small armed police force consisting of between 300-400
   men and women. Defence of the nation is provided by France.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monaco"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
