   #copyright

Monarchy

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Politics and government

   Places where monarchies maintain rule appear in blue.
   Enlarge
   Places where monarchies maintain rule appear in blue.

   A monarchy, from the Greek μονος, "one," and αρχειν, "to rule", is a
   form of government that has a Monarch as Head of State. A
   distinguishing characteristic of most monarchies is that the Monarch
   usually reigns as Head of State for life; in a republic, the Head of
   State (often called the president) is normally elected for a certain
   amount of time. There are currently 29 extant sovereign monarchies in
   the world. The monarchy of Britain rules more of the world than any
   other. However it does so not as the British monarchy but rather as 17
   independent Realms including Canada and Australia.

   The term monarchy is also used to refer to the people (especially the
   dynasty, also known as ' royalty') and institutions that make up the
   royal or imperial establishment, or to the realm over which the monarch
   reigns.

   In most monarchies, the Monarch serves as a symbol of continuity and
   statehood. Many monarchies are constituted by tradition or by codified
   law so that the Monarch has little real political power, but in others
   the Monarch holds substantial power. In some cases, the symbolism of
   monarchy alongside the symbolism of democracy can lead to divisions
   over seemingly contradictory principles of sovereignty.

   Monarchies are one of the oldest forms of government, with echoes in
   the leadership of tribal chiefs. Many monarchies began with the Monarch
   as the local representative and temporary embodiment of the deity:
   (King of Babylon). The Monarch often ruled at the pleasure of the deity
   and was overthrown or sacrificed when it became apparent that
   supernatural sanction had been withdrawn: Celestial Emperor of China,
   Mayan kings, Achaemenid King of Kings of Persia. Other Monarchs derived
   their power by acclamation of the ruling or of the warrior caste of a
   clan or group of clans: Kings of the Franks, Roman emperors. Even where
   law is simply the monarch's will, the king must rule by custom.

   Since 1800, many of the world's monarchies have ceased to have a
   monarch and become republics, or become parliamentary democracies.
   Democratic countries which retain monarchy by definition limit the
   Monarch's power, with most having become constitutional monarchies. In
   England, this process began with the Magna Carta of 1215, although it
   did not reach democratic proportions until after the Glorious
   Revolution in 1689. In the modern media age, however, popular Monarchs
   can, independently of their formal role within the constitutional
   framework, through popularity and various contacts, acquire
   considerable influence via public opinion and/or politicians.

   Among the few states that retain a rather absolute monarchy are
   Swaziland, Brunei, Bhutan, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. In Jordan and
   Morocco, the Monarch also retains considerable power. There are also
   recent ( 2003) developments in Liechtenstein, wherein the regnant
   prince was given the constitutional power to dismiss the government at
   will. Nepal had several swings between a constitutional role and direct
   rule related to the Maoist rebel movement and the palace killings by a
   suicidal crown prince.

Types of Monarchy

   In an absolute monarchy, the Monarch has absolute power over every
   aspect of the state, if not of social life in general, and a
   constitution may be granted or withdrawn, while a constitutional
   monarch is subject to it as well as any citizen (though it may grant
   him such priviliges as inviolability). Modern versions tend to survive
   only in societies with sufficient technology to allow the concentration
   and organization of power, but not to allow education and rapid
   communication. The economic structure of such monarchies is often of
   concentrated wealth, with the majority of the population living either
   as agricultural serfs, or, as in Gulf Monarchies, a paternalistic model
   showering benefits on the citizens (while politically they may remain
   subjects) and importing cheap foreign labor.

   An elected monarchy was popular in various states of Northern Europe
   even up until the Middle Ages. When Charlemagne was a child, his father
   was elected king of the Franks. Wilhelm was elected German emperor in
   the late 1800's. Stanislaw of Poland was an elected king. Frederik of
   Sweden was an elected king. The tradition of an elected monarchy is
   very ancient and still exists today in the office of the Pope. The U.
   S. President acts somewhat in the manner of a modern elected
   constitutional monarch, with powers limited by separate legislative and
   judicial branches of government.

   In Antiquity, there were various traditions of elected monarchs,
   usually rendered as kings, especially in not fully sedentary societies
   such as the Germanic tribes before they established sedentary kingdom
   in territories of the (former) Roman empire. Often there was a mix of
   conflicting principles, the ruling house tending to reserve succession
   for itself, with sometimes a broader nobility rivalling it; actual
   succession often depended on popular assent and/or the support of the
   armed forces, which could take their role of kingmaker as far as
   deposing an incompetent or criminal ruler, or even pure mutiny to seize
   the throne. The hellenistic kings of Macedon and of Epirus were elected
   by the army (a body that was very close in composition to the ecclesia
   of democracies, the council of all free citizens; military service was
   often linked with citizenship) among the male member of the royal
   house. In Macedon this tradition continued until the kingdom was
   dissolved by the Romans after the Third Macedonian War.

   Today's hereditary monarchy is more or less that of a figure head, with
   limited powers, except for ceremonial duties. Usually their powers are
   much less than that of even the U. S. President, because they cannot
   declare war nor veto legislation. Many are also a constitutional
   monarchy and can dissolve parliament and call for new elections. They
   cannot however, actually create legislation, nor wield power in the
   unlimited and often abusive manner of ancient monarchies.

   In some ancient hereditary monarchies, power often resided with the
   military, as often has been the case in Thailand and Japan [where its
   (eventually hereditary) chief, the Shogun, developed into a de facto
   monarch nominally under the Emperor], with an (at least) nominally
   'primeministerial' office (separate Head of government), which may tend
   to become hereditary itself, in the Hindu kingdom of Nepal even
   formally styled a hereditary Maharaja. In Fascist Italy a monarchy
   coexisted with a fascist party for longer than such co-existences
   occurred in Romania, Hungary or Greece. Spain under Francisco Franco
   was officially a monarchy even though there was no Monarch on the
   throne; upon his death, Franco was succeeded as Head of state by the
   Bourbon heir to the throne, King Juan Carlos.

   There have also been situations in which a dictator proclaimed himself
   Monarch of a previous republic, thus starting a self-proclaimed
   monarchy with no historical ties to a previous dynasty. The most famous
   example of this was general Napoleon Bonaparte who crowned himself
   first Emperor of the French after legally assuming political control of
   the French Republic (which in his lifetime has succeeded to the
   absolutist kingdom) as First Consul for life; a blatant imitation of
   his empire was that of dictator Bokassa I in the very poor Central
   African Empire. Also, Yuan Shikai crowned himself emperor of the
   short-lived " Empire of China", a few years after the Republic of China
   was founded.

   On several occasions throughout history, the same person has served as
   Monarch of separate independent states, in a situation known as a
   personal union. An empire was traditionally ruled by a monarchy whose
   leader may have been known by different titles in his different realms.
   Several former colonies of the British Empire, such as Australia,
   Canada, Jamaica, New Zealand etc., are now independent kingdoms that
   continue to recognize the British Monarch as their Sovereign Head of
   State, though with a distinctive title in each nation (e.g. King/Queen
   of Jamaica, etc); these countries, including the UK, are known as
   Commonwealth Realms. In other cases, such as England and Scotland, a
   personal union was the precursor to a merger of the states.

   Some republics can be called 'virtual monarchies' as they appear to
   have introduced de facto inheritance for the Head of state, usually
   establishing a 'dynasty' by making his son (informally) designated
   heir, without constitutionally declaring themselves monarchies. These
   nations may be republics in theory, but monarchies in practice. The
   'Roman Empire' in Latin existed only in the territorial sense, legally
   it was always a republic, theoretically the Principate was not
   hereditary monarchy, and even the Byzantine Empire had republican
   features. In the twentieth century de facto monarchies existed in
   Nicaragua and Haiti. Today, North Korea and Syria have been called de
   facto monarchies; however, one father-son succession without a
   constitutional mechanism is more an appearance than an actual de facto
   monarchy, the next succession may just as well be determined otherwise
   by the real kingmakers (a dead dictator ceases to dictate) and
   democratic republics too have produced de facto successions -albeit
   often not along strict lines such as primogeniture- and even three or
   more generation 'dynasties' (as India's Gandhi family), except that
   these only rule when their party is in power. See also family
   dictatorship.

   Although in theory a Monarch is the Sovereign of a state, historical
   developments often produced more complicated realities: when a state
   loses its true sovereignty, while internally retaining its monarchic
   constitution, its monarchy will often become similarly dependent on the
   greater power, e.g. as a feudal vassal under a suzerain, or in the
   colonial era become redefined as an actor in indirect rule, under a
   paramount power (such as each princely state in the British raj).

Succession

   The rules for selection of Monarchs varies from country to country. In
   constitutional monarchies the rule of succession is generally embodied
   in a law passed by a representative body, such as a parliament.

   Elective monarchies, distinguished by the Monarchs being appointed for
   life, have in most cases been succeeded by hereditary monarchies, but
   both secular sovereign nation cases at present - those of Malaysia and
   the United Arab Emirates - are 20th century creations. In the
   hereditary system, the position of Monarch involves inheritance
   according to an order of succession, usually within one royal family
   tracing its origin back to a historical dynasty or bloodline. In some
   cases the ruling family may claim to hold authority by virtue of God's
   choosing, as reflected in the style-phrase by the Grace of God, or
   other religion-based authority.

   The order of succession in most European monarchical states of the 21st
   century is by primogeniture, meaning the eldest son of the monarch is
   first in line, followed by his male, then female siblings in order of
   age. In earlier times, the succession was often unclear and this led to
   a number of wars. Currently, there is some controversy over the
   succession laws of some monarchies in the European Union (EU), such as
   that of the United Kingdom (UK) or the Scandinavian monarchies, which
   require their Monarch to be of a certain faith (in the UK under the Act
   of Settlement 1701). This has been challenged as violating EU rules
   that prohibit religious disqualification for positions of state
   authority.

   Successions in dependent states were often subject to the assent of the
   dominant power, which then often reserves the right to dethrone (and
   replace) a 'disloyal' incumbent.

Demise of monarchies

   Monarchies can come to an end in several ways. There may be a
   revolution in which the monarchy is overthrown; or, as in Italy, by
   constitutional referendum electorate decides to form a republic. In
   some cases, as with England and Spain, the monarchy has been overthrown
   and later restored. After the abdication of Napoleon I Bonaparte as
   Emperor which ended the Premier Empire, the French restored the royal
   Bourbon dynasty which had been abolished by the republic within which
   Napoleon had established the Empire; at the same time his emperorship
   was 'revived' outside France, as a 'golden cage' principality created
   for him on the island of Elba, so in a sense the empire was succeeded
   by a kingdom and an emperor without an empire.

   Dependent monarchies have been abolished by their dominant power, e.g.
   to be fully annexed, split or merged with another. In Uganda, for
   example, local tribal monarchies were abolished when the country became
   a unitary state.

   The most recent monarchy to be abolished was the Commonwealth realm
   monarchy of Mauritius in 1992. In 1999 Australians voted to keep their
   status as a monarchy under Queen Elizabeth II.

   An international Republican movement is challenging many of the 29
   remaining Monarchies, particularly in the Anglosphere.

   Countries may regard themselves as monarchies even without an actual
   Monarch on the 'vacant' throne, as Spain did from 1947 to 1975, and
   Hungary from 1920 to 1944.

   A person who claims to be the legitimate heir to the throne of a
   deposed (or in the royalist view suspended) monarchy is called a
   pretender, but that term also applies to a rival claimant of a filled
   throne, such as several Russians claimed to be a Tsar who had
   officially been declared dead and succeeded by a reigning heir.

   See also abolished monarchy for a list of recently abolished
   monarchies.

Unusual Monarchies

   Sometimes, component members of federal states are monarchies, even
   though the federal state as a whole is not; for example each of the
   emirates that form the United Arab Emirates has its own monarch (an
   emir).

   Another unique situation is Malaysia, in which the federal king, called
   the Yang di-Pertuan Agong or Paramount Ruler, is elected for a five
   year term from and by the hereditary rulers (mostly sultans) of nine of
   the federation's constitutive States, all on the Malay peninsula.

   In addition to his ecclestiastical role as Supreme Pontiff of the
   universal Catholic Church, the Pope is ex officio the absolute Monarch
   of the Vatican City, the last truly sovereign Prince of the Church. He
   is elected by (and customarily from among) the College of Cardinals.
   (Since the Catholic episcopate is celibate, naturally there can be no
   official hereditary succession to the papal throne.) Notwithstanding
   this, the papacy has at times been under the control of powerful
   Italian families. Several popes have been succeeded by near relatives,
   in some cases by their own sons (officially described as Nepotes,
   literally 'nephews').

   The world's only co-principality, Andorra, has two co-princes: the
   Bishop of Urgell in Spain (thus a Prince-Bishop), and the President of
   France—a unique case where an independent country's Monarch is
   democratically elected by the citizens of another country, which is not
   even in full personal union.

   Samoa is often disputably described as a monarchy. The
   president-for-life, or "o le Ao o le Malo," is Malietoa Tanumafili II,
   a member of one of the three princely families. The Constitution
   designates him Head of State for life with a royal style, but he will
   be succeeded by an elected president.

   Since 1947, the Emperors of Japan have reigned as neither sovereign, or
   the de jure Head of State. Emperor Hirohito having ceded sovereignty to
   the people shortly after World War II, the Japanese monarchy is bound
   by supreme law as opposed to constitutional convention under the
   provisos of the Constitution of Japan.

Current nation monarchies of the world

   Currently 45 nations in the world have Monarchs as Heads of state, 16
   of which are dominions and other Commonwealth Realms that formally
   recognize the British Sovereign as Head of state, legally in chief of
   each nation as a monarchy in its own right. (see also List of countries
   by system of government)
   State Title Extent Currently Notes
   Andorra Co-princes Constitutional principality Jacques Chirac and Joan
   Enric Vives Sicília Only double monarchy- Under joint suzerainty of the
   Bishop of Urgell and the French Head of State as successor to the
   countship of Foix.
   Antigua and Barbuda King/ Queen Constitutional monarchy Elizabeth II
   Commonwealth Realm. The Monarch is represented by a Governor-General,
   presently Sir James Carlisle
   Australia King/Queen Constitutional Monarchy Elizabeth II Commonwealth
   Realm. The Monarch is represented by a Governor-General, presently
   Michael Jeffery
   The Bahamas King/Queen Constitutional Monarchy Elizabeth II
   Commonwealth Realm. The Monarch is represented by a Governor-General,
   presently Dame Ivy Dumont
   Bahrain King, styled Malik Semi-constitutional monarchy Hamad ibn Isa
   al-Khalifah Known as " emir" until 2002.
   Barbados King/Queen Constitutional Monarchy Elizabeth II Commonwealth
   Realm. The Monarch is represented by a Governor-General, presently Sir
   Clifford Husbands
   Belgium King/Queen of the Belgians Constitutional monarchy, at the 1830
   independence a model of liberalism and curbing royal power Albert II
   Ruled by the king of the Netherlands until 1830.
   Belize King/Queen Constitutional Monarchy Elizabeth II Commonwealth
   Realm. The Monarch is represented by a Governor-General, presently Sir
   Colville Young
   Bhutan Druk Gyalpo 'Dragon King' Absolute monarchy Jigme Singye
   Wangchuck Buddhist monarchy.
   Brunei Sultan Absolute sultanate Hassanal Bolkiah
   Cambodia King; individual throne styles, but most Kings include the
   titles of Brhat Pada, Samdach Brhat, Varman, Rajadhiraja, Parama, and
   Adipati Constitutional monarchy Norodom Sihamoni Reinstituted in 1993.
   Canada King/Queen Constitutional Monarchy Elizabeth II Commonwealth
   Realm. The Monarch is represented by a Governor General, presently
   Michaëlle Jean.
   Denmark King/Queen Constitutional monarchy Margrethe II of Denmark Also
   queen of Greenland and the Faroe Islands. Act of Succession revised in
   1953 to allow for female monarchs.
   Grenada King/Queen Constitutional Monarchy Elizabeth II Commonwealth
   Realm. The Monarch is represented by a Governor-General, presently Sir
   Daniel Williams
   Jamaica King/Queen Constitutional Monarchy Elizabeth II Commonwealth
   Realm. The Monarch is represented by a Governor-General, presently Sir
   Howard Cooke
   Japan Emperor, styled Tennō Constitutional Akihito World's only
   emperor. Politically perhaps the weakest monarch in the world, was
   rendered a complete Figurehead after Japanese defeat in World War II.
   Jordan Hashemite King, styled Malik Semi-constitutional Hashemite
   monarchy Abdullah II Monarchy established by United Kingdom in 1921.
   Kuwait Emir, styled Amir ad-Dawlat al-Kuwayt "Emir of the State of
   Kuwait" Semi-constitutional emirate Sabah Al-Sabah Was Hakim al-Kuwayt
   "Ruler of Kuwait" until 1961; still prefixed " sheikh", as every member
   of a Gulf dynasty).
   Lesotho King Constitutional monarchy Letsie III Known as Paramount
   Chief until 1965.
   Liechtenstein Prince, styled Fürst Semi-constitutional principality
   Hans-Adam II Some powers delegated to Prince Alois.
   Luxembourg Grand Duke/Duchess Constitutional grand duchy Henri Only
   remaining Grand Duchy. Ruled by the king of the Netherlands until 1890.
   Malaysia Yang di-Pertuan Agong or "Paramount Ruler" Constitutional
   federation Tuanku Syed Sirajuddin Position electoral amongst -de facto
   tends to rotate between- the nine hereditary rulers of the pensinsular
   Malay states, only for 5 years.
   Monaco Sovereign Prince/Princess Semi-constitutional principality
   Albert II Last sovereign monarchy under (French, amical) protection
   Morocco King, styled Malik Semi-constitutional monarchy Mohammed VI
   Morocco currently occupies Western Sahara.
   Nepal King, styled Maharajadhiraja Constitutional monarchy Gyanendra
   Dissolved the parliament in 2002 due to Nepalese civil war, vowing to
   return democratic rule within three years. Parliament revived in April
   2006.
   Kingdom of the Netherlands King/Queen, styled Koning(in) Constitutional
   monarchy Beatrix Also Koning(in) of both colonies: Aruba and
   Netherlands Antilles.
   New Zealand annex Cook Islands and Niue King/Queen Constitutional
   Monarchy Elizabeth II Commonwealth Realm. The Monarch is represented by
   Governor-General Anand Satyanand
   Norway King, styled Norges Konge Constitutional monarchy Harald V
   Oman Sultan Absolute sultanate Qaboos
   Papua New Guinea King/Queen Constitutional Monarchy Elizabeth II
   Commonwealth Realm. The Monarch is represented by a Governor-General,
   presently Sir Paulias Matane
   Qatar Emir Absolute emirate Hamad bin Khalifa Formerly Hakim Qatar
   "Ruler of Qatar", from 3-9-1971: Amir Dawlat Qatar "Emir of the State
   of Qatar"
   Saint Kitts and Nevis King/Queen Constitutional Monarchy Elizabeth II
   Commonwealth Realm. The Monarch is represented by a Governor-General,
   presently Sir Cuthbert Sebastian
   Saint Lucia King/Queen Constitutional Monarchy Elizabeth II
   Commonwealth Realm. The Monarch is represented by a Governor-General,
   presently Dame Pearlette Louisy
   Saint Vincent and the Grenadines King/Queen Constitutional Monarchy
   Elizabeth II Commonwealth Realm. The Monarch is represented by a
   Governor-General, presently Sir Frederick Ballantyne
   Saudi Arabia King styled Malik but also The Custodian of the Two Holy
   Mosques (خادم الحرمين الشريفين), i.e. Protector of the Holy Cities
   Absolute monarchy Abdullah Saudi Arabia was unified in 1932.
   Solomon Islands King/Queen Commonwealth Realm Elizabeth II Commonwealth
   Realm. The Monarch is represented by a Governor-General, presently Sir
   Nathaniel Waena
   Spain King/Queen Constitutional monarchy Juan Carlos I Also King of the
   Canary Islands, Ceuta and Melilla, and holds the title King of
   Jerusalem. Monarchy was restored in 1975.
   Swaziland King (also Indovuzaki (lit. She-Elephant) or Queen Mother)
   Absolute monarchy Mswati III (and Ntombi) Currently democratizing.
   Sweden King/Queen, styled Konung/Drottning Constitutional monarchy Carl
   XVI Gustaf Act of Succession revised in 1979 to allow for female
   monarchs.
   Thailand King Constitutional monarchy Bhumibol Adulyadej Known as Rama,
   the throne name with numeral officially used by every king of the
   present Chakri dynasty, presently Rama IX; Buddhist monarchy.
   Tonga King/Queen Constitutional monarchy George Tupou V The traditional
   Polynesian style of Tu'i Tongo, still the dynasty's birthright, was
   superseded by the western royal style in 1865, i.e. before the British
   protectorate
   Tuvalu King/Queen Constitutional Monarchy Elizabeth II Commonwealth
   Realm. The Monarch is represented by a Governor-General, presently
   Filoimea Telito
   United Arab Emirates President Constitutional federation Khalifa bin
   Zayed Al Nahayan Position formally elected amongst the seven rulers of
   the Trucial states, de facto always from premier state Abu Dhabi.
   United Kingdom King/Queen Constitutional Monarchy Elizabeth II
   Commonwealth Realm. Also Sovereign of Guernsey, Jersey, Isle of Man,
   and the non-sovereign states Anguilla, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands,
   British Indian Ocean Territory, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands,
   Gibraltar, Montserrat, Pitcairn Islands, Saint Helena, Ascension
   Island, Tristan da Cunha, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
   and the Turks and Caicos Islands.
   Vatican City ( Holy See) Supreme Pontiff, more commonly "Pope" Absolute
   theocracy Benedict XVI Electoral (by Cardinals in conclave), sovereign
   Prince of the church

Current subnational traditional monarchies

   Not only are the Monarchs of constitutive monarchies part of the
   federal establishment of both present elective monarchies (Malaysia,
   mainly sultanates, and the UAE, so named after its emirates), in many
   other modern states -often republics- tribal and other traditional
   states persist, with a dynasty that retains a court and often local
   prestige and influence; some are officially installed with the consent
   of the official government (as some of the many in Indonesia- waiting
   for the go-ahead can mean years of vacancy on the throne), other merely
   condoned, or even in exile.
   Other regions
   Territory Title Currently Notes
   Ankole (Uganda) Omugabe Ntare VI Due to constitutional reform in 1993,
   the government of Uganda restored several traditional monarchies.
   Ashanti (Ghana) Asantehene (King) Otumfuo Nana Osei Tutu II The
   succession is decided by a series of councils of local notables and
   other royal family members.
   Buganda (Uganda) Kabaka and Nnabagereka Muwenda Mutebi II and Queen
   Sylvia of Buganda Due to constitutional reform in 1993, the government
   of Uganda restored several traditional monarchies.
   Bunyoro (Uganda) Omukama Iguru Due to constitutional reform in 1993,
   the government of Uganda restored several traditional monarchies.
   Busoga (Uganda) Kyabazinga Henry Wako Muloki Due to constitutional
   reform in 1993, the government of Uganda restored several traditional
   monarchies.
   Māori (New Zealand) King or Queen Tuheitia Paki Holding no
   constitutional but ceremonial roles.
   Sigave (Wallis and Futuna) Tu'i (King or chief) Visesio Moeliku The
   Council of the Territory of Wallis and Futuna consists of three kings
   and three members appointed by the high administrator on the advice of
   the Territorial Assembly.
   Toro (Uganda) Omukama Rukidi IV Due to constitutional reform in 1993,
   the government of Uganda restored several traditional monarchies.
   Tu'a (Alo) (Wallis and Futuna) Tu`i Agaifo (king) Soane Patita Maituku
   The Council of the Territory of Wallis and Futuna consists of three
   kings and three members appointed by the high administrator on the
   advice of the Territorial Assembly.
   Uvea (Wallis and Futuna) Tui `Uvea (King, also styled Hau and Lavelua)
   Tomasi Kulimoetoke II The Council of the Territory of Wallis and Futuna
   consists of three kings and three members appointed by the high
   administrator on the advice of the Territorial Assembly.
   Zululand (South Africa) King Goodwill Zwelethini kaBhekuzulu Although
   the king does not hold any direct political power, he is provided a
   stipend by the government of South Africa, and holds considerable sway
   over more traditionalist Zulu people in the KwaZulu-Natal Province.

   In many countries that are legally republics, an heir to the throne is
   recognized by the royalist part of the nation. A list of such countries
   is available in the pretender article.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monarchy"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
