   #copyright

Mongolia

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Asia

   SOS Children works in Mongolia. For more information see SOS Children
   in Mongolia
   Монгол Улс
   Mongol Uls
   Mongolia

   Flag of Mongolia Coat of arms of Mongolia
   Flag             Coat of arms
   Motto: "Даяар Монгол" ("Dayar Mongol")
   "Great Mongol"
   Anthem: Bügd Nairamdakh Mongol
   Location of Mongolia
   Capital
   (and largest city) Ulaanbaatar
   47°55′N 106°53′E
   Official languages Mongolian
   Government Parliamentary democracy
    - President Nambaryn Enkhbayar
    - Prime minister Miyeegombo Enkhbold
   Formation
    - National Foundation Day 1206
    - Independence from China July 11, 1921
   Area
    - Total 1,564,116 km² ( 19th)
   603,909 sq mi
    - Water (%) 0.6
   Population
    - July 2005 estimate 2,646,000 ( 139th)
    - 2000 census 2,650,952
    - Density 1.7/km² ( 227th)
   4.4/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total $5.56 billion ( 147th)
    - Per capita $2,175 ( 137th)
   HDI  (2003) 0.679 (medium) ( 114th)
   Currency Tugrug ( MNT)
   Time zone ( UTC+7)
    - Summer ( DST) ( UTC+8)
   Internet TLD .mn
   Calling code +976

   Mongolia ( Mongolian: Монгол Улс) is the largest fully landlocked
   country typically classified as being a part of East Asia, though it is
   sometimes considered as being a part of Central Asia instead. It is
   bordered by Russia to the north and the People's Republic of China to
   the south. Its capital and largest city is Ulaanbaatar.

   Mongolia was the centre of the Mongol Empire in the thirteenth century
   and was later ruled by China during the Manchu Qing Dynasty from the
   end of the seventeenth century until 1911, when an independent
   government was formed with Russian assistance. Following the end of the
   Cold War, and after the fall of communism in Mongolia in 1990, Mongolia
   adopted a new, democratic constitution which was ratified in 1992. This
   officially marked the birth of Mongolia as a democratic country, making
   it one of the world's youngest democracies.

   At 1,564,116 square kilometres, Mongolia is the nineteenth largest
   country in the world. However, the country contains very little arable
   land as much of its area is covered by arid and unproductive steppes
   with mountains to the north and west and the Gobi Desert to the south.
   Approximately 30 percent of the country's 2.8 million people are
   nomadic or semi-nomadic. The predominant religion in Mongolia is
   Tibetan Buddhism, and the majority of the state's citizens are of the
   Mongol ethnicity, though Kazakhs and Tuvans also live in the country,
   especially in the west. About one-third of the population lives in
   Ulaanbaatar.

History

   A large number of ethnicities have inhabited Mongolia since prehistoric
   times. Most of these people were nomads who, from time to time, formed
   great confederations that rose to prominence. The first of these, the
   Xiongnu, were brought together to form a confederation by Modu Shanyu
   in 209 BC. They defeated the Donghu, who had previously been the
   dominant power in eastern Mongolia. The Xiongnu became the greatest
   enemy of China for the following three centuries; the Great Wall of
   China was built partly as defence against the Xiongnu. Marshal Meng
   Tian of the Qin Empire dispersed more than 300,000 soldiers along the
   Great Wall to prevent an expected invasion from the North. It is
   believed that after their decisive defeat by the Chinese in 428-431,
   some of the Xiongnu migrated West to become the Huns. After the Xiongnu
   migrated west, Rouran, a close relative of the Mongols, came to power
   before being defeated by the Gokturks, who then dominated Mongolia for
   centuries.

Early history

   Eurasia, circa 1200 CE.
   Enlarge
   Eurasia, circa 1200 CE.

   During the seventh and eighth centuries, Mongolia was controlled by
   Gokturks, who were succeeded by the ancestors of today's Uigur and then
   by the Khitan and Jurchen. By the tenth century, the country was
   populated predominantly by Mongols believed to be a branch of the
   Xianbei. During this period the country was divided into numerous
   tribes linked through transient alliances.
   The expansion of the Mongol Empire.
   Enlarge
   The expansion of the Mongol Empire.

   In the late twelfth century, a chieftain named Temujin united the
   Mongol tribes to the Naiman and Jurchen after a long struggle and took
   the name of Genghis Khan. Starting in 1206, Genghis Khan and his
   successors consolidated and expanded the Mongol Empire into the largest
   contiguous land empire in world history, going as far northwest as
   Kievan Rus. After Genghis Khan's death, the empire was divided into
   four kingdoms, or "Khanates." One of these, the "Great Khanate,"
   comprised the Mongol homeland and China, and its emperors were known as
   the Yuan Dynasty. Its founder, Kublai Khan, set up his centre of
   administration in present day Beijing. After more than a century of
   power, the Yuan Dynasty was replaced by the Ming Dynasty in 1368, and
   the Mongol court fled north. The Ming armies pursued and defeated them
   in Mongolia, but did not conquer Mongolia.

   During the next few centuries, Mongolia was split between the Oirad in
   the west and the Khalkha in the east. Altan Khan united the Mongols
   briefly in 1571. After failing to defeat the Chinese, he made peace
   with the Ming Dynasty and instead focused on Tibet, eventually becoming
   a convert to Tibetan Buddhism.

   During the seventeenth century, the Manchus rose to prominence in the
   east, they conquered Inner Mongolia in 1636. Outer Mongolia submitted
   in 1691. For the next two hundred years Mongolia was ruled by the Qing
   Dynasty. During this time, the Manchus maintained their control over
   Mongolia with a series of alliances and intermarriages, as well as
   military and economic control. Several Emperors of the Qing Dynasty
   were born to Mongol mothers.

   With the fall of the Qing Dynasty, Mongolia declared independence in
   1911. The new country's territory was approximately that of the former
   Outer Mongolia. After the October Revolution in Russia, Chinese troops
   led by Xu Shuzheng occupied the capital in 1919. The Chinese rule did
   not last: notorious Russian adventurer "bloody" Baron Ungern who had
   fought with the "Whites" (Ataman Semyonov) against the Red army in
   Siberia, led his troops into Mongolia and forced a showdown with the
   Chinese in Ulaanbaatar. Ungern's cossacks triumphed, and he briefly in
   effect ruled Mongolia under the blessing of religious leader Bogd Khan.
   But Ungern's triumph was shortlived; he was chased out by the Red Army,
   which, while at it, liberated Mongolia from feudalism and insured its
   political alignment with the Russian Bolsheviks. In 1924, after the
   death of the religious leader Bogd Khan, the Mongolian People's
   Republic was proclaimed and was backed by the Soviets.

Alignment with the Soviet Union

   The Mongolian People's Republic was aligned closely with the Soviet
   Union. Politicians who demanded a more capitalist course and who
   dissented against collective property, like Dogsomyn Bodoo or
   Horloogiyn Dandzan, quickly became unpopular. In 1928, Horloogiyn
   Choybalsan rose to power. Under his administration, forced
   collectivisation of livestock was instituted, and the destruction of
   Buddhist monasteries in 1937 left more than 10,000 lamas dead.

   During the Soviet-Japanese Border War of 1939, the USSR defended
   Mongolia against Japan. Mongolian forces also took part in the Soviet
   offensive against Japanese forces in Inner Mongolia in August 1945 (see
   Operation August Storm). The (soviet) threat of Mongolian forces
   seizing parts of Inner Mongolia induced the Republic of China to
   recognize Outer Mongolia's independence, provided that a referendum was
   held. The referendum took place on October 20, 1945, with (according to
   official numbers) 100% of the electorate voting for independence. After
   the establishment of the People's Republic of China, both countries
   re-recognized each other on October 6, 1949.

   After Choybalsan died in Moscow on January 26, 1952, Yumjaagiyn
   Tsedenbal took power. In 1956 and again in 1962, Choybalsan's
   personality cult was condemned. Mongolia continued to align itself
   closely with the Soviet Union, especially after the Sino-Soviet split
   of the late 1950s. While Tsedenbal was visiting Moscow in August 1984,
   his severe illness prompted the parliament to announce his retirement
   and replace him with Jambyn Batmonh.

1990 Democratic Revolution

   The introduction of perestroika and glasnost in the USSR by Mikhail
   Gorbachev strongly influenced Mongolian politics even though Mongolia
   was a sovereign nation. The collapse of communism in the Soviet Union
   and Eastern Europe, combined with these two policies, were enough to
   lead to a peaceful democratic revolution in Mongolia in 1990. This, in
   turn, allowed Mongolia to begin engaging in economic and diplomatic
   relations with the Western world. The nation finished its transition
   from a communist state to a multi-party free-market democracy with the
   ratification of a new constitution in 1992.

Government and politics

   Until June 27, 2004, the predominant party in Mongolia was the
   ex-communist Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party, or MPRP. The main
   opposition party was the Democratic Party or DP, which controlled a
   governing coalition from 1996 to 2000.

   From 2000 to 2004, the MPRP was back in power, but results of the 2004
   elections required the establishing of the first ever coalition
   government in Mongolia between the MPRP and MDC (Motherland Democratic
   Coalition). The coalition broke down in January 2006, the current
   government has been formed with the MPRP, some small parties and some
   DP defectors.

President

   Nambaryn Enkhbayar
   Enlarge
   Nambaryn Enkhbayar

   Mongolia's president has a symbolic role. Mongolia's Constitution
   provides three requirements for taking office as President: the
   individual must be a native-born Mongolian, who is at least 45 years of
   age, and who has resided in Mongolia for five years prior to taking
   office. The current President is Nambaryn Enkhbayar.

The State Great Hural

   Mongolia uses a unicameral parliamentary system in which the president
   has a symbolic role and the government chosen by the legislature
   exercises executive power. The legislative arm, the State Great Hural,
   has one chamber with 76 seats and is chaired by the speaker of the
   house.

   On January 14, 2006, the parliament's thirty-nine members, mostly MPRP
   but including four Democratic Party members ( Mendsaikhan Enkhsaikhan,
   Narantsatsralt, Mishig Sonompil, and J. Batkhuyag), overthrew Democrat
   Tsakhiagiyn Elbegdorj's grand coalition government. It has been claimed
   that this violated the Constitution, as the parliament exceeded its
   power. The decision to overthrow Elbegdorj's government was based on
   the MPRP Directing Board's decision, contrary to its three agreements
   with the Democratic Party. The action has been protested. Today you can
   find these people living well.

Prime minister and cabinet

   The prime minister is elected by the State Great Hural. The current
   prime minister is Miyeegombo Enkhbold, who was elected by fifty-six
   votes to ten on January 25, 2006. The deputy prime minister is
   Mendsaikhan Enkhsaikhan (since 28 January 2006).

   The cabinet is nominated by the prime minister in consultation with the
   president, and confirmed by the State Great Hural.

Foreign relations and military

   Mongolia maintains friendly relations with the United States, Russia,
   Japan, the People's Republic of China, and virtually all countries in
   the world. It has initiated large foreign investment initiatives and
   encouraged foreign investment. It supported the 2003 invasion of Iraq,
   or " Operation Iraqi Freedom," and has sent 200 troops to Iraq. On
   November 21, 2005, George W. Bush became the first ever sitting U.S.
   President to visit Mongolia.

Geography and climate

   Map of Mongolia
   Enlarge
   Map of Mongolia

   At 604,209  mi² (1,565,000  km² ), Mongolia is the world's
   nineteenth-largest country (after Iran). It is significantly larger
   than the next-largest country, Peru, and is nearly as large as the US
   state of Alaska.

   The Mongolian heartland consists of relatively flat steppes. The
   southern portion of the country is taken up by the Gobi Desert, while
   the northern and western portions are mountainous. The highest point in
   Mongolia is Nayramadlin Orgil (Huyten Orgil) at 4,374 m (14,350 feet).
   Uvs Nuur Lake, shared with Tuva Republic in Russia, is a natural World
   Heritage Site.

   Most of the country is hot in the summer and extremely cold in the
   winter, with January averages dropping as low as -30ºC (-22ºF). The
   country is also subject to occasional harsh climatic conditions known
   as zud or dzud. Ulaanbaatar has the coldest average temperature of any
   national capital in the world.

   Mongolia is high, cold, and windy. It has an extreme continental
   climate with long, cold winters and short summers, during which most of
   its annual precipitation falls. The country averages 257 cloudless days
   a year, and it is usually at the centre of a region of high atmospheric
   pressure. Precipitation is highest in the north (average of 20 to 35
   centimeters per year) and lowest in the south, which receives 10 to 20
   centimeters annually. The extreme south is the Gobi, some regions of
   which receive no precipitation at all in most years. The name "Gobi" is
   a Mongol term for a desert, depression, salt marsh, or steppe, but
   which usually refers to a category of arid rangeland with insufficient
   vegetation to support marmots but with enough to support camels.
   Mongols distinguish Gobi from desert proper, although the distinction
   is not always apparent to outsiders unfamiliar with the Mongolian
   landscape. Gobi rangelands are fragile and are easily destroyed by
   overgrazing, which results in expansion of the true desert, a stony
   waste where not even Bactrian camels can survive.

Administrative divisions

   The southern portion of Mongolia is taken up by the Gobi Desert, while
   the northern and western portions are mountainous.
   Enlarge
   The southern portion of Mongolia is taken up by the Gobi Desert, while
   the northern and western portions are mountainous.

   Mongolia is divided into twenty-one aymguud ( provinces; sing. aimag or
   aymag) and one municipality (khot) with provincial status:
     * Arhangay
     * Bayan-Ölgiy
     * Bayanhongor
     * Bulgan
     * Darhan-Uul
     * Dornod
     * Dornogovĭ
     * Dundgovĭ
     * Govĭ-Altay
     * Govĭsümber
     * Hentiy

                     * Hovd
                     * Hövsgöl
                     * Ömnögovĭ
                     * Orhon
                     * Övörhangay
                     * Selenge
                     * Sühbaatar
                     * Töv
                     * Ulaanbaatar*
                     * Uvs
                     * Zavhan

   * municipality

   The aymguud are further divided into 315 somon (" districts"; sing.
   sum).

Economy

   Mongolia's economy is centered on agriculture and mining. Mongolia has
   rich mineral resources, and copper, coal, molybdenum, tin, tungsten,
   and gold account for a large part of industrial production.

   There are currently over 30,000 independent businesses in Mongolia,
   chiefly centered around the capital city . The majority of the
   population outside urban areas participate in subsistence herding;
   livestock typically consists of sheep, goats, cattle, horses, and
   Bactrian camels. Agricultural crops include wheat, barley, vegetables,
   and other forage crops.

   GDP per capita in 2005 was $1,900 . Although GDP has risen steadily
   since 2002 at the rate of 6.2% in an official 2005 estimate, the state
   is still working to overcome a sizable trade deficit. A massive ($11
   billion) foreign debt to Russia was settled by the Mongolian government
   in 2004 with a $250 million payment; this reduced value was accepted
   due to Despite growth, the proportion of the population below the
   poverty line is estimated to be 36.1% in 2004, and both the
   unemployment rate and inflation rate are high at 6.7% and 10.9%,
   respectively .

Industrial sector

   Industry currently accounts for 21.4% of GDP, approximately equal to
   the weight of the agriculture sector (20.4%). These industries include
   construction and construction materials, mining (coal, copper,
   molybdenum, fluorspar, tin, tungsten, and gold), oil, food and
   beverages, processing of animal products, and cashmere and natural
   fibre manufacturing. The industrial production growth rate is estimated
   to be 4.1% in 2002. Mining is continuing to rise as a major industry of
   Mongolia.

Science and technology

   Mongolia has increasingly started to develop its technology industry
   since the democratic revolution of the early 1990s, and many new
   technology companies have been founded. Also, some technology companies
   in nearby countries, such as South Korea and the People's Republic of
   China, have started to open offices in Mongolia.

Service sector

   After the democratic revolution of the early 1990s, Mongolian domestic
   production has picked up providing basic food production to its
   residents through increasing competition among companies. According to
   the CIA World Factbook, in 2003, the service sector accounted for 58%
   of the GDP, with 29% of the labor force of 1.488 million involved.

   However, investment from Korea and other countries have helped add more
   paved roads and [?] to China, Korea, Japan, Germany, Russia, and other
   countries. The air transport company of Mongolia is MIAT.

   Petroleum products are to a large part (80%) imported from Russia,
   which makes Mongolia vulnerable to supply side shocks. This is one
   strong example of the influence of Mongolia's neighbors on its economy.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mongolia"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
