   #copyright

Montenegro

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; European
Countries

                  Република Црна Гора
   Republika Crna Gora
   Republic of Montenegro

   Flag of Montenegro Coat of arms of Montenegro
   Flag               Coat of arms
   Anthem: " Oj, svijetla majska zoro"
   Location of Montenegro
   Capital
   (and largest city) Podgorica
                      42°47′N 19°28′E
   Official languages Serbian of the Ijekavian dialect^1
   Government         Republic
    - President       Filip Vujanović
    - Prime Minister  Željko Šturanović
      Independence    From Serbia and Montenegro
    - Declared        June 3, 2006
    - Recognised      June 8, 2006
                                  Area
    - Total           14,026 km² ( 159th)
                      5,414 sq mi
    - Water (%)       1.5
                               Population
    - 2004 estimate   630,548 ( 164th)
    - 2003 census     620,145
    - Density         44.9/km² ( 152nd)
                      115.6/sq mi
       GDP ( PPP)     2005 estimate
    - Total           $2.412 billion ( not ranked)
    - Per capita      $3,800 ( not ranked)
      HDI  (2003)     n/a (n/a) ( n/a)
        Currency      Euro^2 ( EUR)
       Time zone      CET ( UTC+1)
    - Summer ( DST)   CEST ( UTC+2)
      Internet TLD    .yu ( .me)^3
      Calling code    +381(+382)^4
   ^1 Defined as such in constitution, but subject to some controversy.
   See Montenegrin language for more details.
   ^2 Adopted unilaterally; Montenegro is not a formal member of the
   Eurozone.
   ^3 .me will come into use early 2007 while .yu is a holdover from
   Serbia and Montenegro which is still in use for Montenegrin subdomains
   .
   ^4 +382 was assigned by the ITU but is not yet activated. Following
   activation, Serbia's +381 code will remain in use alongside +382 for
   six months until +382 has been established in Montenegro.

   Montenegro ( Montenegrin/ Serbian: Црна Гора or Crna Gora, pronounced
   /'t͡sr̩naː 'ɡɔra/), officially the Republic of Montenegro (Република
   Црна Гора or Republika Crna Gora), is a country located in southeastern
   Europe. It has a coast on the Adriatic Sea to the south, and borders
   Croatia to the west, Bosnia and Herzegovina to the northwest, Serbia to
   the northeast and Albania to the southeast. Its capital is Podgorica.

   Independent from the late Middle Ages until 1918, the country was later
   a part of various incarnations of Yugoslavia and the state union of
   Serbia and Montenegro. Based on the results of a referendum held on May
   21, 2006, Montenegro declared independence on June 3, 2006. On June 28,
   Montenegro became the 192nd member state of the United Nations.

Name

   Montenegro's native name, Crna Gora, was first mentioned in a charter
   of St. Nicholas Monastery ( Vranjina) issued by the Serbian King
   Milutin, in 1296 and translates literally to "black mountain", a
   reference to the dark forests that once covered the slopes of the
   Dinaric Alps as seen from the coast. The country's name in most Western
   European languages, including English, reflects an adoption of the
   Venetian-language term monte negro, also meaning "black mountain,"
   which probably dates back to the era of Venetian hegemony over the area
   in the Middle Ages. Other languages, particularly nearby ones, use
   their own direct translation of the term, e.g. Albanian: Maljitezi,
   Bulgarian: Черна гора; Romanian: Muntenegru, Greek: Μαυροβούνιο and
   Turkish: Karadağ; "black mountains" from further afield include
   Russian: Черногория and Chinese: 黑山 ( pinyin: "hēishān").

   The ISO Alpha-2 code for Montenegro is ME and the Alpha-3 Code is MNE.

History

   Duklja in the 10th century.
   Enlarge
   Duklja in the 10th century.

   The Slav tribes, mixed with Illyrians, Avars and Romans, formed the
   semi-independent dukedom of Duklja by the 10th century. In 1077, Pope
   Gregory VII recognized Duklja as an independent state, acknowledging
   its King Mihailo (Michael) (of the Vojislavljević dynasty founded by
   nobleman Stefan Vojislav) as rex Docleae (King of Duklja). The kingdom,
   however, paid tribute to the Byzantine Empire; later to the Bulgarian
   Empire; it gave birth to the later medieval kingdom of the Serbian
   Grand Prince ( Serbian: župan) Stefan Nemanja, who originated from
   Duklja.

   The Principality of Zeta (which more closely corresponds to the early
   modern state of Montenegro) asserted itself towards 1360. The House of
   Balšić (1360s–1421) and the House of Crnojević (1421–1499) ruled Zeta;
   and though the Ottoman Empire controlled the lands to the south and
   east from the 15th century, it never fully conquered Zeta.

   In 1516, the secular prince Đurađ Crnojević abdicated in favour of the
   Archbishop Vavil, who then made Montenegro into a theocratic state
   under the rule of the prince-bishop (vladika) of Cetinje, a position
   held from 1697 by the Petrović-Njegoš family of the Riđani clan. Petar
   Petrović Njegoš, perhaps the most influential vladika, reigned in the
   first half of the 19th century. In 1851, Danilo II Petrović Njegoš
   became vladika, but in 1852 he married, left the priesthood, assumed
   the title of knjaz (Prince), and transformed his land into a secular
   principality.

   In 1910, Prince Nikola I became King of Montenegro. Two years later, in
   October, 1912, King Nikola declared war on the Ottoman Empire,
   precipitating the two Balkan Wars. The Montenegrin army attacked the
   Ottoman fortress city of Skutari, and forced the empire to gather a
   large army in neighbouring Macedonia. This Ottoman army was then
   attacked by the forces of Greece, Serbia, and Bulgaria which entered
   the war by pre-arrangement. The result was a military disaster for the
   Ottomans, who were thrown back to an area north of Constantinople.

   Montenegro emerged from the Balkan Wars doubled in size, receiving half
   of the former Ottoman territory known as the Sanjak of Novi Pazar, but
   without Skutari, the country's major prize in the war. The London
   Conference awarded Skutari to an independent Albania.

   An allied power during World War I, Montenegro was occupied by
   Austro-Hungarian troops. Feldmarschalleutnant Viktor Weber von Webenau
   became Military Governor of Montenegro on February 26, 1916. In 1918,
   the Podgorica Assembly voted for uniting Montenegro with the Kingdom of
   Serbia. However, pro-independence Montenegrins revolted on Christmas
   Day 1919 against Serbia. The revolt was finally suppressed in 1924.

   From 1919 to 1941, Montenegro was a part of the Kingdom of Serbs,
   Croats and Slovenes, which renamed itself the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in
   1929. During World War II, Montenegro was occupied by Italian troops
   and later German Axis troops (1941–1944). From 1945 to 1992, Montenegro
   separated from Serbia and became a constituent republic in its own
   right of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It was during
   this time that the present capital Podgorica was renamed Titograd,
   after Josip Broz Tito, leader of Yugoslavia. Over the next half
   century, Montenegro remained one of six constituent republics of
   Yugoslavia.

Union with Serbia (1992–2006)

   After the dissolution of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
   in 1992, Montenegro agreed on a federation with Serbia, first as the
   Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, then as a looser State Union of Serbia
   and Montenegro that broke up as soon as a deadline for holding an
   independence referendum expired.

   In the referendum on remaining in Yugoslavia in 1992, 95.96% of the
   votes were cast for remaining in the federation with Serbia, although
   the turnout was at 66% because of a boycott by the Muslim, Albanian and
   Catholic minorities as well as of pro-independence Montenegrins. The
   opposition claimed that poll was organized under undemocratic
   conditions, during war time in the former Yugoslavia, with widespread
   propaganda from the state-controlled media in favour of a
   pro-federation vote. There is no impartial report on the fairness of
   the referendum, as the 1992 referendum was totally unmonitored, unlike
   the 2006 vote, which was monitored by the European Union.

   In 1996, Milo Đukanović's government de facto severed ties between
   Montenegro and Serbia, which was then still under Milošević. Montenegro
   formed its own economic policy and adopted the Deutsche Mark as its
   currency. It has since adopted the euro, though it is not formally part
   of the Eurozone. Subsequent governments of Montenegro carried out
   pro-independence policies, and political tensions with Serbia simmered
   despite political changes in Belgrade. Despite its pro-independence
   leanings, targets in Montenegro were repeatedly bombed by NATO forces
   during Operation Allied Force in 1999.

   In 2002, Serbia and Montenegro came to a new agreement regarding
   continued cooperation. In 2003, the Yugoslav federation was replaced in
   favour of a looser state union named Serbia and Montenegro and a
   possible referendum on Montenegrin independence was postponed for a
   minimum of three years.

Independence

   The status of the union between Montenegro and Serbia was decided by a
   referendum on Montenegrin independence on May 21, 2006. A total of
   419,240 votes were cast, representing 86.5% of the total electorate.
   230,661 votes or 55.5% were for independence and 185,002 votes or 44.5%
   were against. The 45,659 difference narrowly surpassed the 55%
   threshold needed to validate the referendum under rules set by the
   European Union. According to the electoral commission, the 55%
   threshold was passed by only 2,300 votes. Serbia, the member-states of
   the European Union, and the permanent members of the United Nations
   Security Council have all recognized Montenegro's independence; doing
   so removed all remaining obstacles from Montenegro's path towards
   becoming the world's newest sovereign state.

   The 2006 referendum was monitored by 5 international observer missions,
   headed by an OSCE/ODIHR monitoring team, and around 3,000 observers in
   total (including domestic observers from CEMI and other organizations).
   The OSCE/ODIHR ROM joined efforts with the observers of the OSCE
   Parliamentary Assembly (OSCE PA), the Parliamentary Assembly of the
   Council of Europe (PACE), the Congress of Local and Regional
   Authorities of the Council of Europe (CLRAE) and the European
   Parliament (EP) to form an International Referendum Observation Mission
   (IROM). The IROM—in its preliminary report—"assessed compliance of the
   referendum process with OSCE commitments, Council of Europe
   commitments, other international standards for democratic electoral
   processes, and domestic legislation." Furthermore, the report assessed
   that the competitive pre-referendum environment was marked by an active
   and generally peaceful campaign and that "there were no reports of
   restrictions on fundamental civil and political rights."

   The 2006 referendum commission, with an equal number of members from
   both blocs, was headed by a European Union designated official
   František Lipka (a Slovak diplomat) who held the "golden vote".

   On June 3, 2006, the Parliament of Montenegro declared the independence
   of Montenegro, formally confirming the result of the referendum on
   independence. Serbia did not obstruct the ruling, confirming its own
   independence and declaring the Union of Serbia and Montenegro dead
   shortly thereafter.

International recognition of Montenegro

   The first state to recognise Montenegro was Iceland, on June 8, 2006,
   followed by Switzerland and Estonia on June 9, and Russia on June 11.
   Recognition by Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Slovenia soon
   followed. The European Union and the United States recognized
   Montenegro on June 12, as have various member states of the EU and
   other European countries (including Bulgaria). The United Kingdom
   formally extended recognition on June 13, as did the People's Republic
   of China and France on June 14, meaning that all five permanent United
   Nations Security Council members recognise the government of
   Montenegro. Serbia, the other former component of the State Union,
   recognised Montenegro on June 15. The Organization for Security and
   Co-operation in Europe decided to accept Montenegro as the 56th member
   of the organization on June 21 and the country took its seat at the
   Permanent Council on June 22. The United Nations, in a vote of the
   Security Council, decided to offer full membership of the organisation
   to Montenegro on June 22, 2006. Montenegro was confirmed as a member on
   June 28.

Geography

   Map of Montenegro.
   Enlarge
   Map of Montenegro.
   Morača River Canyon.
   Enlarge
   Morača River Canyon.

   Montenegro borders Croatia, Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania.

   Some of the cities and towns in Montenegro are:
     * Podgorica (capital; 152,025 inhabitants)
     * Nikšić (74,706)
     * Pljevlja (39,593)
     * Bijelo Polje (55,628)
     * Herceg Novi (27,593, including Igalo)
     * Berane (38,953)
     * The former royal capital and the seat of the throne is Cetinje
       (20,307).

   The Montenegrin surface ranges from high peaks along its borders with
   Kosovo and Albania, a segment of the Karst of the western Balkan
   Peninsula, to a narrow coastal plain that is only one to four miles
   wide. The plain stops abruptly in the north, where Mount Lovćen and
   Mount Orjen plunge abruptly into the inlet of the Bay of Kotor.

   Montenegro's large Karst region lies generally at elevations of 1,000
   metres (3,281  ft) above sea level — however some parts rise to 2,000
   metres (6,560 ft) like Mount Orjen (1,894 m / 6,214 ft), the highest
   massif among the coastal limestone ranges. Zeta River valley is the
   lowest segment at an elevation of 500 metres (1,640 ft).

   The rough mountains of Montenegro include some of the most rugged
   terrain in Europe. They average more than 2,000 metres (6,560 ft) in
   elevation. One of the country's notable peaks is Bobotov Kuk in the
   Durmitor mountains, which reaches a height of 2,522 metres (8,274 ft).
   The Montenegrin mountain ranges were among the most ice-eroded parts of
   the Balkan Peninsula during the last glacial period.
     * Longest beach: Velika Plaža, Ulcinj — 13,000 m (8 miles)
     * Highest peak: Bobotov Kuk ( Durmitor) — 2,522 m (8,274 ft)
     * Largest lake: Lake Skadar — 391  km² (151  sq mi) of surface area
     * Deepest canyon: Tara River Canyon — 1,300 m (4,265 ft)
     * Biggest bay: Bay of Kotor
     * National parks: Durmitor — 390 km² (150 sq mi), Lovćen — 64 km²
       (25 sq mi), Biogradska Gora — 54 km² (21 sq mi), Lake Skadar —
       400 km² (154 sq mi)
     * UNESCO World Heritage sites: Durmitor and Tara River Canyon, old
       city of Kotor.

Government and politics

   By its current constitution, Montenegro is defined as a "democratic,
   welfare, and ecological state".

Government

   The current Government of the Republic of Montenegro (Vlada Republike
   Crne Gore) comprises the prime minister, the deputy prime ministers as
   well as ministers. Željko Šturanović is the Prime Minister of
   Montenegro and head of the Government. The ruling party in Montenegro
   is the centre-left Democratic Party of Socialists of Montenegro (DPS)
   (Demokratska Partija Socijalista Crna Gore), in coalition with much
   smaller Social Democratic Party of Montenegro (SDP) (Socijaldemokratska
   Partija Crne Gore).

President

   President Filip Vujanović.
   Enlarge
   President Filip Vujanović.

   The President of Montenegro is elected for a period of five years
   through direct and secret ballots. The President will:
    1. represent the republic in the country and abroad;
    2. promulgate laws by ordinance;
    3. call elections for the Assembly;
    4. propose to the Assembly candidates for the Prime Minister,
       president and justices of the Constitutional Court;
    5. propose to the Assembly calling of a referendum.
    6. grant amnesty for criminal offences prescribed by the republican
       law;
    7. confer decoration and awards;
    8. perform all other duties in accordance with the Constitution.

   The President shall be a member of the Supreme Defence Council.

Parliament

   The Montenegrin Parliament (Skupština Republike Crne Gore) passes all
   laws in Montenegro, ratifies international treaties, appoints the Prime
   Minister, ministers, and justices of all courts, adopts the budget and
   performs other duties as established by the Constitution. The
   Parliament can pass a vote of no-confidence on the Government by a
   majority of the members. One deputy is elected per 6,000 voters, which
   in turn results in a reduction of total number of deputies in the
   Assembly of Montenegro (the present assembly convening comprises 78
   deputies instead of previous number of 71). The current president of
   the Parliament is Ranko Krivokapić.

   The present Assembly convening 81 seats instead of previous number of
   75 (parliamentary elections were on 10 September 2006 and were the
   first after the proclamation of independence. The constituent Assembly
   was on 2 October 2006).

Symbols

   A new official flag of Montenegro was adopted on July 12, 2004 by the
   Montenegrin legislature. The new flag is based on the personal standard
   of King Nikola I of Montenegro. This flag was all red with a gold
   border, a gold coat of arms, and the initials НІ in Cyrillic script
   (corresponding to NI in Latin script) representing King Nikola I. These
   initials are omitted from the modern flag.

   The national day of 13 July marks the date in 1878 when the Congress of
   Berlin recognised Montenegro as the 27th independent state in the world
   and the start of one of the first popular uprisings in Europe against
   the Axis Powers on 13 July 1941 in Montenegro.

   In 2004, the Montenegrin legislature selected a popular Montenegrin
   folk song, " Oh the Bright Dawn of May", as the national anthem.
   Montenegro's official anthem during the reign of King Nikola was Ubavoj
   nam Crnoj Gori (To our beautiful Montenegro). The music was composed by
   the King's son Knjaz Mirko. The Montenegrin popular anthem has been
   Onamo, 'namo! since King Nikola I wrote it in the 1860s.

Administrative divisions

   Municipalities of Montenegro.
   Enlarge
   Municipalities of Montenegro.

   Montenegro is divided into 21 municipalities ( opština), and 2 urban
   municipalities, subdivisions of Podgorica municipality:
     * Andrijevica
     * Bar
     * Berane
     * Bijelo Polje
     * Budva
     * Cetinje
     * Danilovgrad
     * Herceg Novi
     * Kolašin
     * Kotor
     * Mojkovac
     * Nikšić

                     * Plav
                     * Plužine
                     * Pljevlja
                     * Podgorica
                          + Golubovci
                          + Tuzi
                     * Rožaje
                     * Šavnik
                     * Tivat
                     * Ulcinj
                     * Žabljak

Economy

   During the era of communism Montenegro experienced a rapid period of
   urbanization and industrialization. An industrial sector based on
   electricity generation, steel, aluminium, coal mining, forestry and
   wood processing, textiles and tobacco manufacture was built up, with
   trade, overseas shipping, and particularly tourism, increasingly
   important by the late 1980s.

   The loss of previously guaranteed markets and suppliers after the break
   up of Yugoslavia left the Montenegrin industrial sector reeling as
   production was suspended and the privatization program, begun in 1989,
   was interrupted. The disintegration of the Yugoslav market, and the
   imposition of the UN sanctions in May 1992 were the causes of the
   greatest economic and financial crisis since World War II. During 1993,
   two thirds of the Montenegrin population lived below the poverty line,
   while frequent interruptions in relief supplies caused the health and
   environmental protection to drop below the minimum of international
   standards. The financial losses under the adverse effects of the UN
   sanctions on the overall economy of Montenegro are estimated to be
   approximately $6.39 billion. This period also experienced the second
   highest hyperinflation in history (3 million percent in January 1994)
   (The highest hyperinflation can be attributed to Hungary after the end
   of World War II where inflation hit 4.19 x 10^16 percent).

   Due to its favourable geographical location (it had access to the
   Adriatic Sea and a water-link to Albania across Lake Skadar) Montenegro
   became a hub for smuggling activity. The entire Montenegrin industrial
   production had stopped, and the republic's main economic activity
   became the smuggling of user goods - especially those in short supply
   like petrol and cigarettes, both of which skyrocketed in price. It
   became a de facto legalized practice and it went on for years.

   In 1997, Milo Đukanović took control over the ruling Democratic Party
   of Socialists of Montenegro (DPS) and began severing ties with Serbia.
   He blamed policies of Slobodan Milošević for overall decline of the
   Montenegrin economy. Montenegro introduced the German mark as response
   to again-growing inflation, and insisted on taking more control over
   its economic fate. This eventually resulted in creation of Serbia and
   Montenegro, a loose union in which Montenegro mostly took
   responsibility for its economic policies.

   This was followed by implementation of faster and more efficient
   privatization, passing of reform laws, introduction of VAT and usage of
   euro as Montenegro's legal tender. The government established a
   medium-term plan of economic reforms, popularly called "The Agenda".

Demographics

   Ethnic map of Montenegro according to the 2003 census.
   Enlarge
   Ethnic map of Montenegro according to the 2003 census.
   Ethnic map of Montenegro according to the 1991 census.
   Enlarge
   Ethnic map of Montenegro according to the 1991 census.

   Ethnic composition according to the 2003 census :
     * Montenegrins: 267,669 (43.16%)
     * Serbs: 198,414 (31.99%)
     * Bosniaks: 48,184 (7.77%)
     * Albanians: 31,163 (5.03%)
     * Muslims by nationality: 24,625 (3.97%)
     * Croats: 6,811 (1.1%)
     * Roma , Egyptians & Ashkalis: 2,826 (0.46%)

   NB: Montenegrin and Serb identities are not exclusive, and the size of
   each group varies with each census, due to political events and as
   people view themselves, on balance, as more one than the other. A
   "Montenegrin" may view himself as a "Serb" as well, and vice versa. In
   both groups, there are also those who view themselves as belonging to
   one group exclusively.

   Over 270,000 citizens of Serbia have Montenegrin citizenship. Around
   69,000 of them are Montenegrins, while others are mostly Serbs. It
   should be noted that those terms have a slightly different meaning in
   Serbia. People who may declare themselves Serbs if living in
   Montenegro, to emphasise their connection with the Serbian cultural
   space, may declare themselves Montenegrins in Serbia, as the identity
   needing to be emphasised would be the Montenegrin one.

   In the constitution of Montenegro adopted in 1992, the official
   language of the republic was changed from Serbo-Croat to the Ijekavian
   standard dialect of Serbian. As of 2003, 63.5% of the population
   declare Serbian their mother tongue, while almost 22% declare
   Montenegrin. The dialects used are the same, very similar to those used
   by Serbs, Croats, and Muslims in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia, with
   slight nuances.

   Over 74% of Montenegrin citizens are Eastern Orthodox Christians, most
   of them adherents of the Serbian Orthodox Church, although there is
   also the Montenegrin Orthodox Church, which is not officially
   recognized. 110,000 Muslims make up 17.74% of Montenegro's population.
   They are divided into three main groups: ethnic Albanians, and Slavic
   Muslims split among Bosniaks, who speak Bosnian and Montenegrin
   Muslims, who prefer Serbian. Albanians are a separate group, speaking
   their own language, Albanian (5.26%) and living mostly in the
   south-east, especially in Ulcinj, where they form the majority of the
   population. Bosniaks are Slavic Muslims speaking the Bosnian language
   and living mostly in the north. Finally, there are a small groups of
   autochthonous Croats and other Roman Catholic inhabitants, who live
   mostly in the coastal areas, particularly the Bay of Kotor. New
   estimates of Croats in 2006 put the figure at 7,100.

Culture

   Because of the country's location, the culture of Montenegro has been
   shaped by a variety of influences throughout history. The influence of
   Orthodox South Slavic, Central European, and seafaring Adriatic
   cultures (notably parts of Italy) have been the most imporant in recent
   centuries.

   Montenegro has many significant cultural and historical sites,
   including heritage sites from the pre- Romanesque, Gothic and Baroque
   periods. The Montenegrin coastal region is especially well known for
   its religious monuments, including the Cathedral of Saint Tryphon, the
   basilica of St. Luke (over 800 years), Our Lady of the Rock (Škrpjela),
   the Savina Monastery and others. The Byzantine influence in
   architecture and in religious artwork is especially apparent in the
   country's interior. Montenegro's medieval monasteries contain thousands
   of square metres of frescos on their walls.

   The traditional folk dance of the Montenegrins is the Oro, a circle
   dance that involves dancers standing on each other's shoulders in a
   circle while one or two dancers are dancing in the middle.

   The first literary works written in the region are ten centuries old,
   and the first Montenegrin book was printed five hundreds years ago. The
   first state-owned printing press was located in Cetinje in 1494, where
   the first South Slavic book was printed the same year ( Oktoih).
   Ancient manuscripts, dating from the 13th century, are kept in the
   Montenegrin monasteries.

   Montenegro's capital Podgorica and the former royal capital of Cetinje
   are the two most importantant centers of culture and the arts in the
   country.

Education

   Education in Montenegro is regulated by the Montenegrin Ministry of
   Education and Science.

   Education starts in either pre-schools or elementary schools. Children
   enroll in elementary schools ( Serbian: Osnovna škola) at age of 7 and
   it lasts for nine years. The students may continue their secondary
   education which lasts 3 ,or in great majority of cases 4 years and ends
   with graduation( Matura). Higher education lasts with a certain first
   degree after 3 to 6 years. Universities also offer postgraduate
   education.

Gallery

   The Harbour in Budva.

   Cathedral of Saint Tryphon (Sv. Tripun) in Kotor.

   Church in Perast.

   The two islands off Perast.

   Monastery of Holy Trinity, Pljevlja.

   Husein-pasa's mosque with the tallest minaret (42m) in the Balkans,
   Pljevlja.

   Durmitor.

   Orjen.

   Njegoš's mausoleum on top of the Mount Lovćen.

   Ostrog monastery.

   Tara River Canyon.

   Millennium bridge, Podgorica.

   Nikšić.

   Palace of the Princes and Kings of Montenegro, Cetinje.

   Savina monastery.

   Biogradska Gora.

Neighbouring countries

   Flag of Bosnia and Herzegovina  Bosnia and Herzegovina Flag of Serbia
   Serbia
   Flag of Croatia  Croatia North
   West    Flag of Montenegro  Montenegro     East
   South
   Flag of Italy  Italy  Image:Template CanadianCityGeoLocation West.png
   Adriatic Sea Flag of Albania  Albania

   Countries of Europe

   Albania · Andorra · Armenia^1 · Austria · Azerbaijan^2 · Belarus ·
   Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus^1 ·
   Czech Republic · Denmark · Estonia · Finland · France · Georgia^2 ·
   Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy · Kazakhstan^2 ·
   Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Republic of Macedonia
   · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands · Norway · Poland
   · Portugal · Romania · Russia^2 · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia ·
   Slovenia · Spain · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey^2 · Ukraine · United
   Kingdom · Vatican City

   (1) Entirely in Asia but having socio-political connections with
   Europe. (2) Has significant territory in Asia.
   Countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea

   Albania • Algeria • Bosnia and Herzegovina • Croatia • Cyprus • Egypt •
   France • Greece • Israel • Italy • Lebanon • Libya • Malta • Monaco •
   Montenegro • Morocco • Slovenia • Spain • Syria • Tunisia • Turkey

   For dependent and other territories, see Dependent territory and List
   of unrecognized countries.
   Countries on the Adriatic Sea

   Flag of Albania  Albania • Flag of Bosnia and Herzegovina  Bosnia and
   Herzegovina • Flag of Croatia  Croatia • Flag of Italy  Italy • Flag of
   Montenegro  Montenegro • Flag of Slovenia  Slovenia
   European Union members and candidates

   Austria • Belgium • Cyprus • Czech Republic • Denmark • Estonia •
   Finland • France • Germany • Greece • Hungary • Ireland • Italy •
   Latvia • Lithuania • Luxembourg • Malta • Netherlands • Poland •
   Portugal • Slovakia • Slovenia • Spain • Sweden • United Kingdom

   Countries acceding on January 1, 2007: Bulgaria • Romania

   Candidate countries: Croatia • Turkey • Republic of Macedonia (referred
   to as the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia by the European Union)
   Slavic-speaking nations

   West Slavic: Flag of Czech Republic  Czech Republic • Flag of Poland
   Poland • Flag of Slovakia  Slovakia

   South Slavic: Flag of Bosnia and Herzegovina  Bosnia and Herzegovina •
   Flag of Bulgaria  Bulgaria • Flag of Croatia  Croatia • Flag of
   Republic of Macedonia  Republic of Macedonia • Flag of Montenegro
   Montenegro • Flag of Serbia  Serbia • Flag of Slovenia  Slovenia

   East Slavic: Flag of Belarus  Belarus • Flag of Russia  Russia • Flag
   of Ukraine  Ukraine
   Republics and Autonomous Provinces of the former Yugoslavia (SFRY)
   Flag of SFR Yugoslavia

   Bosnia and Herzegovina • Croatia • Republic of Macedonia • Montenegro •
   Serbia (Kosovo • Vojvodina) • Slovenia
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Montenegro"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
