   #copyright

Montreal Metro

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Railway transport

   Place-Saint-Henri station
   Enlarge
   Place-Saint-Henri station

   The Montreal Metro is the main form of public transportation within the
   city of Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

   The Metro, operated by the Société de transport de Montréal (STM), was
   inaugurated on October 14, 1966, during the tenure of Mayor Jean
   Drapeau. Originally consisting of 26 stations on three separate lines,
   the Metro now incorporates 65 stations on four lines measuring 60.8
   kilometres (37.8 miles) in length, serving the north, east, and centre
   of Montreal Island with a connection to Longueuil via the Yellow Line
   and, soon, Laval, originally to be completed in 2006, but now scheduled
   to be inaugurated in 2007. The metro system is currently Canada's
   second longest and second in total annual passenger usage (in both
   respects to Toronto's subway system), serving 284 million riders a
   year; according to the STM website, the metro system has transported
   over 6 billion passengers as of 2006, which is equivalent to the
   world's population.

History

   1966 Montreal Metro onboard network map
   Enlarge
   1966 Montreal Metro onboard network map

   Construction began in May, 1962 and was engaged before Montreal was
   chosen as host of the 1967 World Fair (Expo 67), held in the summer of
   1967. Regardless of the fair, the city badly needed a mass
   transportation system, projects dating back to 1910. The main lines (
   Green (Line 1), Atwater to Frontenac; and Orange (Line 2), Bonaventure
   to Henri-Bourassa) were opened gradually starting in October, 1966,
   with the Yellow line (Line 4) ( Berri-de-Montigny) to Longueuil, on the
   south shore of the Saint Lawrence River) not opened until April, 1967.
   1976 Montreal Metro map, with planned extensions to Lines 2 Orange and
   5 Blue
   Enlarge
   1976 Montreal Metro map, with planned extensions to Lines 2 Orange and
   5 Blue

   A Line 3 was originally intended, as a surface metro running in part
   through the existing railway tracks running under Mount Royal to
   Cartierville. But then, as negotiations with the Canadian National
   Railway (CN Rail) for the use of their tracks and tunnel were stalled,
   Montreal was chosen as host of the Expo 67 (1967 World Fair). Plans and
   budgets were therefore redirected for the design and construction of a
   replacement line, Line 4, constructed especially for Expo 67, in place
   of the never built Line 3, which tracks are now used for the
   Deux-Montagnes commuter train. The Montreal Metro nonetheless continues
   to be numbered as if this proposed line had been constructed as Line 3
   of the Metro.

   With the awarding of the 1976 Summer Olympics to Montreal, construction
   began in October 1971 for the extension of Line 1 from Frontenac to
   Honoré-Beaugrand to service the main Olympic site; the new stations
   were opened in June 1976.

   Later, Line 1 was extended from Atwater to Angrignon (September 1978),
   while Line 2 was extended from Bonaventure to Place-Saint-Henri (April
   1980), Snowdon (September 1981), Côte-Sainte-Catherine and Plamondon
   (January and June 1982), and Du Collège (January 1984).

   Two years later, a new line ( Blue (Line 5)) was built from De
   Castelnau to Saint-Michel (June 1986), with transfers to Line 2 at
   Jean-Talon, and Line 2 was extended further to Côte-Vertu (November
   1986). Line 5 was then extended to Parc (June 1987), Acadie (March
   1988), and the existing Snowdon station on Line 2 (January 1988). To
   this date, the Montreal Metro is Canada's second largest subway system.

   The lines however, were not planned to end where they eventually did in
   1990; Line 2 was originally meant to have two or three more stations
   beyond Côte-Vertu, however, priority funding was given to Line 5; The
   plans for Deguire/Poirier, Bois-Franc, and Salaberry stations were
   scrubbed. Line 5 itself was shortened due to funding issues. It has
   originally been projected to have stops west of Snowdon (Côte
   Saint-Luc, Cavendish, Montréal-Ouest, Lafleur) and east of Saint-Michel
   (Pie-IX, Viau, Lacordaire, Langelier, Galeries d’Anjou).

   An entire metro line in initial planning was also scrubbed, the
   so-called Line 7 / Pie IX - Saint-Leonard / White Line, also due to the
   same funding issues. Proposed for the first time by the Bureau des
   Transports de Montréal (BTM) in September 1983, the original project
   for a new north-south line (Line 7, the number 6 being reserved for
   another surface metro line proposed by the Ministère des Transports du
   Québec (MTQ)) would have had 10 stations (from Pie-IX to Léger), which
   then got formally proposed by the Communauté urbaine de Montréal (CUM)
   at the start of 1984, this time having 12 stations (from Pie-IX to
   Maurice-Duplessis/Langelier).

   While a number of proposals for further expansion had been studied, the
   Quebec provincial government placed a moratorium on further metro
   construction. Only recently has construction begun on an extension of
   Line 2 from Henri-Bourassa under the Rivière des Prairies to
   Montmorency on the island of Laval (northwest of the island of
   Montreal); completion is expected in early 2007.

   Other expansion proposals currently being considered involve Line 4
   being extended a short distance beyond
   Longueuil–Université-de-Sherbrooke and Line 5 being extended farther
   northeast beyond Saint-Michel; the plan to extend Line 5 from Snowdon
   into the Notre-Dame-de-Grâce area of Montreal has apparently been
   discarded. Expansion plans may also be affected by the ageing of the
   existing metro cars, which may need to be replaced sometime in the
   future.

Network

   see Table of Montreal metro stations

   The four current Montreal Metro lines are identified by colour, by
   number, or by terminus station. The terminus station in the direction
   of travel is used to differentiate between directions of travel. The
   busiest line is the Green Line, while the least busy is the Blue Line.
   The Yellow Line is the shortest line, with just three stations, built
   for the Expo 67. For now, it is the only Metro line that leaves the
   Island of Montreal; however that will change when the Orange Line is
   extended to Laval, a city to the north of Montreal, in 2007. Line 3 was
   never built (see above History).
   Line # Colour Termini Date Length Stations
   1 Green Angrignon ↔ Honoré-Beaugrand 1966 22.1 km 27
   2 Orange Côte-Vertu ↔ Henri-Bourassa 1966 24.8 km 28
   4 Yellow Berri-UQAM ↔ Longueuil–Université-de-Sherbrooke 1967 4.25 km 3
   5 Blue Snowdon ↔ Saint-Michel 1986 9.7 km 12

Rolling-stock

   The Montreal Metro runs entirely underground and uses exclusively
   rubber tires instead of steel wheels. As noted in the STM official
   document, The Montreal Métro, a source of pride, the Metro runs
   entirely underground because at the time of its initial planning in the
   early 1960s rubber-tired metro technology was unable to operate in
   heavy winter conditions.

   Conception of the first generation of rolling-stock in Montreal went
   beyond just adopting the MP 59 metro car from Paris.

   North American cities building modern subway systems (Washington D.C.,
   San Francisco, Atlanta, Montreal) in the 1960s and 1970s were in search
   of modern rolling-stock that not only best fit their needs, but also
   encompassing a change in industrial design that focused on the
   aesthetics and performance of public transit vehicles.

   Train floor levels are flush with the station platforms, but unlike the
   Washington D.C. Metro, Montreal's Metro system is not wheelchair
   accessible. The stations do not have elevators, nor are trains equipped
   with seating for wheelchair users. This has become a sore point for
   accessibility advocates in Montreal. However, the STM states that
   beginning in 2006 there will be "an area... set aside in some cars for
   wheelchair passengers who will have access in a few years".

   Unlike most other major cities subway systems, Montreal's subway cars
   lack air conditioning, which can make trips very uncomfortable for
   passengers, especially during the hot summer months. Passengers cannot
   move between cars once on board with the current train stock, which can
   be an inconvience if the car becomes overcrowded or when looking for a
   seat.

Design

   Rubber tires of the Montreal Metro
   Enlarge
   Rubber tires of the Montreal Metro

   Careful comparison with other modern subway systems would indicate that
   the builders of the Montreal Metro were clearly focused on a vehicle
   design philosophy of highly optimized operation. The inherent
   high-performance characteristics of Montreal's Metro trains offers
   elevated levels of efficiency, high capacity service as well as high
   overall service speeds. Design specifications called for impressive
   rates of acceleration, powerful brakes and short station dwell times of
   typically 8 to 15 seconds.

   Montreal's metro trains are made of LAHT (low-alloy high-tensile)
   steel, painted blue with a thick white stripe running its length.
   Trains are assembled in 3, 6 or 9-car lengths. Each 3-car segment
   element consists of two motor cab cars encompassing a trailer car. Each
   car is 2.5 meters wide and has four wide bi-parting leaf doors on each
   side for rapid passenger entry and egress. The small cross section of
   the cars allows easier tunnel construction under existing underground
   utilities. The total capacity of each car is 160 passengers, 39 to 40
   of which are seated.

   Each car has two sets of bogies (trucks), each with four sets of
   support tires, guide tires and backup conventional steel wheels. The
   motor cars each have four direct-current traction motors coupled to
   reduction gears and differentials. Montreal's metro trains use
   composite brake pads made of rosewood injected with vegetable oil. Two
   sets are applied against the treads of the steel wheels for friction
   braking. Hard braking produces a characteristic burnt popcorn scent.
   Wooden brake shoes perform well but if subjected to numerous high-speed
   applications they develop a carbon film that diminishes brake
   performance.
   View of a track from a sandpile bumper-post showing the cross-section
   of guide ways, concrete rollways and conventional track
   Enlarge
   View of a track from a sandpile bumper-post showing the cross-section
   of guide ways, concrete rollways and conventional track

   Rubber tires make the Metro exceptionally quiet, transmit minimal
   vibration, helps the cars climb uphill more easily and negotiate turns
   at high speeds. However, the advantages of rubber tires are offset by
   noise levels generated by traction motors, which are noisier than the
   typical North American subway car. Trains can climb slopes of up to
   6.5% and economize the most energy when following a humped-station
   profile (track profiles that descend to accelerate after leaving a
   station and climb before entering the station). Steel-wheel train
   technology has undergone significant advances and can better round
   tight curves, climb and descend similar grades and slopes. Despite
   these advances, steel-wheel trains still cannot operate at high speeds
   (45 mph) on the same steep or tightly curved track profiles as a train
   equipped with rubber tires.

Train operation

   Switches use conventional points on the standard-gauge track to guide
   trains. Rubber tires keep supporting the full weight of the trains as
   they go through switches. Guideways are provided in order to insure
   there are no gaps in the electrical power supply.
   Enlarge
   Switches use conventional points on the standard-gauge track to guide
   trains. Rubber tires keep supporting the full weight of the trains as
   they go through switches. Guideways are provided in order to insure
   there are no gaps in the electrical power supply.

   All lines but the Yellow Line are equipped with automatic train
   control. Generally, the train operator supervises the opening and
   closing of doors, while the train drives itself. The train operator can
   also drive the train manually at his or her discretion. Signalling is
   effected through coded pulses sent through the rails. Coded speed
   orders and station stop positions transmitted through track beacons are
   captured by beacon readers mounted under the driver cabs. The
   information sent to the train's electronic modules conveys speed
   information, and it is up to the train automatic control system
   computer to conform to the imposed speed. Additionally, the train
   computer can receive energy-saving instructions from track beacons,
   providing the train with 4 different economical coasting modes, plus
   one mode for maximum performance. In case of manual control, track
   speed is displayed on the cab speedometer indicating the maximum
   permissible speed. The wayside signals consist of point
   (switch/turnout) position indicators in proximity to switches and
   inter-station signalling placed at each station stop. Trains often
   reach their maximum speed of 44-45 mph (70-72 km/h) in 16 to 26 seconds
   depending on grade and load.

   Trains are programmed to stop at certain station positions with a
   precise odometer (accurate to plus or minus 5 centimetres). They
   receive their braking program and station stop positions orders
   (one-third, two thirds or end of station) from track beacons prior to
   entering the station, with additional beacons in the station for
   ensuring stop precision.

   Trains draw current from two sets of 750-volt direct current guide bar/
   third rails on either side of each motor car. Nine-car trains draw
   large currents of up to 6,000 amperes, requiring that both models of
   rolling-stock have calibrated traction motor control systems to prevent
   power surges, arcing and breaker tripping. Both models have electrical
   braking (using motors) to assist primary friction braking, reducing the
   need to replace the brake pads.

   Two models of train are used on the Metro:
     * Canadian Vickers MR-63 (delivered for the metro's opening in 1966)

   The Canadian Vickers-built MR-63 is used on the Green line and the
   Bombardier-built MR-73 is used on the other three lines. Motor cars
   weigh about 27 metric tonnes, trailer cars weigh 20 metric tonnes. A
   three-car set (one element) weighs a total of 74 metric tonnes.

   The MR-63 is identified with grey interiors, four ventilation hoods
   protruding over the roof of each car, 154 hp traction motors that make
   a whining noise and have round cab headlights. Montreal's rolling stock
   is among the oldest still in use on any metro system in the world. A
   $1.2 billion contract is under negotiation with Bombardier to replace
   the MR-63 fleet.

   Maintenance of Montreal's subway cars is rigorous, as reliability
   levels (Mean Distance Between Failures/MDBF ratings) are more than
   double than that of typical North American subway cars.

   The MR-63 is the first generation of high-performance subway cars, a
   mixture of technology dating back to the mid-1960's and modern train
   technology. The MR-63 model has undergone numerous technological and
   reliability upgrades. Major upgrades include on-board computer modules
   for automatic train control in 1976 with subsequent revisions of
   hardware and software, solid-state door interlocks in 2003, modern
   ergonomic driver cabs with new digital dashboards and automatic station
   annunciators in 2005. Most notably, all the MR-63 carshells emerged
   factory-fresh with new interiors and a new paint scheme after being
   fully refurbished at the GEC Alstom Pointe St. Charles workshops in
   1993. As a result, the MR-63 fleet appears relatively new, gleaming and
   modern despite being 40 years old (as of 2006).

   The MR-63 fleet remains exceptionally reliable (MDBF of 125,000
   miles/200,000 km in 2004) by North American standards. However, they
   suffer elevated levels of vandalism, they retain many obsolete
   components, parts availability is diminishing and ride quality has
   deteriorated over the years as their suspension systems and rubber
   spring packs harden with old age. Poor ride quality has not been
   attributed to the tires or tracks.

   The MR-63 model uses a series-to-parallel servo camshaft rheostat to
   control and regulate power to its traction motors; this control system
   can be heard tapping under the floor of a motor car as the train
   undergoes rapid acceleration at an initial rate of 3.0 mph per second
   (1.33 m/s²). This control system also features a dynamic rheostatic
   braking mode that uses the motors to slow the train, turning the motors
   into generators and dissipating the resulting energy as heat in the
   rheostat grid.

   The 2006 STM action and investment plans indicate that the MR-63 fleet
   will remain in service up until 2014, with their projected replacement
   by 2012.
     * Bombardier Transportation MR-73 (delivered in 1976)

   The MR-73 is the second generation of high-performance metro cars,
   identified by rectangular cab headlights, orange interiors (now the
   orange interiors are slowly being taken out with blue and dark orange
   interiors, this is all part of the mid-life refurbishment) , traction
   motors (rated at 176 hp max., 168 hp continuous) that growl while
   accelerating out of a station, have side vents and a unique three-note
   sound signature when the train pulls out of a station. The initial rate
   of acceleration of the MR-73 model is 3.2 mph per second (1.43 m/s²),
   which is exceptionally high for any subway equipment. The three-note
   sound is produced by traction motor control equipment called a "current
   chopper", which is used to control and power the motors on the train in
   stages without incurring a power surge. The notes are the same as the
   first three notes as Aaron Copland's " Fanfare for the Common Man", one
   of the musical themes for Expo '67, though this is apparently just a
   coincidence. Some MR-73s originally sported murals of Montreal at the
   end of cars, although these were damaged by vandalism and removed long
   ago.

   The MR-73 has a different electrical braking system than the MR-63 to
   assist friction braking. The MR-73's current chopper recuperates energy
   when in braking mode, turning traction motors into generators and
   sending a regulated current back into the traction power supply for
   other trains to use. Electrical braking is most effective when one
   train draws power while starting while another train at a different
   location sends power while braking.

   The Mean Distance Between Failures (MDBF) for the MR-73 exceeds 200,000
   miles (320,000 km) in 2004. As of December 2005, the MR-73 fleet is
   undergoing $40 million in renovations to reconfigure interior seating
   to increase total car capacity, install new poles and new panels with a
   new ergonomic colour scheme that discourages vandalism, decreases
   motion-sickness and promotes aesthetic harmony. The renovations also
   include ergonomic full-spectrum lighting system that provides
   therapeutic anti-depression effects for its passengers. Like the older
   MR-63 metro fleet, the MR-73 driver cabs will be modernized and
   equipped with ergonomic features and digital dashboards.

Maintenance

   Rolling stock maintenance is effected in three facilities, in two
   locations.

Plateau d’Youville

   The Plateau d’Youville, located in the north end of the city is located
   at the intersection of Boulevards Crémazie and Saint-Laurent.

   It provide heavy maintenance of buses, subway cars, light maintenance
   of MR-73 subway cars and is the main base for the track maintenance
   workshops (where track sections are pre-assembled prior to
   installation).

Garage Beaugrand

   An older generation MR-63 train is in the Beaugrand Garage. Note the
   turntable to change trucks in the foreground.
   Enlarge
   An older generation MR-63 train is in the Beaugrand Garage. Note the
   turntable to change trucks in the foreground.

   The Garage Beaugrand is located east of line 1 terminus
   Honoré-Beaugrand. It is entirely underground.

   It provides light maintenance on MR-63 subway cars.

Centre d'attachement Duvernay

   It is a garage and base for maintenance of way equipment. It accesses
   the network through the line 1/line 2 interchange east/south of
   Lionel-Groulx. The access building is located at the corner of Duvernay
   and Vinet streets in Sainte-Cunégonde.

Centre d’attachement Viau

   It is a garage and base for maintenance of way equipment. It accesses
   the network immediately west of the Viau station (line 1). The access
   building is within the Viau station building; in fact, facilities are
   visible from trains going west of the station.

Snowdon

   Heavy work trains are hauled with sizeable tractors such as this old
   (1966) “Duplex”. Traction is effected through the rubber-tyred wheels,
   and guidance through the retractable flanged wheel. This tractor can
   also operate on the road.
   Enlarge
   Heavy work trains are hauled with sizeable tractors such as this old
   (1966) “Duplex”. Traction is effected through the rubber-tyred wheels,
   and guidance through the retractable flanged wheel. This tractor can
   also operate on the road.

   The interchange track between lines 2 and 5 south/west of Snowdon
   station is used for the storage of maintenance of way equipment. There
   are no surface facilities.

Garages

   Idle trains are stored in 3 garages, Angrignon, Beaugrand and
   St-Charles (respectively west of Angrignon line 1 terminus, east of
   Honoré-Beaugrand line 1 terminus and north of Henri-Bourassa terminus.
   An additionnal terminus north of the future Montmorency terminus is
   being built.

Next generation of trains

   In May 2006, the Quebec Government announced the negotiation of a $1.2
   billion contract to replace the MR-63 metro fleet of the Montreal
   Metro. Alstom has voiced its dismay over directly awarding the contract
   without a bidding process. Negotiations between the STM and Bombardier
   will be ongoing until 2007. The negotiations will focus on the
   project's cost controls, terms of contract, train specifications and
   warranty. If negotiations fail, the Quebec government and the STM will
   revert to a bidding process.

   Production at Bombardier's La Pocatière plant will be winding down as
   the building of M-7 electric multiple-unit commuter railcars for New
   York's Long-Island Railroad (LIRR) and Metro-North (MNR) of the
   Metropolitan Transit Authority nears completion. Production may ramp up
   again to produce Montreal's Metro cars starting in 2009. The STM
   indicates that the first train sets will start rolling between 2010 and
   2012.

   The media in Montreal (particularly the La Presse newspaper) suggests
   that the new cars will feature full-width walkways between the cars
   which can be occupied by passengers, resulting in higher train
   capacities. They also suggest that the new rubber-tire trains will have
   to meet very demanding performance requirements: higher speeds (up to
   80 km/h), powerful accelerations, high-speed gradeability,
   high-performance brakes, good ride comfort, low-noise, low-maintenance
   costs, low-energy costs and high levels of reliability. Improving on
   the performance levels of the current metro fleet and developing new
   rolling-stock capable of using sheer speed as a means of increasing
   line capacity will represent a major challenge to Bombardier.

Design

   Stained glass by Mario Merola (with graffiti) in the entrance to
   Charlevoix metro station in Montréal.
   Enlarge
   Stained glass by Mario Merola (with graffiti) in the entrance to
   Charlevoix metro station in Montréal.

   The design of the Metro was heavily influenced by Montreal's winter
   conditions. Unlike other cities' metros, nearly all station entrances
   in Montreal are completely enclosed: usually in small, separate
   buildings with swivelling doors meant to mitigate the wind caused by
   train movements that can make doors difficult to open.

   All separate entrances are set back from the sidewalk; as well several
   stations in downtown Montreal are directly connected to buildings, and
   thus have several entrances inside pre-existing buildings as well as
   street-level entrances, making the Metro an integral part of Montreal's
   famous underground city despite its lack of elevators. Several metro
   entrances are also located within building façades. Only three stations
   have open entrances such as are prevalent in other cities.

   Montreal's metro is renowned for its architecture and public art. Under
   the direction of Drapeau, a competition among Canadian architects was
   held to decide the design of each station, ensuring that every station
   was built in a different style by a different architect. Several
   stations, such as Berri-UQAM are important examples of modernist
   architecture, and various system-wide design choices were informed by
   the International Style.

   Along with the Stockholm Metro, Montreal pioneered the installation of
   public art in the metro among capitalist countries, a practise that
   beforehand was mostly found in Socialist and Communist nations (the
   Moscow Metro being a case in point). More than fifty stations are
   decorated with over one hundred works of public art, such as sculpture,
   stained glass, and murals by noted Quebec artists, including members of
   the famous art movement, the Automatistes.

   Some of the most important works in the Metro include the stained-glass
   window at Champ-de-Mars station, the masterpiece of major Quebec artist
   Marcelle Ferron; and the Guimard entrance at Square Victoria station,
   like the famous metro entrances designed for the Paris Metro, on
   permanent loan since 1966 by the RATP to commemorate its cooperation in
   constructing the metro. Installed in 1967 (the 100th anniversary of
   Guimard's birth) this is the only authentic Guimard entrance in use
   outside Paris, although reproductions using original molds were given
   to Mexico City (see Bellas Artes station), Chicago ( Van Buren Station
   on the Metra network) and Lisbon (Picoas station on the yellow line).

   See also Montreal metro artists.

Operation

   A train at Berri-UQAM during rush hour
   Enlarge
   A train at Berri-UQAM during rush hour

   Metro service starts at 05:30 and stops at 01:00 on weekdays and
   Sunday, and 01:30 on Saturday in order to accommodate people coming
   home later. However, the Blue Line stops service earlier, at 00:15 due
   to low traffic volume. During rush hour, there are three to five
   minutes between trains on the Orange and Green Lines. That interval
   however goes up to 12 minutes at night.

   The Société de transport de Montréal operates both the Metro and the
   bus services in Montreal, thus there is free transfer possible between
   bus and Metro. Fare payment is via a barrier system, including magnetic
   tickets and passes, punched-card bus transfers, and non-magnetized
   reduced fare tickets.

   Fares are partially integrated with the Agence métropolitaine de
   transport's commuter rail system, which links the Metro to the outer
   suburbs via four interchange stations.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Montreal_Metro"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
