   #copyright

Moringa oleifera

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Plants

               iMoringa oleifera
           Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Plantae
   Division: Magnoliophyta
   Class:    Magnoliopsida
   Order:    Brassicales
   Family:   Moringaceae
   Genus:    Moringa
   Species:  M. oleifera

                                Binomial name

   Moringa oleifera

   Moringa oleifera, commonly referred to simply as Moringa, is the most
   widely cultivated variety of the genus Moringa. It is of the family
   Moringaceae. It is an exceptionally nutritious vegetable tree with a
   variety of potential uses. The tree itself is rather slender with
   drooping branches that grows to approximately 10 m in height; however,
   it normally is cut back annually to one meter or less, and allowed to
   regrow, so that pods and leaves remain within arms reach.

   The Moringa tree grows mainly in semi-arid tropical and subtropical
   areas. While it grows best in dry sandy soil, it tolerates poor soil,
   including coastal areas. It is a fast-growing, drought-resistant tree
   that apparently is native only to the southern foothills of the
   Himalayas. Today it is widely cultivated in Africa, Central and South
   America, Sri Lanka, India, Mexico, Malaysia and the Philippines.
   Considered one of the world’s most useful trees, as almost every part
   of the Moringa tree can be used for food, or has some other beneficial
   property. In the tropics it is used as foliage for livestock.

   The immature green pods, called “drumsticks” are probably the most
   valued and widely used part of the tree. They are commonly consumed in
   India, and are generally prepared in a similar fashion to green beans
   and have a slight asparagus taste. The seeds are sometimes removed from
   more mature pods and eaten like peas or roasted like nuts. The flowers
   are edible when cooked, and are said to taste like mushrooms. The roots
   are shredded and used as a condiment in the same way as horseradish,
   however it contains the alkaloid spirochin, a potentially fatal nerve
   paralyzing agent, so such practices should be strongly discouraged.

   The leaves are highly nutritious, being a significant source of
   beta-carotene, Vitamin C, protein, iron and potassium. The leaves are
   cooked and used as spinach. In addition to being used fresh as a
   substitute for spinach, its leaves are commonly dried and crushed into
   a powder, and used in soups and sauces.

   The seeds may be crushed and used as a flocculant to purify water. The
   Moringa seeds yield 38–40% edible oil (called Ben oil, from the high
   concentration of behenic acid contained in the oil) that can be used in
   cooking, cosmetics, and lubrication. The refined oil is clear,
   odorless, and resists rancidity at least as well as any other botanical
   oil. The seed cake remaining after oil extraction may be used as a
   fertilizer.

   The bark, sap, roots, leaves, seeds, oil and flowers are used in
   traditional medicine in several countries. In Jamaica, the sap is used
   for a blue dye.

   The flowers are also cooked and relished as a delicacy in West Bengal
   and Bangladesh, especially during early spring. There it is called
   Sojne ful and is usually cooked with green peas and potato.

Malnutrition

   Interest is growing in the use of moringa in addressing malnutrition in
   developing areas of the world. Also Because of its high vitamin and
   mineral content, in Africa it has become popular as a locally produced
   nutritional supplement for individuals infected with the HIV/AIDS
   virus. It can be grown cheaply and easily, so several governments in
   Africa have promoted Moringa oleifera as locally produced food
   beneficial to HIV-positive individuals
   Moringa leaves in a market in Baguio, Philippines
   Enlarge
   Moringa leaves in a market in Baguio, Philippines

   It has been used successfully to combat malnutrition among infants and
   women of childbearing age. In Africa nursing mothers have been shown to
   produce far more milk when Moringa leaves have been added to their
   diet, while severely malnourished children have made significant weight
   gains when the leaves have been added to their diets. It is commonly
   added to porridge to increase its nutritional content.

   One Doctor in Senegal ( West Africa) explained: "We have always had
   problems with the classical approach to treating malnourished children.
   This was based on industrial products: whole milk powder, vegetable oil
   and sugar. All these things are expensive. When you tell a parent to go
   out and buy these things -- this can be truly costly for him. On the
   other hand, with Moringa the resource is locally available. The people
   themselves can produce it. We have done experiments in treating
   malnourished children with this plant and the results have been really
   spectacular.”

Cultivation

   In India, the plant is propagated by planting limb cuttings 1–2 m long,
   from June to August, preferably. The plant starts bearing pods 6–8
   months after planting but regular bearing commenced after the second
   year. The tree bears for several years. It does not tolerate freezes or
   frost. It can also be propagated by seed. As with all plants optimum
   cultivation depends on producing the right environment for the plant to
   thrive. Moringa is a sun and heat loving plant. As a seedling, however,
   you must monitor the environment in the beginning until the tree is
   established. Seeds can be germinated year round.

Soil

   Moringa needs well draining soil. Increase the drainage of your soil by
   adding perlite or other porous substance.

Planting Seeds

   Plant an inch from the surface of the soil, cover and tamp gently.

Planting Seedling

   Dig a hole twice the depth of the pot. Be careful not to disturb the
   root when transplanting. Cut the bottom of the pot out and slit one
   side. Place the pot and seedling into the hole and back fill with soil,
   tamp gently. Water frequently. Do not let the soil dry out.

   Moringa creates a taproot. Sometimes the top plant may die out due to
   heat, dry soil, or a change in the environment. This does not
   necessarily mean the plant has died. Check the taproot to see if it is
   still firm. If it is, keep the seedling damp with filtered sun. Moringa
   is a very hardy plant and can revive itself given time and good
   conditions. If the taproot is soft, it is dead. Moringa will die from
   root rot, which is from poor draining soil.

   Frost may cause the tree to drop leaves and even die down to the
   ground. Keep damp. It will revive in the spring. Freezing temperatures
   or continuous days of frost can kill Moringa. If you live in a cold
   climate you must keep the plant warm.

   Rajangam et al write:

          India is the largest producer of moringa with an annual
          production of 1.1 to 1.3 million tonnes of tender fruits from an
          area of 380 km². Among the states, Andhra Pradesh leads in both
          area and production (156.65 km²) followed by Karnataka (102.8
          km²) and Tamil Nadu (74.08 km²). In other states, it occupies an
          area of 46.13 km². Tamil Nadu is the pioneering state insomuch
          as it has varied genotypes from diversified geographical areas,
          as well as introductions from Sir Lanka.

   Moringa is common in India, where its triangular, ribbed pods with
   winged seeds are used as a vegetable crop. It is particularly suitable
   for dry regions. The drumstick can be grown using rainwater without
   expensive irrigation techniques. The yield is good even if the water
   supply is not. The tree can be even grown on land covered with 10-90 cm
   of mud.

   Moringa is grown in home gardens and as living fences in Thailand,
   where it is commonly sold in local markets. In the Philippines, moringa
   is commonly grown for its leaves, which are used in soup. The leaves
   (called dahon ng malunggay in Tagalog) are commonly sold in local
   markets. Moringa is also actively cultivated by the AVRDC in Taiwan.
   The AVRDC is "the principal international centre for vegetable research
   and development in the world. Its mission is to reduce poverty and
   malnutrition in developing countries through improved production and
   consumption of vegetables."

Culinary uses

   Seeds and fruit of the M. oleifera, ready for cooking
   Enlarge
   Seeds and fruit of the M. oleifera, ready for cooking

   The fruit of the tree is quite popular as a vegetable in Asia and
   Africa. The fruit is a long, thin pod, resembling a drum stick. The
   fruit itself is called drumstick in India and elsewhere. Moringa leaves
   are also eaten as a leaf vegetable, particularly in the Philippines and
   Africa.

India

   In South India, it is used to prepare a variety of sambar and is also
   fried. In Tamil it is called Murungakai. In Marathi is it called
   "Shevga" .In Gujarati is it called Saragvo. It is also preserved by
   canning and exported worldwide. In other parts of India, especially
   West Bengal and also in a neighboring country like Bangladesh it is
   enjoyed very much. It can be made into varieties of curry by mixing
   with coconut, poppy seeds and mustard. It can just be boiled, until the
   drumsticks are semi-soft and consumed directly without any extra
   processing or cooking. It is used in curries, sambars, kormas, and
   dals, although it is also used to add flavor to cutlets, etc.

   Tender drumstick leaves, finely chopped, make an excellent garnish for
   any vegetable dishes, dals, sambars, salads, etc. One can use the same
   in place of or with coriander, as these leaves have high medicinal
   value. If the pulp has to be scraped out after cooking the sticks, then
   keep the pieces as long as 4-5 inches long. Also do not scrape the skin
   before boiling. This will help to hold and scrape them more easily and
   with less mess. For drumstick sambar follow recipe for traditional
   sambar, adding boiled drumstick fingers, along with onions in the oil,
   while stir frying.

   Scraped drumstick pulp can be made into drumstick bhurtha, more or less
   like the baingan bhurtha after the pulp has been obtained. It is a
   wonderfully unusual and tasty dish. The recipe is identical to that of
   baingan bhurtha.

   Drumstick dal, is also a very tasty version of the traditional ' toor
   dal'. Add some of the pulp to the boiled dal, and hand beat it along
   with the dal before seasoning. This will give an unusual, novel flavor
   to this dal. In another variation you may add pieces of boiled
   drumstick including the water in which it was boiled, to the
   traditional toor dal while it is simmering. The pieces are delightful
   to chew on with the dal & rice.

Philippines

   In the Philippines, the leaves are widely eaten. Bunches of leaves are
   available in many markets, priced below many other leaf vegetables. The
   leaves are most often added to a broth to make a simple, and highly
   nutritious soup. The leaves are also sometimes used as a characteristic
   ingredient in tinola - a traditional chicken dish, composed of chicked
   in a broth, moringa leaves, and either papaya or another secondary
   vegetablle.

Other uses

   The tree's bark, roots, fruit, flowers, leaves, seeds and gum are also
   used medicinally in India. Uses include as an antiseptic and in
   treating rheumatism, venomous bites and other conditions.

Names

   Other names for the Moringa in English include:
     * Drumstick tree,The Marathi Name "Shevga"
     * Drumstick tree, from the appearance of the long, slender,
       triangular seed pods.
     * Horseradish tree, from the taste of the leaves, which can serve as
       a rough substitute for horseradish.
     * Ben oil tree, from the oil derived from the seeds

   The Chinese name of the Moringa (辣木), pronounced "la mu" in Putonghua
   and "lat mok" in Cantonese, means "spicy (hot) wood", and is
   reminiscent of the English name "horseradish tree".

   In Haiti, the moringa is called the benzolive (or benzolivier).

   The MMPND entry for Moringa gives names in many other languages.

Popular Myths

   There are several popular myths associated with the tree and the fruit
   in southern India.
     * The fruit is considered to increase sexual libido in men. This
       belief is so common in the state of Tamil Nadu that there have been
       passive references to this in its legislative assembly.
     * The tree is said to host ghosts during the night. This combined
       with the fact that the tree attracts a host of insects make it
       unattractive for people to grow it in their backyards

   Drumstick in Marathi "Shevga"
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moringa_oleifera"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
