   #copyright

Moscow

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

   CAPTION: Москва
   Moscow


   Official flag of МоскваMoscow Official seal of МоскваMoscow
   Flag                          Coat of arms

                             Location
   Position of Moscow in Europe
   Position of Moscow in Europe
                            Government
       Country
   District
   Subdivision     Russia
                   Central Federal District
                   Federal City
        Mayor      Yuriy Luzhkov
                   Geographical characteristics
        Area
    - City
                   1,081 km²
     Population
    - City (2005)
      - Density
                   10,415,400
                     8537.2/ km²
     Coordinates   55°45′8″N, 37°37′56″E
      Elevation    <130 - 253 m
      Time zone
   - Summer ( DST) MSK ( UTC+3)
                   MSD ( UTC+4)
                        Other Information
     Postal Code   101xxx-129xxx
    Dialing Code   +7 495; +7 499
    License plate  77, 99, 97, 177
                       Website: www.mos.ru

   Moscow (Russian: Москва́, Moskva, IPA: [mʌsk'va] ) is the capital of
   Russia and the country's principal political, economic, financial,
   educational, and transportation centre, located on the Moskva River in
   the Central Federal District, located in the European part of Russia.
   The city's population of 10.4 million permanent inhabitants within the
   city boundaries constitutes about 7% of the total Russian population.
   Likewise, it is the most populous city in Europe. Historically, its
   position was central in the Russian homeland. It was the capital of the
   former Soviet Union and Muscovite Russia, the pre-Imperial Russian
   state. It is the site of the famous Kremlin, which now serves as the
   ceremonial residence of the President.

   Moscow's architecture and performing arts culture are world-renowned.
   Moscow is also well known as the site of Saint Basil's Cathedral, with
   its elegant onion domes, as well as the Cathedral of Christ the Savior.
   The Patriarch of Moscow, whose residence is the Danilov Monastery,
   serves as the head of the Russian Orthodox Church. Moscow also remains
   a major economic centre and is home to a large number of billionaires;
   it is perennially considered one of the most expensive cities for
   expatriate employees in the world. It is home to many scientific and
   educational institutions, as well as numerous sport facilities. It
   possesses a complex transport system that includes the world's busiest
   metro system, which is famous for its architecture. Moscow also became
   the host of the 1980 Summer Olympics.

History

   Saint Basil's Cathedral and Spasskaya Tower of Moscow Kremlin at Red
   Square.
   Enlarge
   Saint Basil's Cathedral and Spasskaya Tower of Moscow Kremlin at Red
   Square.

   The first reference to Moscow dates from 1147 when Yuri Dolgoruki
   called upon the prince of the Novgorod Republic to "come to me,
   brother, to Moscow." Nine years later, in 1156, Prince Yuriy Dolgorukiy
   of Kiev ordered the construction of a wooden wall, which had to be
   rebuilt multiple times, to surround the emerging Moscow. After the
   sacking of 1237-1238, when the Mongol- Tatars burned the city to the
   ground and killed its inhabitants, Moscow recovered and became the
   capital of an independent principality in 1327. Its favorable position
   on the headwaters of the Volga river contributed to steady expansion.
   Moscow developed into a stable and prosperous principality for many
   years and attracted a large number of refugees from across Russia.

   Under Ivan I the city replaced Tver as capital of Vladimir-Suzdal and
   became the sole collector of taxes for the Mongol- Tatar rulers. By
   paying high tribute, Ivan won an important concession from the Khan.
   Unlike other principalities, Moscow was not divided among his sons but
   was passed intact to his eldest. In 1380, prince Dmitry Donskoy of
   Moscow led a united Russian army to an important victory over the
   Tatars in the Battle of Kulikovo. After that, Moscow took the leading
   role in liberating Russia from Tatar domination. In 1480, Ivan III had
   finally broken the Russians free from Tatar control, allowing Moscow to
   become the centre of power in Russia. The Russian capital, which had
   wandered from Kiev to Vladimir, came to rest in this city by the end of
   his reign, and Moscow became the capital of an empire that would
   eventually encompass all of present-day Russia and parts of other
   lands.

   The 17th century was rich in popular risings, such as the liberation of
   Moscow from the Polish-Lithuanian invaders (1612), the Salt Riot
   (1648), the Copper Riot (1662), and the Moscow Uprising of 1682. The
   city ceased to be Russia's capital in 1712, after the founding of St.
   Petersburg by Peter the Great on the Baltic coast in 1703. When
   Napoleon invaded in 1812, the Muscovites burned the city and evacuated,
   as Napoleon's forces were approaching on September 14. Napoleon's army,
   plagued by hunger, cold, and poor supply lines, was forced to retreat.
   In January 1905, the institution of the City Governor, or Mayor, was
   officially introduced in Moscow, and Alexander Adrianov became Moscow's
   first official mayor. Following the success of the Russian Revolution
   of 1917, on March 12, 1918, Moscow became the capital of the Russian
   Soviet Federative Socialist Republic and the Soviet Union less than
   five years later.
   Kremlin Embankment and Moscow skyline with Cathedral of Christ the
   Saviour on the left and Kremlin on the right
   Enlarge
   Kremlin Embankment and Moscow skyline with Cathedral of Christ the
   Saviour on the left and Kremlin on the right

   During the Great Patriotic War, the Soviet State Committee of Defence
   and the General Staff of the Red Army was located in Moscow. In 1941,
   sixteen divisions of the national volunteers (more than 160,000
   people), twenty-five battalions (18,500 people) and four engineering
   regiments were formed among the Muscovites. In November 1941, German
   Army Group Centre was stopped at the outskirts of the city and then
   driven off in the course of the Battle of Moscow. Many factories were
   evacuated, together with much of the government, and from October 20
   the city was declared to be under siege. Its remaining inhabitants
   built and manned antitank defenses, while the city was bombarded from
   the air. It is of some note that Stalin refused to leave the city,
   meaning the general staff and the council of people's commissars
   remained in the city as well. Despite the siege and the bombings, the
   construction of Moscow's metro system, which began in the early 1930s,
   continued through the war and by the end of the war several new metro
   lines were opened. On May 1, 1944 a medal For the defence of Moscow and
   in 1947 another medal In memory of the 800th anniversary of Moscow were
   instituted. On May 8, 1965 in commemoration of the 20th anniversary of
   the victory in World War II, Moscow was one of twelve Soviet cities
   awarded the title of the Hero City. In 1980, it hosted the Summer
   Olympic Games.

   In 1991 Moscow was the scene of a coup attempt by the government
   members opposed to the reforms of Mikhail Gorbachev. When the USSR was
   dissolved in the same year, Moscow continued to be the capital of
   Russia. Since then, the emergence of a market economy in Moscow has
   produced an explosion of Western-style retailing, services,
   architecture, and lifestyles.

Government

   The districts of Moscow
   Enlarge
   The districts of Moscow

   Moscow is the seat of power for the Russian Federation. At the centre
   of the city, in the Central Administrative Okrug, is the Moscow
   Kremlin, which houses the home of the President of Russia as well as
   many of the facilities for the national government. This includes
   numerous military headquarters and the headquarters of the Moscow
   Military District. Moscow, like with any national capital, is also the
   host of all the foreign embassies and diplomats representing a
   multitude of nations in Russia. On a slightly smaller scale, Moscow is
   located within the Central Federal District, one of the seven federal
   districts of Russia. As result, it falls under the administration of a
   representative appointed by the President of Russia to head the
   district. Moscow is also designated as one of only two federal cities -
   Saint Petersburg being the other - within Russia. Since all Russian
   subjects - republics, provinces, cities, and territories - have two
   representatives within the Federation Council of Russia, the over 10
   million Muscovites are represented by just two people - 1.1% of the
   Council - despite the fact that they account for 7.3% of the total
   population of Russia. Lastly, Moscow is located within the central
   economic region, one of twelve regions within Russia with similar
   economic goals.

   The entire city of Moscow is headed by one mayor (currently Yuriy
   Luzhkov). It is divided into 10 administrative ( okrugs) and 123
   municipal districts. Administrative districts: Zelenogradskiy
   Administrative Okrug (City of Zelenograd in the federal
   classification), Northern Administrative Okrug, North-Eastern
   Administrative Okrug, North-Western Administrative Okrug, Central
   Administrative Okrug, Eastern Administrative Okrug, Southern
   Administrative Okrug, South-Eastern Administrative Okrug, South-Western
   Administrative Okrug, and Western Administrative Okrug. Nine of the ten
   administrative districts, except of Zelenogradskiy, are located within
   City of Moscow main boundaries.

   Each administrative district consists of several municipal districts (
   raions). Each municipal and administrative district has its own coat of
   arms, flag, and elected head official. Additionally, most raions have
   their own cable television, computer network, and official newspaper.
   Along with municipal districts are Territorial Unities with Special
   Status or territories. These usually include areas with small or no
   permanent populations, such as the case with the All-Russia Exhibition
   Centre, the Botanical Garden, large parks, and industrial zones. In
   recent years, some territories have been merged with different raions.
   There are no ethnic-specific raions in Moscow in the manner Chinatowns
   exist in some North American and East Asian cities. And although raions
   are not designated by income, as with most cities, those areas that are
   closer to the city centre, metro stations or green zones are considered
   more prestigious.

   In addition to being the capital of Russia, Moscow is the capital of
   the Moscow Oblast. Since Moscow is a Federal City, it is not actually
   within the oblast. (See List of capitals outside of the territories
   they serve.)

Climate

   Average temperature (red) and precipitations (blue) in Moscow
   Enlarge
   Average temperature (red) and precipitations (blue) in Moscow

   Moscow is exposed to cold winters, warm and mild summers, and very
   brief spring and autumn seasons. Typical high temperatures in the warm
   months of July and August are around 23 °C (68 °F); in the winter,
   temperatures normally drop to approximately -12 °C (10 °F). Monthly
   rainfall totals vary minimally throughout the year, although the
   precipitation levels tend to be higher during the summer than during
   the winter. Due to the significant variation in temperature between the
   winter and summer months as well as the limited fluctuation in
   precipitation levels during the summer, Moscow is considered to be
   within a continental climate zone.

City layout

   The layout of Moscow, from a 1784 map
   Enlarge
   The layout of Moscow, from a 1784 map

   Moscow is situated on the banks of the Moskva River, which flows for
   just over five hundred kilometers through western Russia, in the centre
   of the East-European plain.

   Moscow's road system is centered roughly around the heart of the city,
   the Moscow Kremlin. From there, the roads in general radiate out to
   intersect with a sequence of circular roads or "rings" focused at the
   Kremlin.

   The first and innermost major ring, Bulvarnoye Koltso ( Boulevard
   Ring), was built at the former location of the sixteenth century city
   wall around what used to be called Bely Gorod (White Town). The
   Bulvarnoye Koltso is technically not a ring; it does not form a
   complete circle, but instead a horseshoe-like arc that goes from the
   Cathedral of Christ the Saviour to the Yauza River. In addition, the
   Boulevard Ring changes street names numerous times throughout its
   journey across the city.

   The second primary ring, located outside the Boulevard Ring, is the
   Sadovoye Koltso ( Garden Ring). Like the Boulevard Ring, the Garden
   Ring follows the path of a sixteenth century wall that used to
   encompass part of the city. The third ring, the Third Transport Ring,
   was completed in 2003 as a high-speed freeway. The Fourth Transport
   Ring, another freeway, is currently under construction to further
   reduce traffic congestion. The outermost ring within Moscow is the
   Moscow Automobile Ring Road (often called the MKAD from the Russian
   Московская Кольцевая Автомобильная Дорога), which forms the approximate
   boundary of the city.

   Outside the city, some of the roads encompassing the city continue to
   follow this circular pattern seen inside city limits.

Architecture

   Ostankino Tower - the tallest free-standing structure in Eurasia
   Enlarge
   Ostankino Tower - the tallest free-standing structure in Eurasia

   For a long time the view of the city was dominated by numerous orthodox
   churches. The look of the city changed drastically during Soviet times,
   mostly due to Joseph Stalin, who oversaw a large-scale effort to
   modernize the city. He introduced broad avenues and roadways, some of
   them over ten lanes wide, but he also destroyed a great number of
   historically significant architectural works. The Sukharev Tower, as
   well as numerous mansions and stores lining the major streets, and
   various works of religious architecture, such as the Kazan Cathedral
   and the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour, were all destroyed during
   Stalin's rule. During the 1990s, however, both the latter were rebuilt.

   Architect Vladimir Shukhov was responsible for building several of
   Moscow's landmarks during early Soviet Russia. The Shukhov Tower, just
   one of many hyperboloid towers designed by Shukhov, was built between
   1919 and 1922 as a transmission tower for a Russian broadcasting
   company. Shukhov also left a lasting legacy to the Constructivist
   architecture of early Soviet Russia. He designed spacious elongated
   shop galleries, most notably the Upper Trade Rows (GUM) on Red Square,
   bridged with innovative metal-and-glass vaults.

   Stalin, however, is also credited with building the The Seven Sisters,
   comprising seven, cathedral-like structures. A defining feature of
   Moscow's skyline, their imposing form was allegedly inspired by the
   Municipal Building in New York, and their style - with intricate
   exteriors and a large central spire - has been described as Stalinist
   gothic architecture. All seven towers can be seen from most elevations
   in the city; they are among the tallest constructions in central Moscow
   apart from the Ostankino Tower which, when it was completed in 1967,
   was the tallest free-standing land structure in the world and today
   remains the world's second-tallest. The Soviet policy of providing
   mandatory housing for every citizen or their family, and the rapid
   growth of the Muscovite population in Soviet times, also led to the
   construction of large, monotonous housing blocks, which can often be
   differentiated by age, sturdiness of construction, or 'style' according
   to the neighbourhood and the materials used. Most of these date from
   the post-Stalin era and the styles are often named after the leader
   then in power - Brezhnev, Khrushchev, etc - and they are usually
   ill-maintained. The Stalinist-era constructions, usually in the central
   city, are massive and usually ornamented with Socialist realism motifs
   that imitate classical themes. However, small churches - almost always
   Eastern Orthodox - that hint on the city's past still dot various parts
   of the city. The Old Arbat, a popular tourist street that was once the
   heart of a bohemian area, preserves most of its buildings from prior to
   the twentieth century. Many buildings found off the main streets of the
   inner city (behind the Stalinist façades of Tverskaya Street, for
   example) are also examples of the bourgeois decadence in Tsarist times.
   Ostankino, Kuskovo, Uzkoye and other large estates just outside Moscow
   originally belong to nobles from the Tsarist era, and some convents and
   monasteries, both inside and outside the city, are open to Muscovites
   and tourists.

   Attempts are being made to restore many of the city's best-kept
   examples of pre-Soviet architecture. These revamped structures are
   easily spotted by their bright new colours and spotless facades. There
   are a few examples of notable, early Soviet avant-garde work too, such
   as the house of the architect Konstantin Melnikov in the Arbat area.
   Later examples of interesting Soviet architecture are usually marked by
   their impressive size and the semi- Modernist styles employed, such as
   with the Novy Arbat project, familiarly known as "false teeth of
   Moscow" and notorious for the wide-scale disruption of a historic area
   in the Moscow downtown involved in the project.

   Like in London, but on a broader scale, plaques on the house exteriors
   will inform passers-by that a well-known personality once lived there.
   Frequently the plaques are dedicated to Soviet celebrities not
   well-known to the outside world. There are also many 'house-museums' of
   famous Russian writers, composers, and artists in the city.

Views of Moscow

   Presidium of Russian Academy of Sciences.

   Moscow International House of Music and Swissotel Krasnye Holmy.

   Paveletsky Tower Business centre.

   Triumphal arch on Kutuzov Avenue, dedicated to victory over Napoleon's
   army.

   Bogdan Khmelnitsky Bridge.

   Riverside building.

   Old Andreevsky Bridge.

   Cathedral of Christ the Saviour

   Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Borodinsky Bridge

   Moscow International Business Centre, Tower 2000.

   Square of Europe

   Winter Moscow at night, view on IBC.

   Riverside Towers business centre, which includes offices of
   PricewaterhouseCoopers

   Moscow monorail

   Stalinist Skyscraper at Kotelnicheskaya Embankment.

   "Friendship of Peoples" fountain in All-Russia Exhibition Centre

Culture

Museums and galleries

   The Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts
   Enlarge
   The Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts

   Many of Moscow's museums and galleries have collections that can be
   compared to those of the best museums of Western Europe and North
   America. Frequent art exhibitions thrive on both the new and the
   classic, as they once did in pre- Revolutionary times, and are derived
   from diverse branches of the arts - painting, photography, and
   sculpture.

   One of the most notable art museums in Moscow is the Tretyakov Gallery,
   which was founded by Pavel Tretyakov, a wealthy patron of the arts who
   donated a large private collection to the city. Currently the Tretyakov
   Gallery is split into two buildings. The Old Tretyakov, the original
   gallery in the Tretyakovskaya area on the south bank of the Moskva
   River, houses the works of the classic Russian tradition. The works of
   famous pre- Revolutionary painters, such as Ilya Repin, as well as the
   works of early Russian icon painters can be found in the Old Tretyakov
   Gallery. Visitors can even see rare originals by early-fifteenth
   century iconographer Andrei Rublev. The New Tretyakov, created in
   Soviet times, mainly contains the works of Soviet artists, as well as
   of a few contemporary artists, but there is some overlap with the Old
   Tretyakov Gallery for early twentieth century art. The new gallery
   includes a small reconstruction of Vladimir Tatlin's famous Monument to
   the Third International and a mixture of other avant-garde works by
   artists like Kazimir Malevich and Wassily Kandinsky. Socialist realism
   features can also be find within the halls of the New Tretyakov
   Gallery.
   Tretyakov Gallery
   Enlarge
   Tretyakov Gallery

   Another art museum in the city of Moscow is the Pushkin Museum of Fine
   Arts, which was founded by, among others, Marina Tsvetaeva's father.
   The Pushkin Museum is similar to the British Museum in London in that
   its halls are a cross-section of world civilizations, with many plaster
   casts of ancient sculptures. However, it also hosts famous paintings
   from every major Western era of art; works by Claude Monet, Paul
   Cézanne, and Pablo Picasso are all sampled there.

   The State Historical Museum of Russia (Государственный Исторический
   музей) is a museum of Russian history wedged between Red Square and
   Manege Square in Moscow. Its exhibitions range from relics of the
   prehistoric tribes inhabiting present-day Russia, through priceless
   artworks acquired by members of the Romanov dynasty. The total number
   of objects in the museum's collection numbers in the millions. The
   Polytechnical Museum, founded in 1872 is the largest technical museum
   in Russia, offering a wide array of historical inventions and
   technological achievements, including humanoid automata of the 18th
   century and the first Soviet computers. Its collection contains more
   than 160,000 items. The Borodino Panorama museum located on Kutuzov
   Avenue provides an opportunity for visitors to experience being on a
   battlefield with a 360° diorama. It is a part of the large historical
   memorial commemorating the victory in the Patriotic War of 1812 over
   Napoleon's army, that includes also the Triumphal arch erected in 1827.

Theatres and other performing arts

   Bolshoi theater
   Enlarge
   Bolshoi theatre

   Moscow is also the heart of Russian performing arts, including ballet
   and film. There are ninety-three theaters, 132 cinemas and twenty-four
   concert-halls in Moscow.

   Among Moscow's many theatres and ballet studios is the Bolshoi Theatre
   and the Malyi Theatre as well as Vakhtangov Theatre and Moscow Art
   Theatre. The repertories in a typical Moscow season are exhaustive and
   modern interpretations of classic works, whether operatic or
   theatrical, are quite common. State Central Concert Hall Rossia ,
   famous for ballet and estrade performances, is the place of frequent
   concerts of pop-stars such as Alla Pugacheva and is situated in the
   soon to be demolished building of Hotel Rossiya, the largest hotel in
   Europe.
   Bolshoi Theatre during an April 2005 performance
   Enlarge
   Bolshoi Theatre during an April 2005 performance

   Moscow International Performance Arts Centre, opened in 2003, also
   known as Moscow International House of Music, is known for its
   performances in classical music. It also has the largest organ in
   Russia installed in Svetlanov hall.

   There are also two large circuses in Moscow: Moscow State Circus and
   Moscow Circus on Tsvetnoy Boulevard named after Yuri Nikulin.

   Soviet films are integral to film history and the Mosfilm studio was at
   the heart of many Soviet classic films as it is responsible for both
   artistic and mainstream productions. . However, despite the continued
   presence and reputation of internationally-renowned Russian filmmakers,
   the once prolific native studios are much quieter. Rare and historical
   films may be seen in Salut cinema where films from the Museum of Cinema
   collection are shown regularly.

Parks and landmarks

   There are 96 parks and 18 gardens in Moscow, including 4 botanical
   gardens. There are also 450 square kilometres of green zones besides
   100 square kilometres of forests . Moscow is a very green city if
   compared to other cities of comparable size in Western Europe and
   America. There are average 27 square meters of parks per person in
   Moscow compared with 6 for Paris, 7.5 in London and 8.6 in New York.

   The Central Park of Culture and Rest named after Maxim Gorky founded in
   1928. The main part with area of 689,000 square metres along the Moskva
   river contains estrades, children attractions, including the
   Observation Wheel water ponds with boats and water bicycles, dancings,
   tennis courts and other sport facilities. It borders the Neskuchniy
   Garden with area of 408,000 square metres — the oldest park in Moscow,
   and a former Emperor's residence, created as a result of intergration
   of three estates of XVIII century, which contains also the Green
   Theatre, one of the largest open aphiteaters in Europe, able to contain
   up to 15 thousand people .

   Izmaylovsky Park created in 1931 is one of the largest parks in the
   world. Its area of 15.34 km² is 6 times greater than that of Central
   Park in New York.

   Sokolniki park, which got its name for famous falcon huntings occurred
   here in the past, is one of the oldest in Moscow and with area of 6
   square kilometres four times greather than London's Hyde Park. From a
   central circle with a large fountain radiate birch, maple and elm
   alleys. Farther, after the Deer ponds, there is a labirint, composed of
   green paths.

   Losiny Ostrov National Park (literally - "Elk Island"), bordering the
   Sokolniki park, with total area of more than 116 km² is the first
   national park of Russia, located in Moscow and Moscow Oblast. It is
   presumed to be the largest forest in a city of comparable size. It is
   also known as the "city taiga", where living elks can be met.

   Tsytsin Main Moscow Botanical Garden of Academy of Sciences, founded in
   1945 is the largest in Europe . It covers territory of 3.61 km²
   bordering the All-Russian Exhibition Centre and contains a live
   exhibition of more than 20 thousand of different species of plants from
   different parts of the world as well as scientific research laboratory.
   It also contains a rosarium with 20 thousand rose bushes, dendrarium
   and an oak forest with average age of trees exceeding 100 years as well
   as a greenhouse on more than 5000 square meters.

   Lilac park founded in 1958 is known for its permanent sculpture
   exposition and a large rosarium.

   Moscow has always been a popular destination for tourists. Some of the
   better known attractions include the city's UNESCO World Heritage Site,
   Moscow Kremlin and Red Square, which was built between the 14th and
   17th centuries. Kolomenskoye is another popular attraction with its
   UNESCO World Heritage Site, the Church of the Ascension, which dates
   from 1532.

   Other popular attractions include the Moscow Zoo, home to nearly a
   thousands species and more than 6,500 specimens. Each year, the zoo
   attracts more than 1.2 million adult visitors. The long days will also
   afford one more time to cover the immense wealth of historical,
   cultural or simply popular sites in Moscow.

Moscow tourist attractions

   Bolshoi Theatre | Kolomenskoye | Kremlin | Poklonnaya Hill | Kuskovo |
   Manege | Europe's tallest tower | Shukhov Tower | Stalinist skyscrapers
   | Ostankino Palace | Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts | Red Square with
   Lenin's mausoleum, Monument to Minin and Pozharsky, and Lobnoye Mesto |
   Saint Basil's Cathedral | Novodevichy Convent | Donskoy Monastery |
   Komsomolskaya Square | Simonov Monastery | Red Gate | Bolshoi Kamennyi
   Bridge | Cathedral of Christ the Saviour | State Tretyakov Gallery |
   All-Russian Exhibition Centre | Alexander Garden | Moscow Zoo |
   Patriarch's Ponds | Moscow State University | Krutitsy | Elokhovo
   Cathedral | Nativity Church in Putinki | Menshikov Tower | Iberian Gate
   and Chapel | Kazan Cathedral | Church of the Intercession at Fili |
   Gostiny Dvor | Tretyakov Drive | GUM | State Historical Museum | Moscow
   City Hall | White House, Moscow | All-Russia Exhibition Centre and
   Monument to the Conquerors of Space| Melnikov Mansion | Old Arbat |
   Moscow Metro | Moscow-City | Uzkoye

Sports

   Moscow is home to more Olympic champions than any other city in the
   world. It was the host city of the 1980 Summer Olympics, although the
   yachting events were held at Tallinn, in present-day Estonia. Large
   athletic facilities and the main international airport, Sheremetyevo
   Terminal 2, were built in preparation for the 1980 Summer Olympics.
   Moscow had also made a bid for the 2012 Summer Olympics. However, when
   final voting commenced on July 6, 2005, Moscow was the first city to be
   eliminated from further rounds. The Games were finally awarded to
   London.

   Moscow is home to sixty-three stadiums (besides eight football and
   eleven light athletics maneges), of which Luzhniki Stadium is the
   largest and the 4th biggest in Europe. Forty other sport complexes are
   located within the city, including twenty-four with artificial ice.
   There are also seven horse racing tracks in Moscow, of which Central
   Moscow Hippodrome, founded in 1834, is the largest.
   Grand Sport Arena of Luzhniki Stadium as seen from Sparrow Hills
   Enlarge
   Grand Sport Arena of Luzhniki Stadium as seen from Sparrow Hills

   Football is probably the most popular spectator sport among the young,
   followed by ice hockey. Clubs such as Dynamo, CSKA, Lokomotiv, Spartak
   and Zenit Saint Petersburg are prominent on the European stage.

   Because of Moscow's cold locale, winter sports have a large following
   as well. Many of Moscow's large parks offer marked trails for skiers
   and frozen ponds and canals for skaters.

   Moscow also hosts the annual Kremlin Cup, a popular tennis tournament
   on both the WTA and ATP tours. In 2006 the event is to be held from the
   9th-15th October on both the women and men's tennis tour. It is
   regarded as a very prestigious tournament and is one of the ten Tier-I
   events on the womens' tour and a host of Russian players feature every
   year.

Leisure and entertainment

   There is a vibrant night life in Moscow. The major and one of the most
   popular nightlife areas is around Tverskaya Street. The southern part
   of Tverskaya Street near the Manege Square and the Red Square area is
   known as an area with many expensive, luxurious bars and restaurants,
   and is considered being a playground for New Russians and celebrities.
   Tverskaya Street is also one of the busiest shopping streets in Moscow.
   The adjoining Tretyakovsky Proyezd, also south of Tverskaya Street, in
   Kitai-gorod is one of the most expensive shopping streets in Europe .
   Many prestigeous night clubs and casinos, such as Metelitsa located
   along Noviy Arbat street. There also many other different night clubs
   of various ideology including those for gays, lesbians and bisexuals.

Education

   Moscow State University at Sparrow Hills.
   Enlarge
   Moscow State University at Sparrow Hills.

   There are 1696 high schools in Moscow, as well as 91 colleges. Besides
   these, there are 222 institutions offering higher education in Moscow,
   including 60 state universities and the Lomonosov Moscow State
   University, which was founded in 1755. The university main building
   located in Vorobyovy Gory ( Sparrow Hills) is 240-meter-tall and when
   completed, was the tallest building outside the United States. The
   university has over 30,000 undergraduate and 7,000 postgraduate
   students, who have a choice of twenty-nine faculties and 450
   departments for study. Additionally, approximately 10,000 high school
   students take courses at the university, while over two thousand
   researchers work. The Moscow State University library contains over
   nine million books, making it one of the largest libraries in all of
   Russia. Its acclaim throughout the international academic community has
   meant that over 11,000 international students have graduated from the
   university, with many coming to Moscow to learn the Russian language.

   Bauman Moscow State Technical University, founded in 1830, is located
   in the centre of Moscow and provides more than 18,000 undergraduate and
   1,000 postgraduate students with an education in science and
   engineering offering a wide range of technical degrees. Since it opened
   enrollment to students from outside Russia in 1991, Bauman Moscow State
   Technical University has increased its international enrollment to up
   to two hundred.

   The Moscow Conservatory, founded in 1866 is a prominent music school in
   Russia, whose graduates included Sergey Rachmaninoff, Alexander
   Scriabin, Aram Khachaturian, Mstislav Rostropovich, and Alfred
   Schnittke.

   The Gerasimov All-Russian State Institute of Cinematography,
   abbreviated as VGIK, is the world's oldest educational institution in
   Cinematography, founded by Vladimir Gardin in 1919. Sergei Eisenstein,
   Vsevolod Pudovkin, and Aleksey Batalov were among its most
   distinguished professors and Mikhail Vartanov, Sergei Parajanov, Andrey
   Tarkovsky, Nikita Mikhalkov, Eldar Ryazanov, Aleksandr Sokurov, Yuriy
   Norshteyn, Alexandr Petrov, Vasily Shukshin, Konrad Wolf among
   graduates.

   Moscow State Institute of International Relations, founded in 1944,
   remains Russia's best known school of international relations and
   diplomacy, with six different schools focused on international
   relations. Approximately 4,500 students make up the university's
   student body and over 700,000 Russian and foreign-language books - of
   which 20,000 are considered rare - can be found in the library of the
   Moscow State Institute of International Relations.

   Anmong other prominent institutions are the Moscow Institute of Physics
   and Technology, also known as Phystech, Moscow Aviation Institute and
   the Moscow Engineering Physics Institute. Moscow Institute of Physics
   and Technology has taught numerous Noble Prize winners, including Pyotr
   Kapitsa, Nikolay Semyonov, Lev Landau and Alexandr Prokhorov, while the
   Moscow Engineering Physics Institute is known for its research in
   nuclear physics. Other institutions, such as the Financial Academy, the
   State University of Management, the Plekhanov Academy of Economics and
   the Higher School of Economics offer degrees in management and economic
   theory. Several Moscow institutions have divisions in other regions and
   countries around the world, including Russian neighbour Mongolia.

   Although Moscow has a number of famous Soviet-era higher educational
   institutions, most of which are more oriented towards engineering or
   the fundamental science, in recent years Moscow has seen a significant
   growth in the number of commercial and private institutions that offer
   classes in business and management. Many state institutions have
   expanded their education scope and increased their student enrollments.
   Institutions in Moscow, as well as the rest of post-Soviet Russia, have
   begun to offer new international certificates and postgraduate degrees,
   including the Master of Business Administration. Student exchange
   programs with different (especially, European) countries also have
   become widespread in Moscow's universities, while many schools within
   the Russian capital will also offer seminars, lectures, and courses for
   corporate employees and businessmen.

Science and research

   The headquarters of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow
   Enlarge
   The headquarters of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow

   Moscow is known as one of the most important science centers in Russia.
   The headquarters of the Russian Academy of Sciences are located in
   Moscow as well as numerous research and applied science institutions.

   The Kurchatov Institute, Russia's leading research and development
   institution in the field of nuclear energy, where the first nuclear
   reactor in Europe was built, Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics,
   Institute for Theoretical and Experimental Physics, Kapitza Institute
   for Physical Problems and Steklov Institute of Mathematics are all
   situated in Moscow.

   There are 452 libraries in the city, including 168 for children. The
   Russian State Library, founded in 1862 is the national library of
   Russia. The Russian State Library is home to over 275 kilometers of
   shelves and forty-two million items, including over seventeen million
   books and serial volumes, thirteen million journals, 350,000 music
   scores and sound records, and 150,000 maps, making it the largest
   library in Russia and one of the largest in the world. Items in 247
   different languages comprise approximately twenty-nine percent of the
   collection.

   The State Public Historical Library, founded in 1863 is the largest
   library, specializing in Russian history. Its collection contains four
   million items in 112 languages (including 47 languages of the former
   USSR), mostly on Russian and world history, heraldry, numismatics, and
   the history of science.

Transport

Intercity transport

   There are five airports serving Moscow: Sheremetyevo International
   Airport, Domodedovo International Airport, Bykovo Airport, Ostafievo
   International Airport and Vnukovo International Airport. Sheremetyevo
   International Airport is the most common entry point for foreign
   passengers (as it handles sixty percent of all international flights)
   although other airports also serve the city of Moscow, particularly
   with flights within Russia and to and from states from the former
   Soviet Union. Domodedovo International Airport is the leading airport
   in Russia in terms of passenger throughput. Moscow's airports are at
   different distances from the city centre; Bykovo Airport is the
   farthest of the five, located 35 kilometers (21 miles) from the city
   centre and Ostafievo airport is the nearest.

   Likewise, Moscow employs several train stations to serve the city. All
   of Moscow's nine rail terminals (or vokzals) - Belorusskiy Rail
   Terminal, Kazanskiy Rail Terminal, Kievskiy Rail Terminal, Kurskiy Rail
   Terminal, Leningradskiy Rail Terminal, Paveletskiy Rail Terminal,
   Rizhskiy Rail Terminal, Savyolovskiy Rail Terminal, and Yaroslavlskiy
   Rail Terminal - are located close to the city centre, but they each
   handle trains from different parts of Europe and Asia. There are also
   many smaller railway stations in Moscow. As trains are relatively
   cheap, they are the mode of preference for travelling Russians,
   especially when departing to Saint Petersburg, Russia's second-largest
   city. Moscow is also the western terminus of the Trans-Siberian
   Railway, which traverses nearly 9300 kilometers of territory to
   Vladivostok.

   Moscow also has two passenger river terminials ( South River Terminal
   and North River Terminal or Rechnoy vokzal) and regular motorship
   routes and cruises along Moskva and Oka rivers used mostly for
   entertainment. North river terminal, built in 1937 is also the main hub
   for long-lange river routes. There are also three freight ports serving
   Moscow. Besides this Moscow has a bus terminal for long-range and
   intercity passenger buses ( Moscow Avtovokzal) with daily overturn of
   about 25 thousand passengers serving about 40% of long-range bus routes
   in Moscow.

Local transport

   Local transport includes the Moscow Metro, a metro system famous for
   its art, murals, mosaics, and ornate chandeliers. When it first opened
   in 1935, the system had just one line. But today, the Moscow Metro
   contains twelve lines, mostly underground with a total of 172 stations.
   Park Pobedy ("Victory Park"), completed in 2003, is the deepest metro
   station in the world, which also contains the longest escalators in
   Europe. The Moscow Metro is one of world's busiest metro system,
   serving more than seven million passengers daily. There is also a
   monorail line, operated by the same company. Facing serious
   transportation problems Moscow has wide plans of expansion of Moscow
   Metro.
   Moscow Monorail
   Enlarge
   Moscow Monorail

   As Metro stations outside the city centre are far apart in comparison
   to other cities, up to four kilometers, an extensive bus network
   radiates from each station to the surrounding residential zones.
   Suburbs and satellite cities also connected by commuter electric rail
   network. The buses are very frequent, often more than one a minute.
   Every large street in the city is served by at least one bus route.
   There are also extensive tram and trolleybus networks.

   There are over 2.6 million cars in the city on a daily basis. Recent
   years have seen explosive growth in the number of cars, which have
   caused traffic jams and the lack of parking space to become major
   problems.

   The MKAD, along with the Third Transport Ring and the future Fourth
   Transport Ring, is one of only three freeways that run within Moscow
   city limits. However, as one can easily observe from a map of Moscow
   area, there are several other roadway systems that form concentric
   circles around the city.

Economy

   In 2006, Mercer Management Consulting named Moscow the world's most
   expensive city, ahead of perennial winner Tokyo, due to the stable
   Russian ruble as well as increasing housing prices within the city.
   Some prices are considerably higher for the foreign visitor than for
   locals. For locals, small apartments bought or given by the state in
   the Soviet era, coupled with extremely low utility costs and easily
   avoidable income tax serve to lower the cost of living greatly.

Business and Trade

   A significant portion of Russia's profits and development is
   concentrated in Moscow as many multi-national corporations have
   branches and offices in the city. The plush offices and the lifestyles
   of the typical corporate employee in Moscow are often indistinguishable
   from any other Western European city, although the average salary for
   the Muscovite is lower. Since the Russian financial crisis in late
   1998, various business sectors in Moscow have shown exponential rates
   of growth. Many new business centers and office buildings have been
   built in recent years, but Moscow still experiences shortages in office
   space. As a result, many former industrial and research facilities are
   being reconstructed to become suitable for office use.

   However, while the overall stability has improved in the recent years,
   crime and corruption continue to remain a problem hindering business
   development. The Mafia also runs extortion rackets in most parts of the
   city, though there are no reliable data to understand how large their
   influence is.

   The Cherkizovskiy marketplace, controlled by the Azeri diaspora is the
   largest marketplace in Europe with daily turnover of about thirty
   million dollars and about ten thousand sellers from different countries
   (including the China, Turkey, Azerbaijan and India). It is
   administratively divided into twelve parts and covers a wide sector of
   the city.

   Moscow is one of the top cities in the world for billionaires; in 2006,
   Forbes ranked Moscow second in highest number of billionaires,
   surpassed only by New York City. In 2004, Russia's thirty-six
   billionaires (of whom only three did not live in Moscow) held the
   equivalent of twenty-four precent of Russia's gross domestic product.
   The nouveau-riche, also called the "New Russians", often pejoratively,
   have a reputation for flaunting their wealth; the avenues for doing so,
   and subtly, have also increased in recent times - a sense of fashion
   and self-consciousness has instilled itself through the many haute
   couture and haute-cuisine spots in Moscow.

Industry

   Primary industries in Moscow include the chemical, metallurgy, food,
   textile, furniture, and machinery industries.

   The Mil Moscow Helicopter Plant is one of the leading producers of
   military and civil helicopters in the world. Automobile plants ZiL and
   AZLK, as well as the Voitovich Rail Vehicle plant, are situated in
   Moscow. The Poljot Moscow watch factory produces reliable military,
   professional and sport watches well known in Russia and abroad. The
   Kristall distillery is the oldest distellery in Russia producing
   various vodka types, including " Stolichnaya" while a wide assortment
   of wines are produced at several Moscow wine plants, including Moscow
   Interrepublican Vinery. The Moscow Jewelry Factory and the Jewellerprom
   are important producers of jewelry in Russia; Jewellerprom used to
   produce the famous and exclusive Order of Victory, awarded to those
   aiding the Soviet Union's Red Army during World War II. There are also
   many other industries located just outside the city of Moscow, as well
   as many microelectronic industries in Zelenograd.

   Despite the economic growth experienced in Moscow since the dawn of the
   twenty-first century, many industries have undergone various crises in
   recent years. Some of them has been sold to foreign investors, such as
   OTIS and British American Tobacco, and others have been closed down to
   make for new buildings constructed as business centers. Additionally,
   some industry is now being transferred out of Moscow to improve the
   ecological state of the city. Nevertheless, the city of Moscow remains
   one of Russia's major industrial centers.

Living costs

   Triumph-Palace building, built in 2005, the tallest building in Europe
   (second place holds Commerzbank Tower in Frankfurt) is just one of many
   prestigious residential complexes
   Enlarge
   Triumph-Palace building, built in 2005, the tallest building in Europe
   (second place holds Commerzbank Tower in Frankfurt) is just one of many
   prestigious residential complexes

   During Soviet times apartments were lent to people by the government
   according to the square meters-per-person norm (some groups, including
   people's artists, heroes and prominent scientists had bonuses according
   to their honours). Private ownership of apartments was limited until
   1990, when people were permitted to secure property rights to the
   places they inhabited. Since the Soviet era, estate owners have had to
   pay the service charge for their residences, a fixed amount based on
   persons per living area. Due to the current economic situation, the
   price of real estate in Moscow continues to rise. Today, one could
   expect to pay $3800 in average per square meter in the outskirts of the
   city or $6000-$7000 per square meter in a prestigious district. The
   price sometimes may exceed $40000 per square meter in a flat. A typical
   one-bedroom apartment is about thirty square meters, a typical
   two-bedroom apartment is forty-five square meters, and a typical
   three-bedroom apartment is seventy square meters. Many cannot move out
   of their apartments, especially if a family lives in a two-room
   apartment originally granted by the state during the Soviet era. Some
   city residents have attempted to cope with the cost of living by
   renting their apartments while staying in dachas (country house)
   outside the city.

Employment

   As of 2006, there are 8.47 million Muscovites able to work. 1.73
   million are employed by the state, 4.42 million are employed by private
   companies, and 1.99 million are employed by small businesses. There are
   74,400 officially registered unemployed working age adults, of which
   34,400 are eligible for unemployment benefits.

Future development

Moscow-City

   Moscow-City or Moscow International Business Centre is a projected part
   of central Moscow. Geographically situated in Presnya, located at the
   Third Ring, the Moscow-City area is currently under intense
   development.

   The goal of MIBC "Moscow-City" is to create the first in Russia, and in
   all of Eastern Europe, a zone that will combine business activity,
   living space and entertainment. It will be a city within a city. The
   project was conceived by the Moscow government in 1992.

   The construction of MIBC "Moscow-City" takes place on the
   Krasnopresnenskaya embankment. The whole project takes up 1 square
   kilometre. This territory is the only spot in downtown Moscow that can
   accommodate a project of this magnitude. Today, most of the buildings
   there are old factories and industrial complexes.

   At its final stage it will incorporate the highest building in the
   world, the Russia Tower, an aquapark and other recreational facilities,
   trade and entertainment complexes, numerous prestigeous office and
   residential buildings, Wedding Palace, the transport node and the new
   site of the Moscow government. A construction of four new metro
   stations in the territory already completed, of which two opened and
   two other reserved for future metro lines crossing MIBC, and besides
   these, some other stations were planned. A rail shuttle service,
   directly connecting MIBC with Sheremetyevo Airport is also planned.

   The Federation Tower, now being built is to be the completed by 2007,
   will become the tallest building in Europe when completed.

Other projects

Demographics

   Residential apartments in Strogino
   Enlarge
   Residential apartments in Strogino

   The population of Russia has been declining by about 700,000 persons
   per year since the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 due to low birth
   rates and increase in mortality, and Moscow is not entirely immune to
   these effects. In 2003, the number of deaths within the city exceeded
   the number of births by approximately 49,400. Birth rates at the onset
   of the twenty-first century were on the rise, but the average age of
   the Moscow's population has continued to increase. In 2004, there were
   more than twice as many Muscovites over 55 years old than there were
   Muscovites under 14 years old. However, large migration numbers still
   enable the city to overcome the effects of this system. These new
   Muscovites are attracted by the local economic growth, which contrasts
   to the stagnation or even decline in most of Russia as a result of
   sharp polarization of the country in recent years. In order to help
   regulate the population size within the city, Moscow has an internal
   passport system that prohibits non-city residents from staying in the
   capital for more than ninety days without registration.

   The city is home to small numbers of people of many racial and cultural
   groups, from African students to Irish business people. In 2002,
   Moscow's ethnic composition was 84.8% Russian, 2.4% Ukrainian, 1.6%
   Tatar, 1.2% Armenian, 0.9% Azerbaijani 0.8% Jewish, 0.6% Belarusian,
   0.5% Georgian, and 7.2% other ethnicities.

Real Estate and Neighbourhoods

   The Moscow real estate has been increasing a lot the latest years.
   Following are some of the most expensive neighbourhoods in order:
   Patriarch’s Ponds is the most expensive and luxurious neighbourhood
   within the Garden Ring. The neighbourhood is located in the centre of
   Moscow, between the Boulevard Ring and the Garden Ring, but is still
   pretty quiet. It is also home to a number of embassies that gives the
   neighbourhood a higher security status.
   Another prestigious neighbourhood is Arbat named after Arbat Street,
   one of the oldest streets in Moscow and a major tourist attraction with
   souvenirs, restaurants, art shops and musicians. Arbat is also home to
   a number of embassies.
   Kropotkinskaya is a prestigious neighbourhood located along the
   Prechistenka Street and the Moskva River. The neighbourhood is home to
   the most of the embassies in Moscow. It is also home to the Pushkin Art
   Museum and the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour.
   Tverskaya Street and its surrounding streets like Tretyakov Drive,
   Stoleshnikov Lane, Tverskoy Boulevard and the Theatre Square are home
   to luxury hotels and expensive boutiques. Tverskaya Street is located
   next to the Red Square and Kremlin and is the busiest shopping street
   in Moscow. It is called the main street and has existed since the 12th
   century. The street is named after Tver, as it’s heading to that
   direction.
   Clean Ponds is located along the Clean Ponds Boulevard on the Boulevard
   Ring. The prestigious neighbourhood is home to many pre-revolutionary
   buildings, medieval churches, and embassies.
   Zamoskvorechye means beyond the Moskva River. The area is very popular
   among the French community as the neighbourhood is home to the French
   embassy. The neighbourhood is also home to the famous Tretyakov
   Gallery.
   Krasnaya Presnya is one of the more modern neighbourhoods in Moscow, as
   it was reconstructed in the 1990s. It is now a more fashionable area
   than it was before and home to embassies and the Moscow Zoo.

Crime

   Sports team fan violence has become a serious problem when
   international teams play in Moscow. In 2002, a dozen Irish fans in
   Moscow for a Russia-Ireland game were attacked by neo-Nazi groups. One
   later died of his injuries. That same year, when a Russia-Japan World
   Cup match, played in Japan but broadcast live to the crowds in Pushkin
   Square, went badly for the Russians, the crowd turned violent and
   wrought havoc in the centre of the city, breaking windows, smashing and
   burning cars and looting several shops. Four Japanese students were
   beaten and more than one hundred people were injured in the violence
   following the game.

   As with many cities in the world, international terrorism is a threat
   in Moscow. On February 6, 2004 a bomb explosion in a subway car near
   the Avtozavodskaya metro station killed at least 40 and injured many.
   Other prominent acts of terror include the destruction of two apartment
   buildings in September 1999 (see Russian Apartment Bombings), an
   explosion in the pedestrian subway under the Pushkinskaya square in
   August 2000, and the capture of the theatre at Dubrovka in October
   2002.

Sister cities

     * Armenia Yerevan, Armenia
     * United Kingdom London, United Kingdom

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moscow"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
