   #copyright

Mozambique

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Countries;
Countries

   SOS Children works in Mozambique. For more information see SOS Children
   in Mozambique, Africa
                         República de Moçambique
   Republic of Mozambique

   Flag of Mozambique Coat of arms of Mozambique
   Flag               Coat of arms
   Motto: none
   Anthem: Pátria Amada
   (formerly Viva, Viva a FRELIMO)
   Location of Mozambique
   Capital
   (and largest city)    Maputo
                         25°57′S 32°35′E
    Official languages   Portuguese
   Government            Republic
    - President          Armando Guebuza
    - Prime Minister     Luísa Diogo
       Independence
    - from Portugal      June 25, 1975
                                   Area
    - Total              801,590 km² ( 35th)
                         309,496 sq mi
    - Water (%)          2.2
                                Population
    - July 2005 estimate 19,792,000^1 ( 54th)
    - 1997 census        16,099,246
    - Density            25/km² ( 178th)
                         65/sq mi
        GDP ( PPP)       2005 estimate
    - Total              $27.013 billion ( 100th)
    - Per capita         $1,389 ( 158th)
        HDI  (2004)      0.390 (low) ( 168th)
         Currency        Mozambican metical (Mt) ( MZM)
         Time zone       CAT ( UTC+2)
    - Summer ( DST)      not observed ( UTC+2)
       Internet TLD      .mz
       Calling code      +258
   ^1 Estimates for this country explicitly take into account the effects
   of excess mortality due to AIDS; this can result in lower life
   expectancy, higher infant mortality and death rates, lower population
   and growth rates, and changes in the distribution of population by age
   and sex than would otherwise be expected.

   Mozambique, officially the Republic of Mozambique (Portuguese:
   Moçambique or República de Moçambique, pron. IPA: [ʁɛ'publikɐ dɨ
   musɐ̃'bikɨ]), is a country in southeastern Africa bordering to the
   Indian Ocean in the east, Tanzania in the north, Malawi and Zambia in
   the northwest, Zimbabwe in the west and Swaziland and South Africa in
   the southwest. It is a member of the Community of Portuguese Language
   Countries and the Commonwealth of Nations.

History

   Mozambique's first inhabitants were San hunters and gatherers,
   ancestors of the Khoisani peoples. Between the first and fourth
   centuries AD, waves of Bantu-speaking peoples migrated from the west
   and north through the Zambezi River valley and then gradually into the
   plateau and coastal areas. The Bantu were farmers and ironworkers.
   Ilha de Moçambique was first discovered by Europeans in the late 1400s.
   Enlarge
   Ilha de Moçambique was first discovered by Europeans in the late 1400s.

   When Portuguese explorers reached Mozambique in 1498, Arab commercial
   and slave trading settlements had existed along the coast and outlying
   islands for several centuries. From about 1500, Portuguese trading
   posts and forts became regular ports of call on the new route to the
   east. Later, traders and prospectors penetrated the interior regions
   seeking gold and slaves. Although Portuguese influence gradually
   expanded, its power was limited and exercised through individual
   settlers and officials who were granted extensive autonomy. As a
   result, investment lagged while Lisbon devoted itself to the more
   lucrative trade with India and the Far East and to the colonization of
   Brazil.

   By the early twentieth century the Portuguese had shifted the
   administration of much of Mozambique to large private companies, like
   the Mozambique Company, the Zambezi Company and the Niassa Company,
   controlled and financed mostly by the British, which established
   railroad lines to neighboring countries and supplied cheap – often
   forced – African labor to the mines and plantations of the nearby
   British colonies and South Africa. Because policies were designed to
   benefit Portuguese immigrants and the Portuguese homeland, little
   attention was paid to Mozambique's national integration, its economic
   infrastructure, or the skills of its population.

Post-war period

   After World War II, while many European nations were granting
   independence to their colonies, Portugal maintained that Mozambique and
   other Portuguese possessions were overseas provinces of the mother
   country, and emigration to the colonies soared. Calls for Mozambican
   independence developed apace, and in 1962 several anti-colonial
   political groups formed the Front for the Liberation of Mozambique
   (FRELIMO), which initiated an armed campaign against Portuguese
   colonial rule in September 1964. However, Portugal had occupied the
   country for more than four hundred years; not all Mozambicans desired
   independence, and fewer still sought change through armed revolution.
   Despite arms shipments by China and the Soviet Union, FRELIMO and other
   loosely linked armed guerilla forces proved no match for Portuguese
   counterinsurgency forces. After ten years of sporadic warfare, FRELIMO
   had not made appreciable progress towards capturing either significant
   amounts of territory or population centers. After a socialist-inspired
   military coup which overthrew the quasi- fascist Portuguese government
   of Antonio Salazar in 1974, Portugal determined to grant independence
   to its remaining colonies. Mozambique became independent on June 25,
   1975.

   The last thirty years of Mozambique's history have reflected political
   developments elsewhere in the 20th century. Following the coup in
   Lisbon, Portuguese withdrew from Mozambique. In Mozambique, the
   military decision to withdraw occurred within the context of a decade
   of armed anti-colonial struggle, initially led by American-educated
   Eduardo Mondlane, who was assassinated in 1969. When independence was
   achieved in 1975, FRELIMO rapidly established a one-party state allied
   to the Soviet bloc and outlawed rival political activity. FRELIMO
   eliminated political pluralism, religious educational institutions, and
   the role of traditional authorities.

Conflict and civil war

   The new government, under president Samora Machel, gave shelter and
   support to South African ( ANC) and Zimbabwean ( ZANU) liberation
   movements while the governments of first Rhodesia and later apartheid
   South Africa fostered and financed an armed rebel movement in central
   Mozambique called the Mozambican National Resistance (RENAMO). Hence,
   civil war, sabotage from neighboring states, and economic collapse
   characterized the first decade of Mozambican independence. Also marking
   this period were the mass exodus of Portuguese nationals and
   Mozambicans of Portuguese heritage, a weak infrastructure, government
   nationalization of privately owned industries and economic
   mismanagement. During most of the civil war, the government was unable
   to exercise effective control outside of urban areas, many of which
   were cut off from the capital. An estimated 1 million Mozambicans
   perished during the civil war, 1.7 million took refuge in neighboring
   states, and several million more were internally displaced. On October
   19, 1986 Samora Machel was on his way back from an international
   meeting in Malawi in the presidential Tupolev Tu-134 aircraft when the
   plane crashed in the Lebombo Mountains, near Mbuzini. There were nine
   survivors but President Machel and twenty-four others died, including
   ministers and officials of the Mozambique government. The United
   Nations' Soviet delegation issued a minority report contending that
   their expertise and experience had been undermined by the South
   Africans. Representatives of the USSR advanced the theory that the
   plane had been intentionally diverted by a false navigational beacon
   signal, using a technology provided by military intelligence operatives
   of the apartheid government.

   Machel's successor, Joaquim Chissano, continued the reforms and began
   peace talks with RENAMO. The new constitution enacted in 1990 provided
   for a multi-party political system, market-based economy, and free
   elections. The civil war ended in October 1992 with the Rome General
   Peace Accords, brokered by the Community of Sant'Egidio. Under
   supervision of the ONUMOZ peacekeeping force of the United Nations,
   peace returned to Mozambique.

   By mid-1995 the more than 1.7 million Mozambican refugees who had
   sought asylum in neighboring Malawi, Zimbabwe, Swaziland, Zambia,
   Tanzania, and South Africa as a result of war and drought had returned,
   as part of the largest repatriation witnessed in Sub-Saharan Africa.
   Additionally, a further estimated four million internally displaced
   persons returned to their areas of origin.

Administrative divisions

   Mozambique is divided into ten provinces (provincias) and one capital
   city (cidade) with provincial status. The provinces are subdivided into
   129 districts (distritos).
    1. Cabo Delgado
    2. Gaza
    3. Inhambane
    4. Manica
    5. Maputo (city)
    6. Maputo
    7. Nampula
    8. Niassa
    9. Sofala
   10. Tete
   11. Zambezia

                    Map of Mozambique with the province highlighted

Geography

   Satellite image of Mozambique, generated from raster graphics data
   supplied by The Map Library
   Enlarge
   Satellite image of Mozambique, generated from raster graphics data
   supplied by The Map Library

   At 309,475 square miless (801,590 km²), Mozambique is the world's
   36th-largest country (after Pakistan). It is comparable in size to
   Turkey, and is somewhat larger than the US state of Texas.

   It is located in 18°15′S 35°00′E

Politics

   Mozambique is a multi-party democracy under the 1990 constitution. The
   executive branch comprises a president, prime minister, and Council of
   Ministers. There is a National Assembly and municipal assemblies. The
   judiciary comprises a Supreme Court and provincial, district, and
   municipal courts. Suffrage is universal at eighteen.

   In 1994 the country held its first democratic elections. Joaquim
   Chissano was elected President with 53% of the vote, and a 250-member
   National Assembly was voted in with 129 FRELIMO deputies, 112 RENAMO
   deputies, and nine representatives of three smaller parties that formed
   the Democratic Union (UD). Since its formation in 1994, the National
   Assembly has made progress in becoming a body increasingly more
   independent of the executive. By 1999, more than one-half (53%) of the
   legislation passed originated in the Assembly.

   After some delays, in 1998 the country held its first local elections
   to provide for local representation and some budgetary authority at the
   municipal level. The principal opposition party, RENAMO, boycotted the
   local elections, citing flaws in the registration process. Independent
   slates contested the elections and won seats in municipal assemblies.
   Turnout was very low.

   In the aftermath of the 1998 local elections, the government resolved
   to make more accommodations to the opposition's procedural concerns for
   the second round of multiparty national elections in 1999. Working
   through the National Assembly, the electoral law was rewritten and
   passed by consensus in December 1998. Financed largely by international
   donors, a very successful voter registration was conducted from July to
   September 1999, providing voter registration cards to 85% of the
   potential electorate (more than seven million voters).

   The second general elections were held December 3-5, 1999, with high
   voter turnout. International and domestic observers agreed that the
   voting process was well organized and went smoothly. Both the
   opposition and observers subsequently cited flaws in the tabulation
   process that, had they not occurred, might have changed the outcome. In
   the end, however, international and domestic observers concluded that
   the close result of the vote reflected the will of the people.

   President Chissano won the presidency with a margin of 4% points over
   the RENAMO-Electoral Union coalition candidate, Afonso Dhlakama, and
   began his 5-year term in January 2000. FRELIMO increased its majority
   in the National Assembly with 133 out of 250 seats. RENAMO-UE coalition
   won 116 seats, one went independent, and no third parties are
   represented.

   The opposition coalition did not accept the National Election
   Commission's results of the presidential vote and filed a formal
   complaint to the Supreme Court. One month after the voting, the court
   dismissed the opposition's challenge and validated the election
   results. The opposition did not file a complaint about the results of
   the legislative vote.

   The second local elections, involving thirty-three municipalities with
   some 2.4 million registered voters, took place in November 2003. This
   was the first time that FRELIMO, RENAMO-UE, and independent parties
   competed without significant boycotts. The 24% turnout was well above
   the 15% turnout in the first municipal elections. FRELIMO won
   twenty-eight mayoral positions and the majority in twenty-nine
   municipal assemblies, while RENAMO won five mayoral positions and the
   majority in four municipal assemblies. The voting was conducted in an
   orderly fashion without violent incidents. However, the period
   immediately after the elections was marked by objections about voter
   and candidate registration and vote tabulation, as well as calls for
   greater transparency.
   Mozambique's president, Armando Guebuza
   Enlarge
   Mozambique's president, Armando Guebuza

   In May 2004, the government approved a new general elections law that
   contained innovations based on the experience of the 2003 municipal
   elections.

   Presidential and National Assembly elections took place on December
   1-2, 2004. FRELIMO candidate Armando Guebuza won with 64% of the
   popular vote. His opponent, Afonso Dhlakama of RENAMO, received 32% of
   the popular vote. FRELIMO won 160 seats in Parliament. A coalition of
   RENAMO and several small parties won the 90 remaining seats. Armando
   Guebuza was inaugurated as the President of Mozambique on February 2,
   2005. RENAMO and some other opposition parties made claims of election
   fraud and denounced the result. These claims were supported by
   international observers (among others by the European Union Election
   Observation Mission to Mozambique and the Carter Centre) to the
   elections who criticized the fact that the National Electoral
   Commission (CNE) did not conduct fair and transparent elections. They
   listed a whole range of shortcomings by the electoral authorities that
   benefited the ruling party FRELIMO. However, the elections shortcomings
   have probably not (also according to EU observers) affected the final
   result in the presidential election. The pronounced outcome of the
   parliamentary election and thus the distribution of seats in the
   National Assembly does not reflect the will of the Mozambican people
   and is clearly to the disadvantage of RENAMO.

Foreign relations

   While allegiances dating back to the liberation struggle remain
   relevant, Mozambique's foreign policy has become increasingly
   pragmatic. The twin pillars of Mozambique's foreign policy are
   maintenance of good relations with its neighbors and maintenance and
   expansion of ties to development partners.

   During the 1970s and early 1980s, Mozambique's foreign policy was
   inextricably linked to the struggles for majority rule in Rhodesia and
   South Africa as well as superpower competition and the Cold War.
   Mozambique's decision to enforce UN sanctions against Rhodesia and deny
   that country access to the sea led Ian Smith's regime to undertake
   overt and covert actions to destabilize the country. Although the
   change of government in Zimbabwe in 1980 removed this threat, the
   apartheid regime in South Africa continued to finance the
   destabilization of Mozambique. It also belonged to the Front Line
   States.

   The 1984 Nkomati Accord, while failing in its goal of ending South
   African support to RENAMO, opened initial diplomatic contacts between
   the Mozambican and South African governments. This process gained
   momentum with South Africa's elimination of apartheid, which culminated
   in the establishment of full diplomatic relations in October 1993.
   While relations with neighboring Zimbabwe, Malawi, Zambia, and Tanzania
   show occasional strains, Mozambique's ties to these countries remain
   strong.

   In the years immediately following its independence, Mozambique
   benefited from considerable assistance from some western countries,
   notably the Scandinavians. USSR and its allies, however, became
   Mozambique's primary economic, military, and political supporters and
   its foreign policy reflected this linkage. This began to change in
   1983; in 1984 Mozambique joined the World Bank and International
   Monetary Fund. Western aid quickly replaced Soviet support, with the
   Scandinavians countries of Sweden (EU Member since 1996), Norway,
   Denmark (EU Member since 1973) and Iceland. Plus Finland (EU Member
   since 1996) and the Netherlands within the European Union are becoming
   increasingly important sources of development assistance. Italy also
   maintains a profile in Mozambique as a result of its key role during
   the peace process. Relations with Portugal, the former colonial power,
   continue to play an important role as Portuguese investors play a
   visible role in Mozambique's economy.

   Mozambique is a member of the Non-Aligned Movement and ranks among the
   moderate members of the African Bloc in the United Nations and other
   international organizations. Mozambique also belongs to the African
   Union (formerly the Organization of African Unity) and the Southern
   African Development Community. In 1994, the Government became a full
   member of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, in part to
   broaden its base of international support but also to please the
   country's sizable muslim population. Similarly, in early 1996
   Mozambique joined its Anglophone neighbors in the Commonwealth. It is
   the only nation to join the Commonwealth that was never part of the
   British Empire. In the same year, Mozambique became a founding member
   and the first President of the Community of Portuguese Language
   Countries (CPLP), and maintains close ties with other Lusophone states.

Economy

   Women in Mozambique with maize.
   Enlarge
   Women in Mozambique with maize.

   The official currency is the Metical (as of 2006, 1USD is roughly
   equivalent to 25 Meticais). US Dollars, Rands and more recently Euros
   are also widely accepted and used in current business transactions. The
   minimum legal salary is around 60 USD/month.

Rebounding growth

   The resettlement of war refugees and successful economic reform have
   led to a high growth rate: the average growth rate from 1993 to 1999
   was 6.7%; from 1997 to 1999, it averaged more than 10% per year. The
   devastating floods of early 2000 slowed GDP growth to a 2.1%. A full
   recovery was achieved with growth of 14.8% in 2001. In 2003, the growth
   rate was 7%. The government projects the economy to continue to expand
   between 7%-10% a year for the next 5 years, although rapid expansion in
   the future hinges on several major foreign investment projects,
   continued economic reform, and the revival of the agriculture,
   transportation, and tourism sectors. More than 75% of the population
   engages in small scale agriculture, which still suffers from inadequate
   infrastructure, commercial networks, and investment. However, 88% of
   Mozambique's arable land is still uncultivated.

Low inflation

   The government's tight control of spending and the money supply,
   combined with financial sector reform, successfully reduced inflation
   from 70% in 1994 to less than 5% from 1998-99. Economic disruptions
   stemming from the devastating floods of 2000 caused inflation to jump
   to 12.7% that year, and it was 13% in 2003. The value of Mozambique's
   currency, the Metical, lost nearly 50% of its value against the dollar
   since December 2000, although in late 2001 it began to stabilize. Since
   then, it has held steady at about MZN 24,000 to US$1. Since July 2006
   the currency is $1 is 25 (new) MZN.

New Metical

   A new Metical was introduced on July 1st 2006. 1000 old metecais = 1
   new Metical. US$1 = 25 Meticals.

   Both currencies will circulate until December 31, 2006. After that the
   old currency will not be valid but it will be redeemed by the Bank of
   Mozambique until the end of 2012.

Extensive economic reform

   Economic reform has been extensive. More than 1,200 state-owned
   enterprises (mostly small) have been privatized. Preparations for
   privatization and/or sector liberalization are underway for the
   remaining parastatals, including telecommunications, electricity,
   ports, and the railroads. The government frequently selects a strategic
   foreign investor when privatizing a parastatal. Additionally, customs
   duties have been reduced, and customs management has been streamlined
   and reformed. The government introduced a highly successful value-added
   tax in 1999 as part of its efforts to increase domestic revenues. Plans
   for 2003-04 include Commercial Code reform; comprehensive judicial
   reform; financial sector strengthening; continued civil service reform;
   and improved government budget, audit, and inspection capability.

Improving trade imbalance

   Imports remain almost 40% greater than exports, but this is a
   significant improvement over the 4:1 ratio of the immediate post-war
   years. In 2003, imports were $1.24 billion and exports were $910
   million. Support programs provided by foreign donors and private
   financing of foreign direct investment mega-projects and their
   associated raw materials, have largely compensated for
   balance-of-payments shortfalls. The medium-term outlook for exports is
   encouraging, since a number of foreign investment projects should lead
   to substantial export growth and a better trade balance. MOZAL, a large
   aluminium smelter that commenced production in mid-2000, has greatly
   expanded the nation's trade volume. Traditional Mozambican exports
   include cashews, shrimp, fish, copra, sugar, cotton, tea, and citrus
   fruits. Most of these industries are being rehabilitated. As well,
   Mozambique is less dependent on imports for basic food and manufactured
   goods because of steady increases in local production.
   Traditional fishingboat in Mozambique.
   Enlarge
   Traditional fishingboat in Mozambique.

SADC trade protocol

Demographics

   Mozambique's major ethnic groups encompass numerous subgroups with
   diverse languages, dialects, cultures, and histories. Many are linked
   to similar ethnic groups living in neighboring countries. The
   north-central provinces of Zambezia and Nampula are the most populous,
   with about 45% of the population. The estimated four million Makua are
   the dominant group in the northern part of the country; the Sena and
   Shona (mostly Ndau) are prominent in the Zambezi valley, and the
   Shangaan (Tsonga) dominate in southern Mozambique. Other groups include
   Makonde, Yao, Swahili, Tonga, Chopi, Shona, and Nguni (including Zulu).
   The country has also a small number of Caucasian residents, largely
   Europeans of Portuguese ancestry. During Portuguese colonial rule, a
   large minority of Mozamibicans of Portuguese descent lived permanently
   in almost all areas of Mozambique, and Mozambicans with Portuguese
   citizenship at the time of independence was about 250,000. Most of
   these left the region after its freedom in 1975. There is also a small
   mestiço minority of Mozambicans with mixed Bantu and Portuguese
   heritage. The remaining minorities in Mozambique claim heritage from
   India, Pakistan, Portuguese India and Arab countries. There are also
   some 7,000 Chinese.

   Despite the influence of Islamic coastal traders and European
   colonizers, the people of Mozambique have largely retained an
   indigenous culture based on small-scale agriculture. Mozambique's most
   highly developed art forms have been wood sculpture, for which the
   Makonde in northern Mozambique are particularly renowned, and dance.
   The middle and upper classes continue to be heavily influenced by the
   Portuguese colonial and linguistic heritage.

   Portuguese is the official and most widely spoken language of the
   nation, because Bantus speak several of their different languages (most
   widely used of these are Swahili, Makua, Sena, Ndau, and Shangaan —
   these have many Portuguese-origin words), but 40% of all people speak
   it — 31%, mostly Bantus, as their second language and only 9%, mostly
   pure-blooded Portuguese and mestiços, speak it as their first language.
   Arabs, Chinese, and Indians speak their own languages (Indians from
   Portuguese India speak any of the Portuguese Creoles of their origin)
   aside from Portuguese as their second language. Most educated
   Mozambicans speak English, which is used in schools and business as
   second or third language.

   During the colonial era, Christian missionaries were active in
   Mozambique, and many foreign clergy remain in the country. According to
   the national census, about 20%-30% of the population is Christian (with
   Catholicism as the largest denomination), 15%-20% is Muslim, and the
   remainder adheres to traditional beliefs.

   Among the main Protestant churches are Igreja União Baptista de
   Moçambique, the Assembleias de Deus, the Seventh-day Adventists, the
   Anglican Church of Mozambique, the Igreja do Evangelho Completo de
   Deus, the Igreja Metodista Unida, the Igreja Presbiteriana de
   Moçambique, the Igreja de Cristo and the Assembleia Evangélica de Deus.
   The Roman-Catholic church established three archdioceses ( Beira,
   Maputo and Nampula).

Education

   Under Portugal, educational opportunities for poor Mozambicans were
   limited; 93% of the Bantu population was illiterate, and many could not
   speak Portuguese. In fact, most of today's political leaders were
   educated in missionary schools. After independence, the government
   placed a high priority on expanding education, which reduced the
   illiteracy rate to about two-thirds as primary school enrollment
   increased. Unfortunately, in recent years school construction and
   teacher training enrollments have not kept up with population
   increases. With post-war enrollments reaching all-time highs, the
   quality of education has suffered. As a member of Commonwealth of
   Nations, most urban Mozambicans are required to learn English starting
   high-school, and junior high in the more advanced schools.

Culture

Religion

   According to the 1997 Second General Population and Housing Census, the
   religions of the polled population were as follows: 24.2% identified
   themselves as Roman Catholic; 24.25% claimed to not be affiliated with
   a religion (many of these perhaps maintain cultural bonds with Animism
   or tribal religions); 17.8% of the population were cited as Muslims,
   11.45% as other non-Catholic Christians (mostly of various Protestant
   denominations), 18.7% adhering to Zionism (a syncretic faith that
   combines Christian and traditional African religious elements), and
   3.6% as "other".

   The wide range of religious affiliations can be partially attributed to
   a large number of influences in the country, from the more Protestant
   South African churches' influence in southern Mozambique, and the
   Portuguese Catholic influence, traditional tribal religions, and
   historic Muslim ties.
     * Reporters without borders Worldwide Press Freedom Index 2002: Rank
       70 out of 139 countries
     * Transportation in Mozambique
     * Liga dos Escuteiros de Moçambique

Books

     * Afonso, Aniceto and Gomes, Carlos de Matos, Guerra Colonial, 2000

Geographic locale

   Flag of Zambia  Zambia
   Flag of Malawi  Malawi Flag of Tanzania  Tanzania Indian Ocean
   Flag of Zimbabwe  Zimbabwe North Mozambique Channel  Image:Template
   CanadianCityGeoLocation East.png   Flag of Madagascar  Madagascar
   West    Flag of Mozambique  Mozambique     East
   South
   Flag of South Africa  South Africa
   Flag of Swaziland  Swaziland Indian Ocean

   Countries of Southern Africa

   Angola • Botswana • Lesotho • Madagascar • Malawi • Mauritius •
   Mozambique • Namibia • South Africa • Swaziland • Zambia • Zimbabwe
   Countries of Africa

   Sovereign states: Algeria • Angola • Benin • Botswana • Burkina Faso •
   Burundi • Cameroon • Cape Verde • Central African Republic • Chad •
   Democratic Republic of the Congo • Republic of the Congo • Comoros •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Djibouti • Egypt ^1 • Equatorial Guinea • Eritrea •
   Ethiopia • France ^2 • Gabon • The Gambia • Ghana • Guinea-Bissau •
   Guinea • Kenya • Lesotho • Liberia • Libya • Madagascar • Malawi • Mali
   • Mauritania • Mauritius • Morocco • Mozambique • Namibia • Niger •
   Nigeria • Portugal ^2 • Rwanda • Senegal • Seychelles • Sierra Leone •
   Somalia • South Africa • Spain ^2 • Sudan • Swaziland • São Tomé and
   Príncipe • Tanzania • Togo • Tunisia • Uganda • Yemen ^3 • Zambia •
   Zimbabwe

   Dependencies: British Indian Ocean Territory (UK) • French Southern
   Territories (France) • Mayotte (France) • Réunion (France) • Saint
   Helena ^4 (UK)

   Unrecognized countries: Somaliland • Western Sahara •

   ^1  Partly in Asia. ^2  Mostly in Europe. ^3  Mostly in Asia.
   ^4 Includes the dependencies of Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha.
   Countries and territories on the Indian Ocean

   Eurasia: Bahrain • Bangladesh • Christmas Island • Cocos (Keeling)
   Islands • India • Indonesia • Iran • Iraq • Israel • Kuwait • Malaysia
   • Maldives • Myanmar • Oman • Pakistan • Qatar • Saudi Arabia • Sri
   Lanka • Thailand • United Arab Emirates • Yemen

   Africa: Comoros • Djibouti • Eritrea • Kenya • Madagascar • Mauritius •
   Mayotte • Mozambique • Seychelles • Somalia • Somaliland • South Africa
   • Sudan • Tanzania

   Oceania: Australia • Christmas Island • Cocos (Keeling) Islands

   Islands: Bahrain • Christmas Island • Cocos (Keeling) Islands •
   Madagascar • Maldives • Mauritius • Mayotte • Seychelles • Sri Lanka
   Flag of the SADC    Member states of the Southern African Development
   Community

   Angola • Botswana • Democratic Republic of the Congo • Lesotho •
   Madagascar • Malawi • Mauritius • Mozambique • Namibia • Seychelles •
   South Africa • Swaziland • Tanzania • Zambia • Zimbabwe
   Latin Union

   Angola • Argentina • Bolivia • Brazil • Cape Verde • Chile • Colombia •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Costa Rica • Cuba • Dominican Republic • Ecuador •
   France • Guatemala • Guinea-Bissau • Haiti • Honduras • Italy • Mexico
   • Moldova • Monaco • Mozambique • Nicaragua • Panama • Paraguay • Peru
   • Philippines • Portugal • Romania • San Marino • São Tomé and Príncipe
   • Senegal • Spain • Timor Leste • Uruguay • Vatican City • Venezuela
   Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC)
   Flag of the OIC

   Afghanistan • Albania • Algeria • Azerbaijan • Bahrain • Bangladesh •
   Benin • Burkina Faso • Brunei • Cameroon • Chad • Comoros •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Djibouti • Egypt • Gabon • Gambia • Guinea •
   Guinea-Bissau • Guyana • Indonesia • Iran • Iraq • Jordan • Kuwait •
   Kazakhstan • Kyrgyzstan • Lebanon • Libya • Maldives • Malaysia •
   Mali • Mauritania • Morocco • Mozambique • Niger • Nigeria • Oman •
   Pakistan • State of Palestine • Qatar • Saudi Arabia • Senegal •
   Sierra Leone • Somalia • Sudan • Surinam • Syria • Tajikistan •
   Turkey • Tunisia • Togo • Turkmenistan • Uganda • Uzbekistan •
   United Arab Emirates • Yemen

   Observer countries: Bosnia and Herzegovina • Central African Republic •
   Russia • Thailand • Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus

   Observer Muslim organizations and communities:
   Moro National Liberation Front

   Observer international organizations:
   Economic Cooperation Organization • Organisation of African Unity •
   League of Arab States • Non-Aligned Movement • United Nations
   Member states of the African Union

   Algeria • Angola • Benin • Botswana • Burkina Faso • Burundi •
   Cameroon • Cape Verde • Central African Republic • Chad • Comoros •
   Democratic Republic of the Congo • Republic of the Congo •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Djibouti • Egypt • Eritrea • Ethiopia •
   Equatorial Guinea • Gabon • The Gambia • Ghana • Guinea •
   Guinea-Bissau • Kenya • Lesotho • Liberia • Libya • Madagascar •
   Malawi • Mali • Mauritania • Mauritius • Mozambique • Namibia • Niger •
   Nigeria • Rwanda • São Tomé and Príncipe • Senegal • Seychelles •
   Sierra Leone • Somalia • South Africa • Sudan • Swaziland • Tanzania •
   Togo • Tunisia • Uganda • Western Sahara  (SADR) • Zambia • Zimbabwe
   Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP)
   Flag of CPLP
   Angola • Brazil • Cape Verde • East Timor • Guinea-Bissau • Mozambique
   • Portugal • São Tomé and Príncipe
   Niger-Congo-speaking nations
   Kordofanian

   Flag of Sudan  Sudan
   Mande

   Flag of The Gambia  The Gambia • Flag of Guinea  Guinea • Flag of
   Guinea-Bissau  Guinea-Bissau • Flag of Mali  Mali • Flag of Mauritania
    Mauritania • Flag of Senegal  Senegal • Flag of Sierra Leone  Sierra
   Leone
   Atlantic-Congo

   Atlantic

   Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Burkina Faso  Burkina Faso • Flag of
   Cameroon  Cameroon • Flag of Central African Republic  Central African
   Republic • Flag of Chad  Chad • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire •
   Flag of The Gambia  The Gambia • Flag of Guinea  Guinea • Flag of
   Guinea-Bissau  Guinea-Bissau • Flag of Liberia  Liberia • Flag of Mali
    Mali • Flag of Mauritania  Mauritania • Flag of Niger  Niger • Flag of
   Senegal  Senegal • Flag of Sierra Leone  Sierra Leone • Flag of Sudan
   Sudan • Flag of Togo  Togo

   Ijoid: Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria - Dogon: Flag of Mali  Mali
   Volta-Congo

   Senufo: Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire •
   Flag of Mali  Mali

   Gur: Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Burkina Faso  Burkina Faso • Flag
   of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire • Flag of Ghana  Ghana • Flag of Mali
   Mali • Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria • Flag of Togo  Togo

   Adamawa-Ubangi: Flag of Cameroon  Cameroon • Flag of Central African
   Republic  Central African Republic • Flag of Chad  Chad • Flag of
   Nigeria  Nigeria

   Kru: Flag of Burkina Faso  Burkina Faso • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte
   d'Ivoire • Flag of Liberia  Liberia

   Kwa: Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire • Flag
   of Ghana  Ghana • Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria • Flag of Togo  Togo
   Benue-Congo

   Bantu

   Flag of Angola  Angola • Flag of Botswana  Botswana • Flag of Burundi
   Burundi • Flag of Cameroon  Cameroon • Flag of Democratic Republic of
   the Congo  Democratic Republic of the Congo • Flag of Republic of the
   Congo  Republic of the Congo • Flag of Equatorial Guinea  Equatorial
   Guinea • Flag of Gabon  Gabon • Flag of Kenya  Kenya • Flag of Nigeria
    Nigeria • Flag of Malawi  Malawi • Flag of Mozambique  Mozambique •
   Flag of Namibia  Namibia • Flag of Rwanda  Rwanda • Flag of Somalia
   Somalia • Flag of South Africa  South Africa • Flag of Swaziland
   Swaziland • Flag of Tanzania  Tanzania • Flag of Uganda  Uganda • Flag
   of Zambia  Zambia • Flag of Zimbabwe  Zimbabwe

   Yoruba and Igbo: Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mozambique"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
