   #copyright

Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Astronomers and
physicists

   A stamp issued September 6, 1983 in the Soviet Union, commemorating
   al-Khwārizmī's (approximate) 1200th anniversary.
   Enlarge
   A stamp issued September 6, 1983 in the Soviet Union, commemorating
   al-Khwārizmī's (approximate) 1200th anniversary.

   Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī (Arabic: محمد بن موسى الخوارزمي‎) was a
   Persian mathematician, astronomer, astrologer and geographer. He was
   born around 780, in either Khwarizm or Baghdad, and died around 850.^
   ^^

   He was the author of al-Kitāb al-mukhtaṣar fī ḥisāb al-jabr
   wa-l-muqābala, the first book on the systematic solution of linear and
   quadratic equations. Consequently he is considered to be the father of
   algebra,^ a title he shares with Diophantus. The word algebra is
   derived from al-jabr, one of the two operations used to solve quadratic
   equations, as described in his book. Algoritmi de numero Indorum, the
   Latin translation of his other major work on the Indian numerals,
   introduced the positional number system and the number zero to the
   Western world in the 12th century. The words algorism and algorithm
   stem from Algoritmi, the Latinization of his name.^ His name is also
   the origin of the Spanish word guarismo, meaning digit.^

Biography

   Few details about al-Khwārizmī's life are known, it is not even certain
   where he was born. His name indicates he has come from Khwarizm (Khiva)
   in the Khorasan province of the Sassanid Persian Empire (now Xorazm
   Province of Uzbekistan).

   His name is often given as either Abū ʿAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn Mūsā
   al-Ḵwārizmī (Arabic: أبو عبد الله محمد بن موسى الخوارزمي‎ “Father of
   Abdullah, Muhammad, son of Moses, native of Khwārizm”^ ) or Abū Ǧaʿfar
   Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Ḵwārizmī (Arabic: أبو جعفر محمد بن موسى
   الخوارزمي‎).

   The historian al-Tabari gave his name as Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwārizmī
   al-Majousi al-Katarbali (Arabic: محمد بن موسى الخوارزميّ المجوسيّ
   القطربّليّ‎). The epithet al-Qutrubbulli indicates he might instead
   have came from Qutrubbull, a small town near Baghdad. Regarding
   al-Khwārizmī's religion, Toomer writes:

     Another epithet given to him by al-Ṭabarī, "al-Majūsī," would seem
     to indicate that he was an adherent of the old Zoroastrian religion.
     This would still have been possible at that time for a man of
     Iranian origin, but the pious preface to al-Khwārizmī's Algebra
     shows that he was an orthodox Muslim, so al-Ṭabarī's epithet could
     mean no more than that his forebears, and perhaps he in his youth,
     had been Zoroastrians.^

   In Ibn al-Nadīm's Kitāb al-Fihrist we find a short biography on
   al-Khwārizmī, together with a list the books he wrote. Al-Khwārizmī
   accomplished most of his work in the period between 813 and 833. After
   the Islamic conquest of Persia, Baghdad became the centre of scientific
   studies and trade, and many merchants and scientists, from as far as
   China and India traveled to this city--as such apparently so did
   Al-Khwārizmī. He worked in Baghdad as a scholar at the House of Wisdom
   established by Caliph al-Maʾmūn, where he studied and translated Greek
   scientific manuscripts.

Contributions

   The frontispiece of Frederic Rosen's The Algebra of Mohammed ben Musa
   (1831)
   Enlarge
   The frontispiece of Frederic Rosen's The Algebra of Mohammed ben Musa
   (1831)

   His major contributions to mathematics, astronomy, astrology, geography
   and cartography provided foundations for later and even more widespread
   innovation in algebra, trigonometry, and his other areas of interest.
   His systematic and logical approach to solving linear and quadratic
   equations gave shape to the discipline of algebra, a word that is
   derived from the name of his 830 book on the subject, al-Kitab
   al-mukhtasar fi hisab al-jabr wa'l-muqabala (الكتاب المختصر في حساب
   الجبر والمقابلة) or: "The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion
   and Balancing". The book was first translated into Latin in the twelfth
   century.

   His book On the Calculation with Hindu Numerals written about 825, was
   principally responsible for the diffusion of the Indian system of
   numeration in the Middle-East and then Europe. This book also
   translated into Latin in the twelfth century, as Algoritmi de numero
   Indorum. From the name of the author, rendered in Latin as algoritmi,
   originated the term algorithm.

   Some of his contributions were based on earlier Persian and Babylonian
   Astronomy, Indian numbers, and Greek sources.

   Al-Khwārizmī systematized and corrected Ptolemy's data in geography as
   regards to Africa and the Middle east. Another major book was his Kitab
   surat al-ard ("The Image of the Earth"; translated as Geography), which
   presented the coordinates of localities in the known world based,
   ultimately, on those in the Geography of Ptolemy but with improved
   values for the length of the Mediterranean Sea and the location of
   cities in Asia and Africa.

   He also assisted in the construction of a world map for the caliph
   al-Ma'mun and participated in a project to determine the circumference
   of the Earth, supervising the work of 70 geographers to create the map
   of the then "known world".

   When his work was copied and transferred to Europe through Latin
   translations, it had a profound impact on the advancement of basic
   mathematics in Europe. He also wrote on mechanical devices like the
   astrolabe and sundial.

Algebra

   A page from al-Khwārizmī's Algebra
   Enlarge
   A page from al-Khwārizmī's Algebra

   al-Kitāb al-mukhtaṣar fī ḥisāb al-jabr wa-l-muqābala (Arabic: الكتاب
   المختصر في حساب الجبر والمقابلة “The Compendious Book on Calculation by
   Completion and Balancing”) is a mathematical book written approximately
   830 AD.

   The book is considered to have defined algebra. The word algebra is
   derived from the name of one of the basic operations with equations
   (al-jabr) described in this book. The book was translated in Latin as
   Liber algebrae et almucabala by Robert of Chester ( Segovia, 1145)^
   hence "algebra", and also by Gerard of Cremona.

   Al-Khwārizmī's method of solving linear and quadratic equations worked
   by first reducing the equation to one of six standard forms (where b
   and c are positive integers)
     * squares equal roots (ax^2 = bx)
     * squares equal number (ax^2 = c)
     * roots equal number (bx = c)
     * squares and roots equal number (ax^2 + bx = c)
     * squares and number equal roots (ax^2 + c = bx)
     * roots and number equal squares (bx + c = ax^2)

   by dividing out the coefficient of the square and using the two
   operations al-ǧabr (Arabic: الجبر “restoring” or “completion”) and
   al-muqābala ("balancing"). Al-ǧabr is the process of removing negative
   units, roots and squares from the equation by adding the same quantity
   to each side. For example, x^2 = 40x - 4x^2 is reduced to 5x^2 = 40x.
   Al-muqābala is the process of bringing quantities of the same type to
   the same side of the equation. For example, x^2+14 = x+5 is reduced to
   x^2+9 = x.

   Several authors have published texts under the name of Kitāb al-ǧabr
   wa-l-muqābala, including Abū Ḥanīfa al-Dīnawarī, Abū Kāmil (Rasāla fi
   al-ǧabr wa-al-muqābala), Abū Muḥammad al-ʿAdlī, Abū Yūsuf al-Miṣṣīṣī,
   Ibn Turk, Sind ibn ʿAlī, Sahl ibn Bišr (author uncertain), and
   Šarafaddīn al-Ṭūsī.

Arithmetic

   Page from a Latin translation, beginning with "Dixit algorizmi"
   Enlarge
   Page from a Latin translation, beginning with "Dixit algorizmi"

   Algoritmi de numero Indorum ("al-Khwārizmī on the Hindu Art of
   Reckoning") on Arithmetic, which survived in a Latin translation but
   was lost in the original Arabic. The translation was most likely done
   in the 12th century by Adelard of Bath, who had also translated the
   astronomical tables in 1126. The original Arabic title was possibly
   Kitāb al-Ǧamʿ wa-al-tafrīq bi-ḥisāb al-Hind.^

Geography

   A 15th century map based on Ptolomy's Geography for comparison.
   Enlarge
   A 15th century map based on Ptolomy's Geography for comparison.

   Al-Khwārizmī's third major work is his Kitāb ṣūrat al-Arḍ (Arabic: كتاب
   صورة الأرض "Book on the appearance of the Earth" or "The image of the
   Earth" translated as Geography), which was finished in 833. It is a
   revised and completed version of Ptolemy's Geography, consisting of a
   list of 2402 coordinates of cities and other geographical features
   following a general introduction.

   There is only one surviving copy of Kitāb ṣūrat al-Arḍ, which is kept
   at the Strasbourg University Library. A Latin translation is kept at
   the Biblioteca Nacional de España in Madrid. The complete title
   translates as Book of the appearance of the Earth, with its cities,
   mountains, seas, all the islands and rivers, written by Abu Ja'far
   Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwārizmī, according to the geographical treatise
   written by Ptolemy the Claudian.

   The book opens with the list of latitudes and longitudes, in order of "
   weather zones", that is to say in blocks of latitudes and, in each
   weather zone, by order of longitude. As Paul Gallez points out, this
   excellent system allows us to deduce many latitudes and longitudes
   where the only document in our possession is in such a bad condition as
   to make it practically illegible.

   Neither the Arabic copy nor the Latin translation include the map of
   the world itself, however Hubert Daunicht was able to reconstruct the
   missing map from the list of coordinates. Daunicht read the latitudes
   and longitudes of the coastal points in the manuscript, or deduces them
   from the context where they were not legible. He transferred the points
   onto graph paper and connected them with straight lines, obtaining an
   approximation of the coastline as it was on the original map. He then
   does the same for the rivers and towns.^

   One of the corrections which al-Khwārizmī made in Ptolemy's work is the
   reduction of the latitude of the Mediterranean from 62° to 52° when, in
   actual fact, it should be only 42°. The Arab opts for the same zero
   meridian as Ptolemy, that of the Canaries. The amount of inhabited land
   extends over 180°.

   The majority of the placenames used by al-Khwārizmī match those of
   Ptolemy, Martellus and Behaim. The general shape of the coastline is
   the same between Taprobane and Cattigara. The Atlantic coast of the
   Dragon's Tail, which does not exist in Ptolemy's map, is traced in very
   little detail on al-Khwārizmī's map, but is clear and precise on the
   Martellus map and on the later Behaim version.

   Finally, al-Khwarizmi also compiled a set of astronomical tables (Zij),
   based on a variety of Hindu and Greek sources. This work included a
   table of sines, evidently for a circle of radius 150 units. Like his
   treatises on algebra and Hindu-Arabic numerals, this astronomical work
   (or an Andalusian revision thereof) was translated into Latin.

Astronomy

   Corpus Christi College MS 283
   Enlarge
   Corpus Christi College MS 283

   Al-Khwārizmī's Zīj al-sindhind (Arabic: زيج "astronomical tables") is a
   work consisting of approximately 37 chapters on calendrical and
   astronomical calculations and 116 tables with calendrical, astronomical
   and astrological data, as well as a table of sine values.

   The original Arabic version (written c. 820) is lost, but a version by
   the Spanish astronomer Maslama al-Majrīṭī (c. 1000) has survived in a
   Latin translation, presumably by Adelard of Bath (January 26, 1126).^2
   The four surviving manuscripts of the Latin translation are kept at the
   Bibliothèque publique (Chartres), the Bibliothèque Mazarine (Paris),
   the Bibliotheca Nacional (Madrid) and the Bodleian Library (Oxford).

Jewish calendar

   Al-Khwārizmī wrote several other works including a treatise on the
   Jewish calendar (Risāla fi istikhrāj taʾrīkh al-yahūd "Extraction of
   the Jewish Era"). It describes the 19-year intercalation cycle, the
   rules for determining on what day of the week the first day of the
   month Tishrī shall fall; calculates the interval between the Jewish era
   (creation of Adam) and the Seleucid era; and gives rules for
   determining the mean longitude of the sun and the moon using the Jewish
   calendar. Similar material is found in the works of al-Bīrūnī and
   Maimonides.

Other works

   Several Arabic manuscripts in Berlin, Istanbul, Taschkent, Cairo and
   Paris contain further material that surely or with some probability
   comes from al-Khwārizmī. The Istanbul manuscript contains a paper on
   sundials, which is mentioned in the Fihirst. Other papers, such as one
   on the determination of the direction of Mecca, are on the spherical
   astronomy.

   Two texts deserve special interest on the morning width (Maʿrifat saʿat
   al-mashriq fī kull balad) and the determination of the azimuth from a
   height (Maʿrifat al-samt min qibal al-irtifāʿ).

   He also wrote two books on using and constructing astrolabes. Ibn
   al-Nadim in his Kitab al-Fihrist (an index of Arabic books) also
   mentions Kitāb ar-Ruḵāma(t) (the book on sundials) and Kitab al-Tarikh
   (the book of history) but the two have been lost.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muhammad_ibn_Musa_al-Khwarizmi"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
