   #copyright

Mumbai

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Asia

   Mumbai
   Mumbai
   State
    -  District(s)           Maharashtra
                              -  Mumbai City
                              -  Mumbai Suburban
   Coordinates               18.96° N 72.82° E
   Area
    -  Elevation             437.71  km²
                              - 8 m
   Time zone                 IST ( UTC+5:30)
   Population ( 2001)
    -  Density
    -  Agglomeration ( 2006) 11,914,398 ( 1st)
                              - 27,220/km²
                              - 19,944,372 ( 1st)
   Municipal commissioner    Johny Joseph
   Mayor                     Datta Dalvi
   Codes
    -  Postal
    - Telephone
    -  Vehicle
                              - 400 xxx
                              - +022
                              - MH-01—03
             Website: www.mcgm.gov.in

   Mumbai ( IPA: /'mumbəi/ , Marathi: मुंबई), formerly known as Bombay, is
   the capital of the state of Maharashtra, and the most populous city of
   India, with an estimated population of about 13 million (as of 2006).
   Mumbai is located on Salsette Island, off the west coast of
   Maharashtra. Along with its neighbouring suburbs, it forms the world's
   sixth most populous metropolitan area with a population of about 20
   million. The city has a deep natural harbour and the port handles over
   half of India's passenger traffic and a significant amount of cargo.

   Mumbai is the commercial and entertainment capital of India, and houses
   important financial institutions, such as the Reserve Bank of India
   (RBI), the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE), the National Stock Exchange of
   India (NSE) and the corporate headquarters of many Indian companies.
   Mumbai has attracted migrants from all over India because of the
   immense business opportunities, and the relatively high standard of
   living, making the city a potpourri of various communities and
   cultures. The city is home to India's Hindi film and television
   industry, known as Bollywood. Mumbai is also one of the rare cities to
   accommodate a national park, the Sanjay Gandhi National Park, within
   its city limits.

Name

   The appellation Mumbai is an eponym, etymologically derived from Mumba
   or Maha-Amba— the name of the Hindu goddess Mumbadevi, and Aai — mother
   in Marathi. In the 16th century, the Portuguese named the area Bom
   Bahia (Good Bay), later corrupted to Bomaím or Bombaim, by which it is
   still known in Portuguese. After the British gained possession, it was
   anglicised to Bombay, although it was known as Mumbai or Mambai to
   Marathi and Gujarati-speakers, and as Bambai in Hindi, Urdu, and
   Persian. The name was officially changed to Mumbai in 1995, but the
   former name is still used by many of the city's inhabitants and famous
   institutions.

History

   Kalbadevi Road - Glimpse of Mumbai circa 1890.
   Enlarge
   Kalbadevi Road - Glimpse of Mumbai circa 1890.
   A part of the Metropolis of Mumbai as seen during night time. Mumbai is
   one of the most modern and cosmopolitan cities in India
   Enlarge
   A part of the Metropolis of Mumbai as seen during night time. Mumbai is
   one of the most modern and cosmopolitan cities in India
   Northern Mumbai
   Enlarge
   Northern Mumbai
   The region of Worli in Mumbai
   Enlarge
   The region of Worli in Mumbai
   Marine Drive aka "The Queen's Necklace"
   Enlarge
   Marine Drive aka "The Queen's Necklace"

   Present-day Mumbai was originally an archipelago of seven islands
   Artefacts found near Kandivali, in northern Mumbai indicate that these
   islands had been inhabited since the Stone Age. Documented evidence of
   human habitation dates back to 250 BC, when it was known as Heptanesia
   (Ptolemy) ( Ancient Greek: A Cluster of Seven Islands). In the 3rd
   century BCE, the islands formed part of the Maurya Empire, ruled by the
   Buddhist emperor, Aşoka. The Hindu rulers of the Silhara Dynasty later
   governed the islands until 1343, when the kingdom of Gujarat annexed
   them. Some of the oldest edifices of the archipelago – the Elephanta
   Caves and the Walkeshwar temple complex date from this era.

   In 1534, the Portuguese appropriated the islands from Bahadur Shah of
   Gujarat, naming them Bom Baia, Portuguese for "good bay". They were
   ceded to Charles II of England in 1661, as dowry for Catherine de
   Braganza. These islands, were in turn leased to the British East India
   Company in 1668 for a sum of £10 per annum. The company found the deep
   harbour on the east coast of the islands to be ideal for setting up
   their first port in the sub-continent. The population quickly rose from
   10,000 in 1661, to 60,000 in 1675; In 1687, the British East India
   Company transferred its headquarters from Surat to Bombay. The city
   eventually became the headquarters of the Bombay Presidency.

   From 1817 onwards, the city was reshaped with large civil engineering
   projects aimed at merging all the islands in the archipelago into a
   single amalgamated mass. This project, known as the Hornby Vellard, was
   completed by 1845, and resulted in the total area swelling to 438
   km².In 1853, India's first passenger railway line was established,
   connecting Bombay to the town of Thane. During the American Civil War
   (1861-1865), the city became the world's chief cotton trading market,
   resulting in a boom in the economy and subsequently enhancing the
   city's stature. The opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 transformed
   Bombay into one of the largest seaports on the Arabian Sea.

   Over the next thirty years, the city grew into a major urban centre,
   spurred by an improvement in infrastructure and the construction of
   many of the city's institutions. The population of the city swelled to
   one million by 1906, making it the second largest in India after
   Calcutta. As capital of the Bombay Presidency, it was a major base for
   the Indian independence movement, with the Quit India Movement called
   by Mahatma Gandhi in 1942 being its most rubric event. After India's
   independence in 1947, it became the capital of Bombay State. In the
   1950 the city expanded to its present limits by incorporating parts of
   Salsette island which lay to the north.

   After 1955, when the State of Bombay was being reorganised along
   linguistic lines into the states of Maharashtra and Gujarat, there was
   a demand that the city be constituted as an autonomous city-state.
   However, the Samyukta Maharashtra movement opposed this, and insisted
   that Mumbai be declared the capital of Maharashtra. Following a
   successful protests in which 105 people were killed by police firing,
   Maharashtra state was formed with Mumbai as its capital on May 1, 1960

   The late 1970s witnessed a construction boom and a significant influx
   of migrants, which saw Bombay overtake Calcutta as India’s most
   populous city. This has being giving rise to unrest in Marathi speaking
   people in Mumbai and consequently Shiv Sena,a political outfit
   safeguarding the rights of 'sons of soil' was formed in 1966.The city's
   secular fabric was torn apart in 1992, after large scale sectarian
   violence caused extensive loss of life and property. A few months
   later, on March 12, simultaneous bombings at several city landmarks by
   the Mumbai underworld killed around three hundred people. In 1995, the
   city was renamed Mumbai by the Shiv Sena party government of
   Maharashtra, in keeping with their policy of renaming colonial
   institutions after historic local appellations. In 2006, Mumbai was
   also the site of a major terrorist incident in which over two hundred
   people were killed by Islamic terrorists when several bombs exploded
   almost simultaneously on the Mumbai Suburban Railway.

Geography

   The metropolis comprises the city and suburbs.
   Enlarge
   The metropolis comprises the city and suburbs.

   Mumbai is located on Salsette Island, which lies at the mouth of Ulhas
   River off the western coast of India, in the coastal region known as
   the Konkan. Much of Mumbai is at sea level, and the average elevation
   ranges from 10 to 15 metres. The northern part of Mumbai is hilly, and
   the highest point of the city is at 450 metres (1,450 feet). Mumbai
   spans a total area of 468 km² (169  mi²).

   Three lakes are located within the metropolitan limits — the Tulsi
   Lake, Vihar Lake and Powai Lake. The first two are located within the
   Borivali National Park, and supply part of the city's drinking water.
   Mumbai also has three small rivers within the city limits originating
   in the National Park. The coastline of the city is indented with
   numerous creeks and bays. The eastern seaboard of Salsette Island is
   covered with large mangrove swamps, rich in biodiversity.

   Soil cover in the city region is predominantly sandy due to its
   proximity to the sea. In the suburbs, the soil cover is largely
   alluvial and loamy. The underlying rock of the region is composed of
   black Deccan basalt flows, and their acid and basic variants dating
   back to the late Cretaceous and early Eocene eras. Mumbai sits on a
   seismically active zone owing to the presence of three fault lines in
   the vicinity. The area is classified as a Zone III region, which means
   an earthquake of up to magnitude 6.5 on the Richter scale may be
   expected.

   Mumbai is classified as a metropolis of India, under the jurisdiction
   of the BrihanMumbai Municipal Corporation. It consists of two distinct
   regions — the city and the suburbs, which also form two separate
   districts of Maharashtra. The city region is also commonly referred to
   as the Island City.

Climate

   Satellite image of Mumbai with Salsette Island clearly visible.
   Enlarge
   Satellite image of Mumbai with Salsette Island clearly visible.

   The climate of the city, being in the tropical zone, and near the
   Arabian Sea, may be broadly classified into two main seasons — the
   humid season, and the dry season. The humid season, between March and
   October, is characterised by high humidity and temperatures of over 30
   °C (86  °F). The monsoon rains lash the city between June to September,
   and supply most of the city's annual rainfall of 2,200  mm (85  in).
   The maximum annual rainfall ever recorded was 3,452 mm (135.89 in) in
   1954. The highest rainfall recorded in a single day was 944 mm
   (37.16 in) on 2005- 07-26.

   The dry season, between November and February, is characterised by
   moderate levels of humidity and warm to cool weather. Cold northerly
   winds are responsible for a mild chill during January and February.
   Annual temperatures range from a high of 38 °C (100 °F) to a low of
   11 °C (52 °F). The record high is 43 °C (108 °F) and record low is
   7.4 °C (45 °F) on 1962- 01-22.

Economy

   The Bombay Stock Exchange index reflects investor confidence in the
   economy of India.
   Enlarge
   The Bombay Stock Exchange index reflects investor confidence in the
   economy of India.

   Mumbai contributes 10% of all factory employment, 40% of all income tax
   collections, 60% of all customs duty collections, 20% of all central
   excise tax collections, 40% of India's foreign trade and Rupees 40
   billion ( US$ 9 billion) in corporate taxes. A number of Indian
   financial institutions have headquarters in downtown Mumbai, including
   the Bombay Stock Exchange, the Reserve Bank of India, the National
   Stock Exchange of India, the Mint, and numerous conglomerates (the Tata
   Group, Godrej and Reliance etc). Many foreign banks and financial
   institutions also have branches in this area.

   Up until the 1980s, Mumbai owed its prosperity largely to textile mills
   and the seaport, but the local economy has since been diversified to
   include engineering, diamond polishing, healthcare and information
   technology. Mumbai’s status as the state capital means that state and
   federal government employees make up a large percentage of the city's
   workforce. Mumbai also has a large unskilled and semi-skilled labour
   population, who primarily earn their livelihood as hawkers, taxi
   drivers, mechanics and other such blue collar professions. The port and
   shipping industry too employs many residents, directly or indirectly.

   The entertainment industry is the other major employer in Mumbai. Most
   of India's major television and satellite networks are headquartered in
   Mumbai, as well as its major publishing houses. The centre of the Hindi
   movie industry, Bollywood, is also located in Mumbai, along with its
   largest studios and movie production houses.

Civic administration

                                     City officials
                                Mayor        Datta Dalvi February 20, 2005
               Municipal Commissioner       Johny Joseph February 29, 2004
                  Police Commissioner  Anami Narayan Roy  February 5, 2004
                              Sheriff Vijaypat Singhania December 19, 2005
                            Collector      Mahesh Pathak         -

   The city is administered by the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation
   (BMC) (formerly the Bombay Municipal Corporation), with executive power
   vested in the Municipal Commissioner, who is an IAS officer appointed
   by the state government. The Corporation comprises 227 directly elected
   Councillors representing the twenty four municipal wards , five
   nominated Councillors, and a titular Mayor. The BMC is in charge of the
   civic and infrastructure needs of the metropolis. An Assistant
   Municipal Commissioner oversees each ward for administrative purposes.
   Almost all the state political parties field candidates in the
   elections for Councillors.

   The metropolitan area forms two districts of Maharashtra, with each
   district under the jurisdiction of a District Collector. The Collectors
   are in charge of property records and revenue collection for the
   Federal Government, and oversee the national elections held in the
   city.

   The Mumbai Police is headed by a Police Commissioner, who is an IPS
   officer. The Mumbai Police comes under the state Home Ministry. The
   city is divided into seven police zones and seventeen traffic police
   zones, each headed by a Deputy Commissioner of Police. The Traffic
   Police is a semi-autonomous body under the Mumbai Police.

   Mumbai is the seat of the Bombay High Court, which exercises
   jurisdiction over the states of Maharashtra and Goa, and the Union
   Territories of Daman and Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli. Mumbai also
   has two lower courts, the Small Causes Court for civil matters, and the
   Sessions Court for criminal cases.

   The city elects six members to the Lok Sabha and thirty-four members to
   the Maharashtra State Assembly.

Transport

   BEST buses form an integral part of the city's transport system.
   Enlarge
   BEST buses form an integral part of the city's transport system.
   Double-length BEST bus in Mumbai
   Enlarge
   Double-length BEST bus in Mumbai
   Mumbai Suburban Railway
   Enlarge
   Mumbai Suburban Railway

   Most of Mumbai's inhabitants rely on public transport to travel to and
   from their workplace due to the lack of car parking spaces, traffic
   bottlenecks, and generally poor road conditions. The city is the
   headquarters of two rail divisions – the Central Railway (CR)
   (headquartered at Chatrapati Shivaji Terminus (formerly known as
   Victoria Terminus)), and the Western Railway (WR) (headquartered near
   Churchgate). The backbone of the city's transport, the Mumbai Suburban
   Railway, is composed of three separate networks running the length of
   the city, in a north-south direction. The Western Railway runs along
   the western region of the city, while the Central Railway covers most
   of the central and northeast parts of the metropolis. Both lines extend
   into the exurbs, each covering a total one-way length of around 125 km.
   The Harbour Line is a sub-division of the Central Railway, covering a
   distance of 54 km along the south-eastern section of the city, near the
   docks, and extending into Navi Mumbai (New Bombay). Mumbai is well
   connected by the Indian Railways to most parts of India.

   Public buses run by the BEST (an autonomous body under the BMC) cover
   almost all parts of the metropolis, as well as parts of Navi Mumbai and
   Thane. Buses are used for commuting short to medium distances, while
   train fares are more economical for long distance commutes. The BEST
   fleet consists of single-decker, double-decker and
   air-conditioned.(Reminds people slightly of London)

   Black and yellow-metered taxis, accommodating up to four passengers,
   cover most of the metropolis. Auto rickshaws, allowed to operate only
   in the suburban areas, are the main form of hired transport here. These
   three-wheeled vehicles can accommodate up to three passengers.

   Mumbai's Chatrapati Shivaji International Airport (formerly, Sahar
   International Airport) is the busiest airport in India, and caters to
   cargo and international flights while Santacruz Airport caters to
   domestic flights. The nearby Juhu aerodrome was India's first airport,
   and now hosts a flying club and a heliport.

   With its unique topography, Mumbai has one of the best natural harbours
   in the world, handling 50% of the country's passenger traffic, and much
   of India's cargo. It is also an important base for the Indian Navy.

Utility services

   The Mumbai-Pune expressway overlooking the city
   Enlarge
   The Mumbai-Pune expressway overlooking the city

   The BMC supplies potable water to the city, most of which come from the
   Tulsi and Vihar lakes, as well as a few lakes further north. The water
   is filtered at Bhandup, which is also Asia's largest water filtration
   plant. The BMC is also responsible for the road maintenance and garbage
   collection in the city. Almost all of Mumbai's daily refuse of 7,800
   metric tonnes is transported to dumping grounds in Gorai in the
   northwest, Mulund in the northeast,and Deonar in the east. Sewage
   treatment is carried out in Worli and Bandra.

   Electricity is provided by the BEST in the city, and by Reliance Energy
   and Mahavitaran (Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Co. Ltd) in
   the suburbs. Most of the city's electricity is hydroelectric and
   nuclear based. The largest telephone service provider is the
   state-owned MTNL, which held a monopoly over fixed line and cellular
   services up until 2000, and provides fixed line as well as mobile WLL
   services. Cell phone coverage is extensive, and the main service
   providers are Hutch, Airtel, BPL group, Reliance Infocomm and Tata
   Indicom. Both GSM and CDMA services are available in the city.
   Broadband internet penetration is increasing in the city, with MTNL and
   Tata being the leading service providers.

Demographics

   The Siddhivinayak temple is one of the most visited religious places in
   Mumbai.
   Enlarge
   The Siddhivinayak temple is one of the most visited religious places in
   Mumbai.
   Hiranandani Complex in Powai is an upmarket area in the northern
   suburbs.
   Enlarge
   Hiranandani Complex in Powai is an upmarket area in the northern
   suburbs.

   The population of Mumbai is about 18 million, with a density of about
   29,000 persons per square kilometre. There are 811 females to every
   1,000 males – which is lower than the national average, because many
   working males come from rural areas, where they leave behind their
   families. The overall literacy rate of the city is above 86%, which is
   higher than the national average. The religions represented in Mumbai
   include Hindus (68% of the population), Muslims (17% of the
   population), and Christians and Buddhist (4% each). The remainder are
   Parsis, Jains, Sikhs, Jews and atheists .

   For a city of its size, Mumbai has a moderate crime rate. Mumbai
   recorded 27,577 incidents of crime in 2004, which is down 11% from
   30,991 in 2001. The city's main jail is the Arthur Road Jail.

   Mumbai has a large polyglot population and Marathi is widely spoken,
   but the most common language spoken on the city streets is a colloquial
   form of Hindi, known as Bambaiya – a blend of Hindi, Marathi, Indian
   English and some invented colloquial words. Marathi is the official
   language of the state of Maharashtra. English is extensively spoken,
   and is the principal language of the city's white collar workforce.
   Most languages spoken in India have some degree of representation in
   the demographic fabric of Mumbai; the most widely spoken of these are
   Tamil, Gujarati, Telugu, Kannada, Konkani and Urdu.

   Like other large cities in the developing world, Mumbai suffers from
   the same major urbanisation problems seen in many fast growing cities
   in developing countries — widespread poverty and poor public health,
   employment, civic and educational standards for a large section of the
   population. With available space at a premium, Mumbai residents often
   reside in cramped, relatively expensive housing, usually far from
   workplaces, and therefore requiring long commutes on crowded mass
   transit, or clogged roadways. According to the Business Week, around
   45-48% of the population lives in shantytowns and slums.

People and culture

   Mumbai is always in a state of flux as depicted here outside the
   Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus station.
   Enlarge
   Mumbai is always in a state of flux as depicted here outside the
   Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus station.
   Auto rickshaws in Mumbai are a vital mode of transportation
   Enlarge
   Auto rickshaws in Mumbai are a vital mode of transportation

   A resident of Mumbai is called a Mumbaikar, or Bombayite. Many
   residents prefer to stay close to major railway stations for easy
   access to their workplaces, as a significant amount of time is spent on
   daily commuting. Thus, many live a fast-paced life, with very little
   time for social activities. Bombay residents celebrate Indian and
   Western festivals with great fanfare.

   The metropolis has its own local roadside fast food flavour, comprising
   vada pav (leavened wheat bread split in half, with fried dumplings as
   filling), panipuri (deep fried crêpe with tamarind and lentil sauce),
   pav bhaji (leavened wheat bread accompanied with fried vegetables) and
   bhelpuri (puffed rice mixture), while South Indian and Chinese food are
   also very popular. The cosmopolitan residents have unique tastes in
   cuisine, music, film and literature, both Indian and international. In
   2004, Mumbai received three heritage conservation awards from the
   UNESCO.

   Mumbai is the birthplace of Indian cinema, with the oldest film
   broadcast here in the early 20th century. Mumbai also boasts of large
   number of cinemas, including Asia's largest IMAX dome theatre, which
   feature mainstream Bollywood and Hollywood films. Many film festivals
   are avidly attended throughout the year. Besides catering to
   cinephiles, the city has a thriving theatrical tradition both in the
   regional languages and in English. Contemporary art is well represented
   in both government funded art spaces and private commercial galleries.
   The government funded art galleries include The Jehangir Art Gallery
   and The National Gallery of Modern Art. Built in 1833, the Asiatic
   Society of Bombay is the oldest public library in the city. The city
   also contains most of India's tallest buildings.

   Mumbai has six sister cities (the maximum permitted by the Indian
   government). They are: Berlin, London, Los Angeles, Saint Petersburg,
   Stuttgart and Yokohama.

Education

   Schools in Mumbai are either "municipal schools" (run by the BMC) or
   private schools (run by trusts and individuals). A majority of
   residents prefer private schools because of better infrastructure and
   the use of English as a medium of instruction. All private schools are
   affiliated either to the Maharashtra State SSC board, or the all-India
   Indian Certificate of Secondary Education (ICSE) and Central Board for
   Secondary Education (CBSE) boards. Demand is especially high for ICSE
   and CBSE affiliated schools, and those run by convents or the Jesuits.
   The government run public schools lack many facilities, but are the
   only option for poorer residents who cannot afford the more expensive
   private schools.

   Under the 10+2+3 plan, students complete ten years of schooling, and
   then enroll for two years in Junior College, where they choose from one
   of three streams: Arts, Commerce or Science. This is followed by either
   a general degree course in a chosen field of study, or a professional
   degree course, such as law, engineering, medicine etc. Most
   professional colleges in Mumbai are affiliated to the University of
   Mumbai, one of the largest universities in the world in terms of
   graduation rate. The Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, one of
   India's premier engineering schools, and the SNDT Women's University
   are the other universities in Mumbai.

Sports and recreation

   The Bombay Gymkhana is one of the elite sports clubs in the city.
   Enlarge
   The Bombay Gymkhana is one of the elite sports clubs in the city.

   Cricket is the most popular sport in the city, and is usually played in
   the maidans (grounds) around the city. Gully cricket, a modified form
   of cricket, is played in the narrow by-lanes of the city, especially on
   Sundays. Mumbai has produced several famous international cricketers,
   and is home to the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI).
   International cricket is widely watched, and the city almost comes to a
   virtual standstill on days when the Indian cricket team plays important
   matches. The city has two international cricket stadiums, the Wankhede
   Stadium and the Brabourne Stadium. The local Mumbai cricket team is
   among the strongest competitors in the Ranji Trophy, the nation's top
   domestic cricketing circuit.

   Football is the second most popular sport with the city clubs playing
   during the monsoons, when other outdoor sports cannot be played. The
   Football World Cup is one of the most widely watched television events
   in Mumbai. India's national sport, field hockey, has gone into a sharp
   decline in the recent years, losing out in terms of popularity to
   cricket, though many Mumbai players play in the national team.

   Other sports are mostly played in the numerous clubs and gymkhanas, and
   include tennis, squash, billiards, badminton, table tennis and golf.
   Mumbai also plays Rugby, one of the few cities to do so in the country.
   Every February, Mumbai holds the Derby races in the Mahalaxmi
   Racecourse. The event sees many of the city's glitterati attending,
   arrayed in the latest fashions. In recent times Formula 1 racing has
   also caught the public's attention. Other sports such as volleyball and
   basketball are mostly popular in schools and colleges.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mumbai"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
