   #copyright

Munich

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: European Geography

   Coordinates: 48°08′N 11°34′E
                            Munich (München)
   Coat of arms of Munich Location of Munich in Germany
     __________________________________________________________________

   Country                Germany
   State                  Bavaria (Bayern)
   Administrative region  Upper Bavaria
   District               urban district
   Population             1,314,551 (August 2006)
   Area                   310.43 km²
   Population density     4,205 / km²
   Elevation              519 m
   Coordinates            48°08′ N 11°34′ E
   Postal code            80000–81929
   Area code              089
   Licence plate code     M
   Mayor                  Christian Ude ( SPD)
   Website                muenchen.de
   Munich: Frauenkirche and Town Hall steeple
   Enlarge
   Munich: Frauenkirche and Town Hall steeple
   Munich: St. Lukas and River Isar
   Enlarge
   Munich: St. Lukas and River Isar

   Munich (German: München, pronounced [ˈmʏnçən] listen) is the capital of
   the German Federal State of Bavaria (German: Freistaat Bayern).

   Munich is Germany's third largest city and one of Europe's most
   prosperous and expensive. The city has a population of about 1.3
   million ( as of 2006) and the Munich metropolitan area is home to
   around 2.7 million people. The city is located on the River Isar north
   of the Bavarian Alps.

   The city's motto was "Die Weltstadt mit Herz" (The world city with a
   heart) for a long time but has recently been replaced by "München mag
   dich" (Munich loves you). The figure on Munich's coat-of-arms is a monk
   referred to as the Münchner Kindl, the child of Munich. Black and gold
   - the colours of the Holy Roman Empire - have been the city's official
   colours since the time of Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor.

Geography

Setting

   River Isar in Munich
   Enlarge
   River Isar in Munich

   Munich lies on the elevated plains of Upper Bavaria, about 50 km north
   of the northern edge of the Alps, at an altitude of about 520 m.

   Munich is situated in the Northern Alpine Foreland. The northern part
   of this sandy plateau includes a highly fertile flint area which is no
   longer affected by the folding processes found in the Alps, while the
   southern part is covered by morainic hills. In between there are fields
   of fluvio-glacial out-wash, like around Munich. Wherever these deposits
   get thinner, the ground water can permeate the gravel surface and flood
   the area, leading to marshes as in the north of Munich.

Climate

   Because of the city's altitude and proximity to the northern edge of
   the Alps, precipitation is rather high. Rain storms often come
   violently and unexpectedly. The range of temperature between day and
   night or summer and winter can be extreme. A warm downwind from the
   Alps ( Föhn) can change the temperatures completely within a few hours,
   even in the winter. Winters last from December to March. Munich
   experiences rather cold winters, but heavy rainfall is rarely seen in
   the winter. The coldest month is January with an average temperature of
   1° C (33° F). Snow cover is seen for at least a couple of weeks during
   winter. Summers in Munich city are fairly warm with average temperature
   of 19° C (67° F) in the hottest month of July. The summers last from
   May till August. In the summer, there is frequent rainfall accompanied
   by thunderstorms.

History

Origin

   As foundation date the year 1158 is assumed which is the earliest date
   the city is mentioned in a document. By that time the Guelph Henry the
   Lion, Duke of Saxony and Bavaria, had built a bridge over the river
   Isar next to a settlement of Benedictine monks. The monks' presence
   dated back to the 8th century, although settlement in the Munich area
   can be traced back to Roman times. To force traders to use his bridge
   (and charge them for doing so) Henry also destroyed a nearby bridge
   owned by bishop Otto von Freising ( Freising). Subsequently the bishop
   and Henry quarreled about the city before Emperor Frederick I
   Barbarossa at an Imperial Diet held in Augsburg in 1158. This
   sanctioned Henry's spoliation, and awarded an annual compensation for
   the bishop, and also confirmed Munich's trading and currency rights.

Middle Ages

   The Munich flag, the Bavarian flag and the Frauenkirche
   Enlarge
   The Munich flag, the Bavarian flag and the Frauenkirche

   Almost two decades later in 1175 Munich was officially granted city
   status and fortified. In 1180, with the trial of Henry the Lion, Otto I
   Wittelsbach became Duke of Bavaria and Munich was handed over to the
   bishop of Freising. Otto's heirs, the Wittelsbach dynasty would rule
   Bavaria until 1918. In 1240 Munich itself was transferred to Otto II
   Wittelsbach and in 1255, when the dukedom of Bavaria was split in two,
   Munich became the ducal residence of Upper Bavaria.

   Duke Louis IV was elected German king in 1314 and crowned as Holy Roman
   Emperor in 1328. He strengthened the city's position by granting it the
   salt monopoly, thus assuring it of additional income. In 1327 most of
   the city was destroyed by a fire but was rebuilt, extended and
   protected with a new fortification some years later. Philosophers like
   Michael of Cesena, Marsilius of Padua and William of Ockham supported
   Louis IV in his fight with the papacy and were protected at the
   emperor's court. Since the citizenry several times revolted against the
   dukes a new castle was built close to the fortification from 1385
   onwards. A rising of the guilds in 1397 was thrown down the following
   year.

   Another devastating fire destroyed parts of the city in 1429. Since the
   town fathers considered themselves threatened by the Hussites the
   fortification was extended. In the late 15th century Munich underwent a
   revival of gothic arts - the Old Town Hall was enlarged and a new
   cathedral - the Frauenkirche - constructed within only twenty years
   from 1468 onwards. The cathedral has become a symbol for the city with
   its two brick towers and onion domes.

Capital of the reunited duchy of Bavaria

   Marienplatz, Munich about 1650
   Enlarge
   Marienplatz, Munich about 1650

   When Bavaria was reunited in 1506 Munich became capital of the whole of
   Bavaria. The arts and politics became increasingly influenced by the
   court. During the 16th century Munich was a centre of the German
   counter reformation, and also of renaissance arts. Duke Wilhelm V
   commissioned the Jesuit Michaelskirche, which became a centre for the
   counter-reformation, and also built the Hofbräuhaus for brewing brown
   beer in 1589.

   The Catholic League was founded in Munich in 1609. In 1623 during the
   Thirty Years' War Munich became electoral residence when Maximilian I,
   Duke of Bavaria was invested with the electoral dignity but in 1632 the
   city was occupied by Gustav II Adolph of Sweden. When the bubonic
   plague broke out in 1634 and 1635 about one third of the population
   died. After the war Munich quickly became a centre of baroque life.
   Elector Ferdinand Maria’s consort Henriette Adelaide of Savoy invited
   numerous Italian architects and artists to the city, and built the
   Theatinerkirche and Nymphenburg palace on the occasion of the birth of
   their son and heir Maximilian II Emanuel, elector of Bavaria in 1662.
   The baroque Theatinerkirche on Odeonsplatz in the historic city centre
   Enlarge
   The baroque Theatinerkirche on Odeonsplatz in the historic city centre

   Munich was under the control of the Habsburg family for some years
   after Maximilian II Emanuel had made a pact with France in 1705 during
   the War of the Spanish Succession. The occupation led to bloody
   uprisings against the Austrian imperial troops followed by a massacre
   while farmers were rioting (the "Sendlinger Mordweihnacht" or Murder
   Christmas of Sendling). The coronation of Max Emanuel's son elector
   Charles Albert as Emperor Karl VII in 1742 led to another Habsburg
   occupation. The city's first academic institution, the Bavarian Academy
   of Sciences, was founded in 1759 by Maximilian III Joseph, who
   abandoned his forefather's imperial ambitions and made peace. From 1789
   onwards, when the old medieval fortification was demolished, the
   English Garden was laid out - it is one of the world's largest urban
   public parks. By that time, the city was growing very quickly and was
   one of the largest cities in continental Europe.

Capital of the Kingdom of Bavaria

   Munich, town map 1858
   Enlarge
   Munich, town map 1858

   In 1806, it became the capital of the new Kingdom of Bavaria, with the
   state's parliament (the Landtag) and the new archdiocese of Munich and
   Freising being located in the city. Twenty years later Landshut
   University was moved to Munich.
   The Bavaria with the Ruhmeshalle, opened in 1850
   Enlarge
   The Bavaria with the Ruhmeshalle, opened in 1850

   Many of the city's finest buildings belong to this period and were
   built under the reign of King Ludwig I. These neoclassical buildings
   include the Ruhmeshalle with the "Bavaria" statue by Ludwig Michael von
   Schwanthaler and those on the magnificent Ludwigstraße and the
   Königsplatz, built by the architects Leo von Klenze and Friedrich von
   Gärtner. Under King Max II the Maximilianstraße was constructed in
   Perpendicular style.

   The railways reached Munich in 1839, followed by trams in 1876 and
   electric lighting in 1882. The Technical University of Munich was
   founded in 1868. The city hosted Germany's first exhibition of
   electricity, and in 1930 the first ever television was showcased at the
   city's Deutsches Museum (founded in 1903) on the banks of the Isar.
   Numerous inventors and scientists worked in Munich, including Alois
   Senefelder, Joseph von Fraunhofer, Justus von Liebig, Georg Ohm, Carl
   von Linde, Rudolf Diesel, Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen, Emil Kraepelin and
   Alois Alzheimer, and the young Albert Einstein attended the Luitpold
   Gymnasium. In 1901 the Hellabrunn Zoo opened in the city.

   Munich also became a centre of the arts and literature again, as Carl
   Rottmann, Wilhelm von Kaulbach, Carl Spitzweg, Franz von Lenbach, Franz
   von Stuck, Wilhelm Leibl, Paul Heyse, Henrik Ibsen, Richard Wagner,
   Richard Strauss and many others lived and worked there.
   Justizpalast, postcard late 19th century
   Enlarge
   Justizpalast, postcard late 19th century

   The period immediately before World War I saw particular economic and
   cultural prominence for the city. Munich, and especially its suburb of
   Schwabing, became the domicile of many artists and writers. Thomas Mann
   wrote about this period "Munich shone". Der Blaue Reiter (The Blue
   Rider), a group of expressionist artists, was established in Munich in
   1911. The city was a home for painters like Paul Klee, Wassily
   Kandinsky, Alexej von Jawlensky, Gabriele Münter, Franz Marc, August
   Macke and Alfred Kubin and for numerous writers like Rainer Maria Rilke
   and Frank Wedekind. In 1846 Munich's population was about 100,000, and
   by 1901 this had risen to about 500,000.

World War I and revolution

   Following the outbreak of World War I in 1914, life in Munich became
   very difficult, as the Allied blockade of Germany led to food and fuel
   shortages. During French air raids in 1916 three bombs fell on Munich.
   After World War I, the city was at the centre of much political unrest.
   In November 1918 on the eve of revolution, Ludwig III and his family
   fled the city. After the murder of the first republican premier of
   Bavaria Kurt Eisner in February 1919 by Anton Graf von Arco-Valley, a
   member of the right-wing Thule Gesellschaft (Thule Society), the Munich
   Soviet Republic (Münchner Räterepublik) was proclaimed. After
   Communists had taken power, Lenin, who had lived in Munich some years
   before, sent a congratulatory telegram, but the Soviet Republic was put
   down on May 3, 1919 by the Freikorps. After the Räterepublik had been
   brutally put down and the republican government had been restored,
   Munich subsequently became a hotbed of right-wing politics, among which
   Adolf Hitler and the Nazis rose to prominence.

Weimar Republic / Nazi Regime and World War II

   In 1923 Hitler and his supporters, who at that time were concentrated
   in Munich, staged the Beer Hall Putsch, an attempt to overthrow the
   Weimar Republic and seize power. The revolt failed, resulting in
   Hitler's arrest and the temporary crippling of the Nazi Party, which
   was virtually unknown outside Munich.

   Munich remained a centre of cultural life during the Weimar period, as
   figures such as Lion Feuchtwanger, Bert Brecht and Oskar Maria Graf
   were active.

   The city however would once again become a Nazi stronghold when they
   took power in Germany in 1933. Because of its importance to the rise of
   Nazism, the Nazis called it the Hauptstadt der Bewegung ("capital of
   the movement"). The NSDAP headquarters were in Munich and many
   Führerbauten ("Führer-buildings") were built around the Königsplatz,
   some of which have survived to this day. During the Night of the Long
   Knives in 1934 Hitler eliminated potential political rivals.

   In 1938, the Munich Agreement, Neville Chamberlain's famous act of
   appeasement to Hitler, was signed in the city by representatives of
   Germany, Italy, France and Britain. It ceded the mostly German-speaking
   regions of Czechoslovakia called Sudetenland to Germany. One year later
   Georg Elser failed with his attempt to assassinate Hitler during his
   annual speech to commemorate the Beer Hall Putsch in the
   Bürgerbräukeller in Munich.

   Munich was the base of the White Rose (German: Die Weiße Rose), a group
   of students that formed a resistance movement from June 1942 to
   February 1943. The core members were arrested and executed following a
   distribution of leaflets in Munich University by Hans and Sophie
   Scholl.

   The city was very heavily damaged by allied bombing during World War II
   - the city was hit by 71 air raids over a period of five years.

Postwar Munich

   After American occupation in 1945, Munich was completely rebuilt
   following a meticulous and - by comparison to other war-ravaged German
   cities - rather conservative plan which preserved its pre-war street
   grid.

   In 1957 Munich's population passed the 1 million mark.

   Munich was the site of the 1972 Summer Olympics, during which Israeli
   athletes were assassinated by Palestinian terrorists (see Munich
   massacre), when terrorist gunmen from the Palestinian " Black
   September" group took hostage members of the Israeli Olympic team. A
   rescue attempt by the West German government was unsuccessful and
   resulted in the deaths of the Israeli hostages, five of the terrorists,
   and one German police officer.

   Several games of the 1974 World Cup were also held in the city,
   including the German triumph against the Netherlands in a legendary
   final. Several games of the 2006 World Cup were also held in Munich.

   In 1992 Munich’s new airport was inaugurated and the inauguration of
   the Neue Messe, the new exhibition centre on the site of the former
   airport of Riem, took place in 1998.

   The current (2006) Roman Catholic Pope Benedict XVI (Joseph Ratzinger)
   was ordained a priest in the Archdiocese of Munich and Freising on June
   29, 1951. Ratzinger served as Archbishop of Munich from 1977 to 1982.

Politics

   Munich's current mayor is Christian Ude of the SPD (Social Democratic
   Party of Germany). Munich has a nearly unbroken history of SPD
   governments since World War II, which is remarkable because the rest of
   Bavaria is a conservative stronghold, with the CSU (Christian Social
   Union) winning absolute majorities among the Bavarian electorate in
   nearly all elections at the communal, state, and federal levels.

   As capital of Bavaria, Munich is an important political centre in
   Germany and the seat of the Bavarian Landtag (the state parliament),
   the Staatskanzlei (the state chancellery) and of all state departments.

   Several national and international authorities are located in Munich,
   including the Bundesfinanzhof (the highest German tax court) and the
   European Patent Office.

Subdivisions

   Munich is subdivided into 25 boroughs (Bezirke in German, also
   sometimes called districts in English).
   Munich's Boroughs
   Enlarge
   Munich's Boroughs

   Allach-Untermenzing (23), Altstadt-Lehel (1),
   Aubing-Lochhausen-Langwied (22), Au-Haidhausen (5), Berg am Laim (14),
   Bogenhausen (13), Feldmoching-Hasenbergl (24), Hadern (20), Laim (25),
   Ludwigsvorstadt-Isarvorstadt (2), Maxvorstadt (3), Milbertshofen-Am
   Hart (11), Moosach (10), Neuhausen-Nymphenburg (9), Obergiesing (17),
   Pasing-Obermenzing (21), Ramersdorf-Perlach (16), Schwabing-Freimann
   (12), Schwabing-West (4), Schwanthalerhöhe (8), Sendling (6),
   Sendling-Westpark (7),
   Thalkirchen-Obersendling-Forstenried-Fürstenried-Solln (19),
   Trudering-Riem (15) and Untergiesing-Harlaching (18).

Main sights and culture

   Street art in Kaufingerstraße, near Marienplatz
   Enlarge
   Street art in Kaufingerstraße, near Marienplatz
   Munich: New Town Hall steeple with Marian column
   Enlarge
   Munich: New Town Hall steeple with Marian column

   Munich is a popular tourist destination and has been described as
   Germany's "secret capital".

Marienplatz and Stachus

   At the centre of the city is the Marienplatz - a large open square
   named after the Mariensäule, a Marian column in its centre - with the
   Old and the New Town Hall. Its tower contains the Rathaus-Glockenspiel,
   an ornate clock with almost life-sized moving figures that show scenes
   from a medieval jousting tournament as well as a performance of the
   famous "Schäfflertanz" (roughly translated "Barrel-makers' dance").
   Three gates of the demolished medieval fortification have survived to
   this day - the Isartor in the east, the Sendlinger Tor in the south and
   the Karlstor in the west of the inner city. The Karlstor is the oldest
   building at Stachus, a grand square dominated by the Justizpalast
   (Palace of Justice).

Houses of worship

   The Frauenkirche as seen from the top of the town hall
   Enlarge
   The Frauenkirche as seen from the top of the town hall

   The Peterskirche close to Marienplatz is the oldest church of the inner
   city. It was first built during the romanesque period, and was the
   focus of the early monastic settlement in Munich before the city's
   official foundation in 1158. The oldest church within the city borders
   is Heilig Kreuz in Fröttmaning next to the Allianzarena, known for its
   Romanesque fresco. Nearby St. Peter the gothic hall-church
   Heiliggeistkirche (The Church of the Holy Ghost) was converted to
   baroque style from 1724 onwards and looks down upon the
   Viktualienmarkt, the most popular market of Munich.

   The Frauenkirche ("Dom zu unserer Lieben Frau" - Cathedral of Our Lady)
   is the most famous building in the city centre and serves as cathedral
   for the Archdiocese of Munich and Freising. It is particularly famous
   for the brass onion domes that top the twin towers. The domes were
   added in the 16th century, in a style that contrasted with the gothic
   style of the rest of the building. The original design called for
   pointed towers like Cologne Cathedral but they were never completed due
   to lack of money. At first glance the two towers appear to be the same
   height but in fact one is slightly taller than the other. Unlike most
   buildings in Munich's old town, the towers of the Frauenkirche (but not
   the church itself) survived WW2 intact, making them more than 500 years
   old. The Frauenkirche's towers (99 meters or 325 feet) are also the
   measurement for a new rule which limits the height of new buildings to
   the same height in the city. This rule was passed in November 2004 by
   the people of Munich in a referendum organized by Georg Kronawitter, a
   former SPD mayor, despite opposition from the political parties in the
   city's parliament ("Stadtrat") who feared that it would harm the city's
   attractiveness to investors. Other gothic churches are the former
   graveyard chapels of St. Peter, the Kreuzkirche, and of the
   Frauenkirche, St Salvator but also the former Augustinerkirche which
   serves today as German Hunting and Fishing Museum.
   Asamkirche
   Enlarge
   Asamkirche

   The nearby Michaelskirche is the largest renaissance church north of
   the Alps, while the Theatinerkirche is a basilica in Italianate high
   baroque which had a major influence on Southern German baroque
   architecture. Its dome dominates the Odeonsplatz. Other baroque
   churches in the inner city which are worth a detour are the
   Bürgersaalkirche, the Dreifaltigkeitskirche, the St. Anna
   Damenstiftskirche and St. Anna im Lehel, the first rococo church in
   Bavaria. The Asamkirche was endowed and built by the Brothers Asam,
   pioneering artists of the rococo period. St Michael in Berg am Laim was
   built almost simultaneously by Johann Michael Fischer and might be the
   most remarkable church out of the inner city.

   With the 19th century architectural revival styles many new catholic
   churches were constructed also in Munich. Since Middle Franconia whose
   population is predominantly of Protestant origin was annexed by Bavaria
   the first Protestant churches St Mathaeus, St. Martin and St. Lukas in
   Munich were erected in this period as well.

   On November 9th 2006 the new Ohel Jakob synagogue was opened on
   Sankt-Jakobs-Platz, 68 years after the massive Kristallnacht pogrom .

   A new mosque is planned not far from the city centre on a vacant lot.
   An Islamic prayer house still exists in the vicinity but the plans for
   a bigger and more representative building face to face with a catholic
   church are discussed controversely.

The palaces, royal avenues and theatres

   The Alte Hof, a medieval castle and first residence of the Wittelsbach
   dukes in Munich still exists in the inner city close to Marienplatz.
   The Renaissance Mint Yard with its neoclassical façade is situated
   between the old castle and the Residenz.

   The large Residenz palace complex (begun in 1385) on the edge of
   Munich's Old Town ranks among Europe's most significant museums of
   interior decoration. Having undergone several extensions, it contains
   also the treasury and the splendid rococo Cuvilliés Theatre. Many
   operas were staged here, including the premiere of Mozart's "Idomeneo"
   in 1781.
   Munich, Residenz and National Theatre
   Enlarge
   Munich, Residenz and National Theatre

   Munich is home to a neo-classical opera house of international renown,
   the Nationaltheater where several of Richard Wagner's operas had their
   premieres under the patronage of Ludwig II of Bavaria. Today it is the
   home of the Bavarian State Opera and the Bavarian State Orchestra. Next
   door the modern Residenz Theatre was erected in the building that had
   housed the Cuvilliés Theatre before World War II. The Gärtnerplatz
   Theatre is a ballet and musical state theatre on the left bank of the
   Isar in the south of the inner city. The modern Gasteig centre on the
   opposite bank houses the Munich Philharmonic Orchestra. The third
   orchestra in Munich with international importance is the Bavarian Radio
   Symphony Orchestra. Close to the Gasteig on the bank of the Isar is the
   Volksbad, a large public bath built in the art nouveau style.

   Among the baroque and neoclassical mansions which still exist in Munich
   are the Palais Törring-Jettenbach with its loggia, the Palais Preysing,
   the Palais Holnstein (the residence of the Archbishop of Munich and
   Freising), the Palais Leuchtenberg (the former residence of Eugène de
   Beauharnais) and the Prinz-Carl-Palais, the official residence of
   Bavaria's state premier (or Ministerpräsident). All mansions are
   situated close to the Residenz.

   Four grand royal avenues of the 19th century with magnificent official
   buildings are reminders of the kingdom of Bavaria:

   Brienner Strasse, starting at Odeonsplatz on the northern fringe of the
   Old Town close to the Residenz, runs from east to west and opens into
   the impressive Königsplatz, designed with the " Doric" Propyläen, the "
   Ionic" Glyptothek and the " Corinthian" State Museum of Classical Art,
   on its back side St. Boniface's Abbey was erected. The area around
   Königsplatz is home to the Kunstareal, Munich's gallery and museum
   quarter (as described below).

   The neoclassical Ludwigstrasse also begins at Odeonsplatz and runs from
   south to north, skirting the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, the St.
   Louis church, the Bayerische Staatsbibliothek ( Bavarian State Library)
   and numerous state ministries and palaces.
   Maximilianeum
   Enlarge
   Maximilianeum

   Maximilianstrasse starts at Max-Joseph-Platz, where the Residenz and
   the National Theatre are situated, and runs from west to east. The
   avenue is framed by neogothic palaces which house, among others, the
   Schauspielhaus (one of the most important German language theatres in
   the world), the building of the district government of Upper Bavaria
   and the Völkerkundemuseum (Museum of Ethnology). After crossing the
   river Isar, the avenue circles the Maximilianeum, home of the Bavarian
   Landtag (state parliament). The western portion of Maximilianstrasse is
   known for its designer shops, luxury boutiques, jewellery stores, and
   one of Munich's foremost five-star hotels, the Hotel Vier Jahreszeiten
   (Four Seasons).

   Prinzregentenstrasse runs parallel to Maximilianstrasse and begins at
   Prinz-Carl-Palais, in the northeastern part of the Old Town. Many
   museums can be found along the avenue, such as the internationally
   renowned Haus der Kunst (House of Art), the Bayerisches Nationalmuseum
   ( Bavarian National Museum), the Schackgalerie and the Villa Stuck on
   the eastern side of the river. The avenue crosses the river and circles
   the Friedensengel (Angel of Peace), a monument commemorating the 25
   years of peace following the Franco-Prussian War in 1871. The
   Prinzregententheater, another important theatre, is at
   Prinzregentenplatz further to the east.
   Nymphenburg
   Enlarge
   Nymphenburg

   Two large baroque palaces in Nymphenburg and Oberschleissheim are
   reminders of Bavaria's royal past. Schloss Nymphenburg ( Nymphenburg
   Palace), some 6 km north west of the city centre, is surrounded by an
   impressive park and is considered to be one of Europe's most beautiful
   royal residences. 2 km north west of Nymphenburg Palace is Schloss
   Blutenburg ( Blutenburg Castle) situated, an old ducal country seat
   with a late-Gothic palace church. Schloss Fürstenried ( Fürstenried
   Palace), a baroque palace of similar structure to Nymphenburg but of
   much smaller size, was contemporaneously erected in the south west of
   Munich. The second large baroque residence is Schloss Schleißheim (
   Schleissheim Palace), located in the suburb of Oberschleissheim, a
   palace complex encompassing three separate residences: Altes Schloss
   Schleißheim (the old palace), Neues Schloss Schleißheim (the new
   palace) and Schloss Lustheim (Lustheim Palace). Most parts of the
   palace complex serve as museums and art galleries. Deutsches Museum's
   Flugwerft Schleißheim flight exhibition centre is located nearby, on
   the Schleißheim Special Landing Field.

The museums

   The Deutsches Museum, located on an island in the Isar, is one of the
   oldest and largest science museums in the world. Three redundant
   exhibition buildings which are under a protection order were converted
   to house the Verkehrsmuseum, which houses the land transport
   collections of the Deutsches Museum. Several still not centralised
   museums show the expanded state collections of palaeontology, geology,
   mineralogy, zoology, botany and anthropology.
   The Glyptothek on Königsplatz
   Enlarge
   The Glyptothek on Königsplatz

   The city has several important art galleries, most of which can be
   found in the Kunstareal, including the Alte Pinakothek, the Neue
   Pinakothek, and the Pinakothek der Moderne. Alte Pinakothek's rather
   monolithic structure contains a treasure trove of the works of European
   masters between the 14th and 18th centuries. The collection reflects
   the eclectic tastes of the Wittelsbachs over four centuries, and is
   sorted by schools over two sprawling floors. Major displays include
   Albrecht Dürer`s Christ-like Self-Portrait, his Four Apostles,
   Raffael's paintings The Canigiani Holy Family and Madonna Tempi as well
   as Peter Paul Rubens two-storey-high Judgment Day. The gallery houses
   one of the world's most comprehensive Rubens collections. Before World
   War I, the Blaue Reiter group of artists worked in Munich. Many of
   their works can now be seen at the Lenbachhaus. An important collection
   of Greek and Roman art is held in the Glyptothek and the Staatliche
   Antikensammlung (State Antiquities Collection). Louis I managed to
   acquire such famous pieces as the Medusa Rondanini, the Barberini Faun
   and the figures from the Temple of Aphaea on Aegina for the Glyptothek.
   The Kunstareal will be further augmented by the completion of the
   Egyptian Museum.

   The famous gothic Morris dancers of Erasmus Grasser are exhibited in
   the Munich City Museum in the old arsenal building. The State Museum of
   Ethnology in Maximilianstrasse is the second largest collection in
   Germany of artifacts and objects from outside Europe, while the
   Bavarian National Museum and the adjoining State Archeological
   Collections in Prinzregentenstrasse rank among Europe's major art and
   cultural history museums. The nearby Schackgalerie is an important
   gallery of German 19th century paintings.

Modern Munich

   Highlight Towers
   Enlarge
   Highlight Towers

   Munich features a wide and diverse array of modern architecture,
   although strict height limitations for buildings have limited the
   construction of skyscrapers. Most high-rise buildings are clustered at
   the northern edge of Munich, like the Hypohaus, the Arabella High-Rise
   Building, the Highlight Towers, Uptown Munich and the BMW Headquarters
   next to the Olympic Park. Several other high-rise buildings are located
   near the city centre and on the Siemens campus in southern Munich. A
   landmark of modern Munich is also the architecture of the sport
   stadiums (see below).

   In November 2004, a referendum was held to decide whether the
   construction of high-rise buildings in the inner city should be
   prohibited; as a result of the referendum, several building projects,
   among them the planned new office building of Süddeutscher Verlag, had
   to be changed substantially or given up completely. However, as of
   2006, due to the very close result of the referendum and due to the
   fact that the referendum's result was binding only for one year, there
   is an ongoing discussion in the city council on how to proceed with
   future building plans.

The parks

   Hofgarten with the dome of the state chancellery near the Residenz
   Enlarge
   Hofgarten with the dome of the state chancellery near the Residenz

   Munich is a green city with numerous parks. The Englischer Garten,
   close to the city centre and covering an area of 3.7 km², is one of the
   world's largest urban public parks, and contains a nudist area, jogging
   tracks and bridle-paths. Other large green spaces are the modern
   Olympic Park, and the parks of Nymphenburg Palace (with the Botanical
   Garden to the north), and Schleissheim Palace. The city's oldest park
   is the Hofgarten, near the Residenz, and dating back to the 16th
   century. Most known for the largest beergarden in the town is the
   former royal Hirschgarten, founded in 1780 for deer which still live
   there. The city's zoo is the Tierpark Hellabrunn near the Flaucher
   Island in the Isar in the south of the city. Another notable park is
   Ostpark, located in Perlach-Rammersdorf area which houses the swiming
   area , Michealibad, one of the largest in Munich.

Hofbräuhaus and Oktoberfest

   Main article: Oktoberfest
   Oktoberfest (2003)
   Enlarge
   Oktoberfest (2003)

   The Hofbräuhaus am Platzl is arguably the most well-known beer hall,
   located in the city centre. It also operates the second largest tent at
   the Oktoberfest, perhaps Munich's most famous attraction. A 2-week-long
   fair, it offers a wide selection of rollercoasters and several large
   beer tents ("Bierzelte"). The Oktoberfest was first held on October 12,
   1810 in honour of the marriage of crown prince Ludwig to Princess
   Therese von Sachsen-Hildburghausen. The festivities were closed with a
   horse race and in the following years the horse races were continued
   and later developed into what is now known as the Oktoberfest. Despite
   its name, most of Oktoberfest occurs in September. It always finishes
   on the first Sunday in October unless the German national holiday on 3
   October ("Tag der deutschen Einheit" - Day of German Unity) is a Monday
   or Tuesday - then the Oktoberfest still opens for these days.

Others

     * Dallmayr

Around Munich

   Oberschleissheim, New Palace
   Enlarge
   Oberschleissheim, New Palace
   Fürstenfeldbruck, St.Mary
   Enlarge
   Fürstenfeldbruck, St.Mary

   The Munich agglomeration sprawls across the plain of the Voralpenland.
   Several smaller traditional Bavarian towns are today part of the Munich
   suburbs:
     * Dachau
     * Erding
     * Fürstenfeldbruck
     * Freising
     * Garching bei München
     * Germering
     * Gräfelfing
     * Gröbenzell
     * Grünwald
     * Gauting
     * Haar
     * Germering
     * Oberschleissheim
     * Planegg
     * Starnberg
     * etc.

Lifestyle

   Residents of Munich typically enjoy a high quality of life. Mercer HR
   Consulting consistently rates the city among the top 10 cities with
   highest quality of life worldwide - a 2005 survey ranked Munich as 7th.
   Munich enjoys a thriving economy, driven by the information technology,
   biotechnology, and publishing sectors. Environmental pollution is
   comparatively low, although as of 2006 the city council is concerned
   about levels of particulate matter (PM), especially along the city's
   major thoroughfares. Since the enactment of EU legislation concerning
   the concentration of particulate in the air, environmental groups such
   as Greenpeace have staged large protest rallies to urge the city
   council and the State government to take a harder stance on pollution.

   Public transport is very efficient, although delays on the S-Bahn
   (commuter train) often cause frustration during extreme winter weather.
   The crime rate is very low compared to other large German cities, such
   as Hamburg or Berlin. This high quality of life and safety has caused
   the city to be nicknamed "Toytown" amongst some of the English-speaking
   residents. German inhabitants call it “Millionendorf”, which means
   “village of a million people”. Some also refer to it as "Weltstadt mit
   Herz" which was the official city slogan for some years and means
   "world city with a heart".

   The Viktualienmarkt is Munich's most popular market for fresh food and
   delicatessen. A very old feature of Munich's Fasching (carnival) is the
   dance of the Marktfrauen (market women) of the Viktualienmarkt in
   comical costumes.

   The Auer Dult is held three times a year on the square around Mariahilf
   church and is one of Munich's oldest markets, well known for its jumble
   sale and antiques. Almost 300 stands offer rare books and old prints,
   haberdashery goods, natural hair and skin care and a large selection of
   china and cooking equipment. Many authentic traditional Bavarian
   garments, like lederhosen or dirndl, can be found there. For amusement
   the Auer Dult offers horseback riding, the puppet show, the
   merry-go-rounds, bumper cars and shooting galleries.

   Three weeks before Christmas the Christkindlmarkt at Marienplatz and
   other squares in the city sells Christmas goods.

   Café culture is strong in Munich, especially during the summer. There
   are many restaurants accommodating all preferences of cuisine. And
   possibly the most important free time activity during the summer: the
   beer gardens. There are around 20 major beer gardens, with four of the
   most famous and popular being located in the Englischer Garten and the
   largest one in the Hirschgarten.

Nightlife in Munich

   Nightlife in Munich is thriving with over 6,000 licensed establishments
   in the city, especially in Schwabing. Some notable establishments are:
   the touristy Hofbräuhaus, one of the oldest breweries in Munich,
   located in the city centre near Tal; Kultfabrik, a former industrial
   area converted to host many different discos and pubs;

Culinary specialities

   Weißwürste with sweet mustard and pretzel
   Enlarge
   Weißwürste with sweet mustard and pretzel

   The Weißwürste ('white sausages'), traditionally eaten only in the
   morning, often served with sweet mustard and freshly baked pretzels are
   a speciality from Munich as well as Leberkäs, Bavarian grilled Sausage
   Loaf often served with Potato Salad.

   The most famous soup might be the Leberknödel Soup. Leberknödel is a
   bread dumpling seasoned with liver and onions.

   Schweinebraten (pot roasted pork) with Knödel (dumplings made from
   potatoes or white bread) and Kraut (cabbage) and Schweinshaxn (knuckle
   of pork) are served as lunch or dinner.

   Popular as dessert is the traditional Bavarian Apple Strudel with
   Vanilla Sauce or Auszogene, a fried pastry shaped like a large donut.

   These specialities are often served in the beergardens: Obatzda is a
   Bavarian Cheese Specialty, a savoury blend of smashed camembert with
   brie prepared with cream cheese, butter and onions or spicy paprika.
   It's often served in the beergardens as well as Radi (radish), white
   radish cut in slin slices and salted, and Münchner Wurstsalat, Munich'
   s famous Sausage Salad with thinly sliced Knackwurst marinated in
   vinegar and oil with onions on a bed of lettuce and sliced Swiss
   cheese. A Steckerlfisch is a local fish like trout or whitefish speared
   on a wooden stick, grilled and smoked on charcoal, the typical feature
   is the crispy skin. Another classic is A Hoibs Hendl (half a grilled
   chicken). A Maß is a litre of blond beer, a Radler consists of beer and
   half of lemonade.

   Munich is famous for its breweries and the Weißbier (or Weizenbier,
   wheat beer) is a speciality from Bavaria. Helles with its translucent
   gold colour is the most popular Munich beer today, although it’s not
   very old (only introduced in 1895). Helles and Pils have almost ousted
   the Munich Dark Beer, which gets its dark colour from burnt malt, the
   most popular beer in Munich within the 19th century. Starkbier is the
   strongest Munich beers, containing 6-9 percent alcohol. It is dark
   amber and has a heavy malty taste. It is most popular during the Lenten
   Starkbierzeit (strong beer time), which begins on or before St.
   Joseph’s Day (March 19th).

Economy

   BMW Headquarters building (one of the few buildings that have been
   built from the top to the bottom) and the bowl shaped BMW museum
   Enlarge
   BMW Headquarters building (one of the few buildings that have been
   built from the top to the bottom) and the bowl shaped BMW museum

   Munich has the strongest economy of any German city. The initiative
   “Neue Soziale Marktwirtschaft (INSM)” (New Social Market Economy) and
   the “ WirtschaftsWoche” (Business Weekly) magazine have awarded Munich
   the top score in their comparative survey for the third time in June
   2006. Munich topped also the ranking of the magazine “Capital” in
   February 2005 for the economic prospects between 2002 and 2011 in sixty
   German cities.

   Munich is one of the centers of the German new economy as a centre for
   biotechnology, software and other service industries. Munich is the
   home of the headquarters of the car manufacturer BMW, the truck
   manufacturer MAN Nutzfahrzeuge, the aircraft engine manufacturer MTU
   Aero Engines, the space and defence contractor EADS (headquartered in
   the suburban town of Ottobrunn), the injection molding machine
   manufacturer Krauss-Maffei, the camera and lighting manufacturer Arri,
   the technology firms Siemens and Infineon Technologies (headquartered
   in the suburban town of Neubiberg), as well as the German headquarters
   of Precision Plus, McDonald’s and Microsoft.

   The significance of Munich as a financial centre is proven by numerous
   banks such as the HypoVereinsbank and the Bayerische Landesbank and
   many insurances. The city is home to the global headquarters of German
   insurance companies Allianz and Munich Re.

   Munich is home to many publishing houses (fewer only than New York
   City) and also to The Süddeutsche Zeitung, one of Germany's largest
   daily newspapers.

   The Bavaria Film Studios are located in the suburb of Grünwald, they
   are one of Europe's biggest and most famous movie production studios.

   Because of numerous special trade exhibitions Munich is regarded as an
   international centre in this field as well.

   Lufthansa has opened a second hub at Munich's Franz Josef Strauss
   International Airport, the second-largest airport in Germany, after
   Frankfurt International Airport.

Transportation

   Public transport network
   Enlarge
   Public transport network

Munich Airport

   Franz Josef Strauss International Airport ( IATA: MUC, ICAO: EDDM) is
   Munich's main airport, some 30 km to the north east of the city centre.
   The airport can be reached by Schnellbahn train lines S1 from the east
   and S8 from the west part of the city. However, from the Hauptbahnhof
   (Main railway station), the journey takes 40-45 minutes. A magnetic
   levitation train (called Transrapid) which will run at speeds of up to
   400km/h from the central station to the airport is under consideration.
   It would reduce the travel time from the Hauptbahnhof to only 10
   minutes. The airport began operations in 1992, replacing the former
   main airport, the Munich-Riem airport (active 1939-1992).

   Also, the Bavarian state government has announced plans to expand the
   Oberpfaffenhofen Air Station, located west of Munich, for commercial
   use. These plans are opposed by many residents of the Oberpfaffenhofen
   area. It seems these plans have now been put aside.

Public transportation

   For its population, Munich has one of the most comprehensive systems in
   the world, incorporating subways, suburban trains, trams and buses. The
   system is supervised by the Munich Transport and Tariff Association
   (Münchner Verkehrs- und Tarifverbund GmbH).

   The main train station is Munich Hauptbahnhof (Central Station), in the
   city centre, and there are two smaller main line stations at Pasing, in
   the west of the city, and Munich Ostbahnhof (East Station) in the east.
   All three are connected to the public transport system and serve as
   transportation hubs.

   ICE highspeed trains stop at Munich-Pasing and Munich Central only.
   InterCity and EuroCity trains with destinations East of Munich also
   stop at Munich East. Since 28 May 2006 Munich is connected to Nuremberg
   via Ingolstadt by a 300 km/h ICE high speed railway line.

Individual transportation

   Munich is an integral part in the Autobahn network of southern Germany.
   Highways from Stuttgart, Berlin, Frankfurt and Hamburg terminate at
   Munich, making it easy to access the different parts of Germany.
   However, traffic in and around Munich is often heavy (especially on the
   beltway and the inner-city highways). Traffic jams are commonplace
   during rush hour and at the beginning or end of major vacations in
   Germany.

   Cycling is recognised as a good alternative for motorised transport and
   the growing number of bicycle lanes is widely used throughout the year.

Sports

Sports clubs

   Munich is home to several professional soccer teams, including
   Germany's most popular club, FC Bayern. The Munich area currently has
   three teams in the Bundesliga system, which comprises the two top
   divisions of German football:
   Club Sport Founded League Venue Head Coach
   FC Bayern Munich Soccer 1900 Bundesliga Allianz Arena Felix Magath
   TSV 1860 Munich Soccer 1860 2. Bundesliga Allianz Arena Walter
   Schachner
   SpVgg Unterhaching Soccer 1925 2. Bundesliga Unterhachinger Sportpark
   Harry Deutinger
   EHC Munich Ice hockey Bundesliga

Olympic Park and Allianz Arena

   The Olympic Park with its stadium was built for the Munich 1972 Summer
   Olympics. The Olympic buildings are famous for their design, which was
   inspired by dew-covered cobwebs. Visitors can get a great panoramic
   view of Munich and the Alps from the top of the Olympic Tower (
   Olympiaturm), which is also used as a radio and TV broadcasting tower.

   The 2006 World Cup did not take place in the traditional Olympic
   Stadium, but in Munich's new football stadium, the Allianz Arena,
   located in the northern suburb of Fröttmanning. However, the Olympic
   park was a public viewing area and nearly all World Cup matches were
   played on a massive television screen from inside Olympic Stadium.

Colleges and universities

   Munich is a leading location for science and research with a long list
   of Nobel Prize winners from Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen in 1901 to Theodor
   Hänsch in 2005. Both the universities of the Bavarian metropolis, the
   Ludwig Maximilian University (LMU) and the Technical University (TU),
   were found to be worthy of the title of elite university by the
   selection committee, which consisted of academics and members of the
   Ministries of Education and Research of the Federation and the German
   states (Länder). Only Munich's two universities and the Technical
   University of Karlsruhe have been awarded the prestigious title of
   elite university of Germany and millions of euro in funding.
     * University of Munich (LMU), founded in 1472 in Ingolstadt, moved to
       Munich in 1826
     * Technical University of Munich (TUM), founded in 1868
     * Munich University of Applied Sciences (FHM), founded in 1971
     * Universität der Bundeswehr München, founded in 1973
     * Pionierschule und Fachschule des Heeres für Bautechnik
     * Hochschule für Musik und Theatre München, founded in 1830
     * Akademie der Bildenden Künste München, founded in 1808
     * Hochschule für Fernsehen und Film , founded in 1966
     * Hochschule für Philosophie München, founded in 1925 in Pullach,
       moved to Munich in 1971
     * Hochschule für Politik München
     * Katholische Stiftungsfachhochschule München, founded in 1971
     * Munich Business School (MBS)
     * European School of Management and Technology (esmt)
     * Max Planck Institute for Physics (Werner Heisenberg Institute)
     * Fraunhofer Institute

Twin cities

   Plaques in the in the Neues Rathaus (New City Hall) showing Munich's
   sister cities
   Enlarge
   Plaques in the in the Neues Rathaus (New City Hall) showing Munich's
   sister cities
     * France Bordeaux, France, (since 1964)

     * United States Cincinnati, United States, (since 1989)

     * United Kingdom Scotland Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom (since
       1954)

     * Zimbabwe Harare, Zimbabwe, (since 1996)

     * Ukraine Kiev, Ukraine, (since 1989)

     * Japan Sapporo, Japan, (since 1972)

     * Italy Verona, Italy, (since 1960)

Famous people born in Munich

     * Isabeau de Bavière, 1371 - 1435, queen-consort of France
     * Franz Xaver Gabelsberger, 1789 - 1849, inventor of the Gabelsberger
       shorthand writing system
     * Elisabeth of Bavaria, 1837 - 1898, Empress "Sisi" of Austria
     * Richard Strauss, 1864 - 1949, composer
     * Franz Marc, 1880 - 1916, painter
     * Karl Valentin, 1882 - 1948, comedian, author and film producer
     * Lion Feuchtwanger, 1884 - 1958, writer
     * Adolf Abraham Halevi Fraenkel, 1891 - 1965, mathematician
     * Carl Orff, 1895 - 1982, composer
     * Eugen Roth, 1895 - 1976, writer
     * Heinrich Himmler, 1900 - 1945, Nazi, leading organizer of the
       Holocaust
     * Klaus Mann, 1906 - 1949, writer
     * Feodor Felix Konrad Lynen, 1911 - 1979, biochemist and Nobel Prize
       winner
     * Alfred Andersch, 1914 - 1980, writer
     * Franz Josef Strauß, 1915 - 1988, Minister-President of the Free
       State of Bavaria
     * Curd Jürgens, 1915 - 1982, actor
     * Carl Amery, 1922 - 2005, writer, President of the German PEN Centre
       and founding member of the German Green Party
     * Wolfgang Sawallisch, born in 1923, conductor and pianist
     * Rudolf Mößbauer, born in 1927, physicist and Nobel Prize winner
     * Charlotte Knobloch, born in 1932, President of Zentralrat der Juden
       in Deutschland, also Vice President of the European Jewish Congress
       and the World Jewish Congress
     * Percy Adlon, born in 1935, film director
     * Rudolph Moshammer, 1940 - 2005, fashion designer and crime victim
     * Willy Bogner, born in 1942, fashion designer and director of
       photography
     * Werner Herzog, born in 1942, film director
     * Andreas Baader, 1943 - 1977, Red Army Faction leader
     * Franz Beckenbauer, born in 1945, footballer
     * Harold Faltermeyer, born in 1952, composer and record producer
     * Moritz Bleibtreu, born in 1971, actor
     * Thomas Hitzlsperger, born in 1982, footballer
     * Philipp Lahm, born in 1983, footballer
     * Andreas Ottl, born in 1985, footballer

Local beers brewed in Munich

     * Augustiner Bräu
     * Hacker-Pschorr
     * Hofbräu
     * Löwenbräu
     * Paulaner
     * Spaten-Franziskaner-Bräu

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Munich"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
