   #copyright

Mustard seed

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Food and agriculture

   Mustard seeds
   Enlarge
   Mustard seeds
   Black Mustard seeds close-up
   Enlarge
   Black Mustard seeds close-up

   Mustard seeds are the proverbially small seeds of the various mustard
   plants. The seeds are about 1 mm in diameter, and may be colored from
   yellowish white to black. They are important spices in many regional
   cuisines. The seeds can come from three different plants: black mustard
   ( B. nigra), brown Indian mustard ( B. juncea), and white or yellow
   mustard ( B. hirta/Sinapis alba).

   In the Indian subcontinent they are often used whole, and are quickly
   fried in oil until they pop to impart a flavor to the oil.

   Mustard seeds generally take 3-7 days to germinate if placed under the
   proper conditions, which include a cold atmosphere and relativly moist
   soil.

   Mustard oil can be extracted from the seeds. The seeds, particularly
   the white ones, can also be ground into a flour, and mixed to a thick
   paste with a little water to make the condiment mustard. The ground
   mustard powder is usually mixed with ordinary flour to reduce the
   strength of the resulting condiment.

   Other ingredients can be used to mix mustard, for example, sugar,
   honey, vinegar, wine, or milk.

   When initially mixed the sauce is mild in flavor, but it develops in
   time. Strong mustard has a very powerful (and painful) effect on the
   nasal membranes if eaten carelessly.

   The whole seeds can be soaked in liquid before grinding to create whole
   grain mustard.

   It is possible to buy ready prepared mustard (condiment) in many
   places.

                              Herbs and spices
     Herbs Basil · Bay leaf · Boldo · Borage · Chervil · Chives ·
        Coriander leaf (cilantro) · Curry leaf · Dill · Epazote ·
   Eryngium foetidum (long coriander) · Fennel · Holy basil · Houttuynia
               cordata · Hyssop · Lavender · Lemon grass ·
   Limnophila aromatica (rice paddy herb) · Lovage · Marjoram · Mint ·
Oregano · Parsley · Perilla · Rosemary · Rue · Sage · Savory · Sorrel ·
        Stevia · Tarragon · Thyme · Vietnamese coriander (rau ram)
    Spices African pepper · Ajwain (bishop's weed) · Allspice · Amchur
  (mango powder) · Anise · Asafoetida · Caraway · Cardamom · Cardamom,
  black · Cassia · Celery seed · Chili · Cinnamon · Clove · Coriander
     seed · Cubeb · Cumin · Cumin, black · Dill seed · Fenugreek ·
 Galangal · Garlic · Ginger · Grains of paradise · Horseradish · Juniper
 berry · Liquorice · Mace · Mahlab · Mustard, black · Mustard, white ·
 Nigella (kalonji) · Nutmeg · Paprika · Pepper, black · Pepper, green ·
    Pepper, pink · Pepper, white · Pomegranate seed (anardana) · Poppy
 seed · Saffron · Sarsaparilla · Sassafras · Sesame · Sichuan pepper ·
      Star anise · Sumac · Tamarind · Turmeric · Wasabi · Zedoary

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mustard_seed"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
