   #copyright

Nairobi

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography

                                  Nairobi
                              Nairobi Skyline

   Nairobi Skyline
                                 Location

   Location of Nairobi within Kenya
   Coordinates:               1°17′S″36, 49°E′″{{{8}}}
                                Government
   Constituent country:       Kenya
   Province:                  Nairobi Province
   HQ:                        City Hall
   Mayor:                     Dick Wathika
                               Subdivisions
   Constituencies of Nairobi: Makadara, Kamukunji, Starehe, Langata,
                              Dagoretti, Westlands, Kasarani and Embakasi
                                 Geography
   Nairobi
   Area:                      684 km² (684 sq kl)
   Population:                2.5 million (2005 est.)
   Density:                    ?/ km²
   Wider population
   Nairobi Urban area:        3 million
   Nairobi Metro area:        4 million
                                 Time Zone
   Standard:                  EAT
                                  Website
   http://www.nairobicity.org/

   Nairobi ( pronounced [ˈnaɪɹəʊbiː]) is the capital of Kenya. Founded in
   1899, the city was handed capital status from Mombasa in 1907. It is
   also the capital of the Nairobi Province. The city lies on the Nairobi
   River, in the south of the nation, and has an elevation of 5450ft
   (1661m) above sea-level.

   Nairobi has the highest urban population in East Africa, estimated at
   between 3 and 4 million (according to the 1999 Census, in the
   administrative area of Nairobi, 2,143,254 inhabitants lived within 684
   km²). Since its foundation as a railway camp in 1899, Nairobi has grown
   to become the largest city in Kenya, and one of the largest cities in
   Africa.

   Nairobi is now one of the prime cities in Africa politically and
   financially. Home to many companies and organizations, Nairobi is
   established as a hub for business and culture. The GaWC defines Nairobi
   as a prominent social centre.

History

   The area was an essentially uninhabited swamp until in 1899 a supply
   depot of the Uganda Railway was built, which soon became the railway's
   headquarters. The city was named after a water hole known in Maasai as
   Ewaso Nyirobi, meaning "cool waters". It was totally rebuilt in the
   early 1900s after an outbreak of plague and the burning of the original
   town.

   Nairobi replaced Mombasa as the capital of the British East Africa
   Protectorate in 1905. The railway brought wealth into the city, which
   made it grow dramatically. It then became Kenya's second largest town
   after Mombasa.

   In 1901 it became the capital of the British protectorate, and the city
   grew around administration and tourism, initially in the form of big
   game hunting. As the British colonialists started to explore the
   region, they started using Nairobi as their first port of call. This
   prompted the colonial government to build several grand hotels in the
   city. The main occupants were British game hunters.

   Nairobi continued to grow under the British rule, and many British
   peoples settled within the city's suburbs. The continuous expansion of
   the city began to anger the Maasai people, as the city was devouring
   their land to the south. It also angered the Kikuyu people, who wanted
   the land returned to them.
   An aerial of Nairobi in the 1950s Enlarge
   An aerial of Nairobi in the 1950s

   In 1919, Nairobi was declared to be a municipality. Between the years
   of 1920 and 1950, the number of white settlers within Nairobi rose from
   9,000 to 80,000. There was, however, friction that existed between
   these settlers and the local peoples. Nairobi was granted city status
   in 1954.

   After the end of World War II, this friction developed into the Mau Mau
   rebellion. Jomo Kenyatta, Kenya's future president, was jailed for his
   involvement even though there was no evidence linking him to the
   rebellion. Pressure exerted from the locals onto the British resulted
   in Kenyan independence in 1963, with Nairobi as the capital of the new
   republic.

   After independence, Nairobi grew rapidly and this growth put pressure
   on the city's infrastructure. Power cuts and water shortages were a
   common occurrence, though in the past few years better city planning
   has helped to put some these problems in check.

   The U.S. Embassy in Nairobi was bombed in August 1998 by Al-Qaida,
   killing over 200 civilians, one of a series of U.S. embassy bombings.
   It is now the site of a memorial park.

Culture

   Nairobi is a cosmopolitan and multicultural religious city, with many
   immigrants from former British colonies, including India, Somalia and
   Sudan. This is highlighted in the number of churches, mosques, temples
   and gurdwaras within the city. As a reflection of the cities
   multicultural composition, the night life offers a diverse range of
   watering holes.

   Nairobi has the informal title "The Green City in the Sun."

Literature and Film

   Perhaps the most famous book and film set in Nairobi, is Out of Africa.
   The book was written by Karen Blixen (pen name Isak Dinesen), and it is
   her account of living in Kenya. Karen Blixen lived in the Nairobi Area
   from 1917 to 1931, and the neighbourhood in which she lived, Karen, is
   named after her.

   In 1985, Out of Africa was made into a film, directed by Sydney
   Pollack. The film won 28 awards, including 7 Academy Awards. The
   popularity of the film prompted the opening of Nairobi's Karen Blixen
   Museum.

   Nairobi has been the set of several other American and British films.
   The most recent of these was The Constant Gardener (2005), a large part
   of which was filmed in the city. The story revolves around a British
   diplomat in Nairobi whose wife is murdered in northern Kenya. Much of
   the filming was in the Kibera slum.

Geography

   An aerial of Nairobi, the central business district and Ngong Road
   Enlarge
   An aerial of Nairobi, the central business district and Ngong Road

   The city is located at 1°16′S 36°48′E and occupies around 150 km². It
   is situated about 1660 metres (5450 ft) above sea level.

   Nairobi is situated between the cities of Kampala and Mombasa. It is
   close to the eastern edge of the Rift Valley. As Nairobi is adjacent to
   the Rift Valley, minor earthquakes and tremors occasionally occur. The
   Ngong hills, located to the west of the city, are the most promenant
   geographical feature of the Nairobi Area. Mount Kenya is situated north
   of Nairobi and Mount Kilimanjaro is towards the south-east. Both
   mountains are visible from Nairobi on a clear day.

   The Nairobi River and its tributaries traverse through the Nairobi
   Province. Nobel Peace Prize laureate Wangari Maathai has fought
   fiercely to save the indigenous Karura Forest in northern Nairobi which
   is under threat of being replaced by housing and other infrastructure.

   Nairobis western suburbs stretch all the way from the Kenyatta National
   Hospital in the south to the UN headquarters and Gigiri in the north -
   a distance of about 20 km.

   The city centres on City Square, around which lie the Kenyan Parliament
   buildings, the Holy Family Cathedral, Nairobi City Hall, Jomo
   Kenyatta's mausoleum and the most upmarket shops. It also has the Kenya
   National Theatre, Kenya National Archives, Mzizi Arts Centre and
   Kenyatta International Conference Centre. Other attractions include the
   Ramoma Rahimtulla Museum of Modern Art, All Saints Cathedral and
   several markets.

Climate

   At 1860 metres, Nairobi enjoys a fairly moderate climate. The altitude
   makes for some chilly evenings, especially in the June/July season when
   the temperature can drop to 10°C . The sunniest and warmest part of the
   year are from December to March, when temperatures average the
   mid-twenties during the day. The temperature usually peaks at 25 °C.
   There are two rainy seasons but rainfall can be moderate. The cloudiest
   part of the year is just after the first rainy season, when, until
   September, conditions are usually overcast with drizzle. As Nairobi is
   situated close to the equator, the differences between the seasons are
   minimal. The seasons are referred to as the wet season and dry season.
   The timing of sunrise and sunset do not vary tremendously throughout
   the year.

Parks and Gardens

   Nairobi has many parks and open spaces throughout the city. Most of
   Nairobi is green-space, and the city has dense tree-cover. The most
   famous park in Nairobi is Uhuru Park. The park borders the central
   business district and the neighbourhood Upper Hill. Uhuru (Freedom)
   Park is a centre for outdoor speeches, services and rallies. The park
   was to be built-over by former President Daniel Arap Moi, who wanted
   his party's 60-storey headquarters situated in the park. However, the
   park was saved by Wangari Maathai, who later won a Nobel Peace Prize
   for her efforts.

   Central Park is adjacent to Uhuru Park, and includes a memorial for
   Jomo Kenyatta, the first president of Kenya. Other notable open spaces
   include Jeevanjee Gardens, City Park and Nairobi Arboretum.

Business and Economy

   Headquarters for the I&M Bank in Nairobi.
   Enlarge
   Headquarters for the I&M Bank in Nairobi.

   Nairobi is home to the Nairobi Stock Exchange, one of Africa's largest.
   The NSE was officially recognised as an overseas stock exchange by the
   London Stock Exchange in 1953. The exchange is Africa's 4th largest (in
   terms of trading volumes) and 5th (in terms of Market Capitalization as
   a percentage of GDP)

   Several of Africa's largest companies are headquartered in Nairobi.
   KenGen, which is the largest African stock outside South Africa , is
   based in the city. Kenya Airways, Africa's 2nd largest airline, uses
   Nairobi's Jomo Kenyatta International Airport as a hub.

   Nairobi is the regional headquarters of several international companies
   and organizations. This makes it one of the most influential cities in
   Africa. The United Nations has strong presence in Nairobi, as two of
   its departments, UNEP and UN-Habitat have headquarters in Nairobi.

   Goods manufactured in Nairobi include clothing, textiles, building
   materials, processed foods, beverages and cigarettes. Several foreign
   companies have factories based in and around the city. This includes
   Firestone and Goodyear, which have factories on the Mombasa Road. Most
   industries in Nairobi are based to the east of the city.

   Nairobi has a large tourist industry, being both a tourist destination
   and a transport hub.

Tourism

   A lone giraffe at Nairobi National Park, with Nairobi's skyline in
   background.
   Enlarge
   A lone giraffe at Nairobi National Park, with Nairobi's skyline in
   background.

   Nairobi is not a prime tourist destination, but it does have several
   tourist attractions. The most famous is the Nairobi National Park. The
   national park is unique, in being the only game-reserve of this nature
   to border a capital city, or city of this size. The park contains many
   animals including lions and giraffes. The park is home to over 400
   species of bird , which is more than the entire British Isles .

   Nairobi has several museums. These include the Nairobi Railway Museum
   and the National Museum of Kenya, which houses many artefacts including
   the full remains of a homo erectus boy. The National Museum is
   currently closed due to renovation, but is due to be reopened in 2007.

   Nairobi hotels include the Hilton, Intercontinental Hotel, Safari Park,
   the New Stanley Hotel, the Grand Regency and the Norfolk Hotel, the
   oldest continuously operating hotel in the city. Panari Hotel is the
   newest 5* hotel in the city, and opened in 2006

   Nairobi is also home to the largest ice rink in Africa, the Panari Sky
   Centre. The rink covers 15,000 square metres and can accommodate 200
   people.

Places of interest

     * Nairobi National Park
     * Karen Blixen Museum
     * National Archives
     * Bomas of Kenya
     * Giraffe Centre
     * Safari park
     * Carnivore Restaurant

Maps

     * FallingRain Map

Transport

Airports

   An aerial of the cargo terminal at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport,
   the largest and busiest airport in East Africa.
   Enlarge
   An aerial of the cargo terminal at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport,
   the largest and busiest airport in East Africa.

   Nairobi is served primarily by Jomo Kenyatta International Airport. It
   is the largest airport in East and Central Africa and handled over 4
   million passengers in 2005. The airport is a major transit hub for
   passengers flying to East Africa's natural attractions, and other
   smaller African cities. The airport is situated 20km from Nairobi's
   Central Business District, and is served by taxis, shuttle services and
   coaches. The airport directly serves intercontinental passengers from
   Europe and Asia.

   Wilson Airport is a small, busy airport to the west of Nairobi. It
   handles small aircraft that generally operate within Kenya, although
   some offer services to other East African destinations.

   Eastleigh Airport was the original landing strip in the pre- jet
   airline era. It was used in a landing point on the 1930s and 1940s
   British passenger and mail route from Southampton to Cape Town. This
   route was served by flying boats between Britain and Kisumu and then by
   land-based aircraft on the routes to the south. The airport is now a
   military base.

Buses

   A Nairobi Matatu, after the regulation changes.
   Enlarge
   A Nairobi Matatu, after the regulation changes.

   Buses are the most common form of public transport in Nairobi. Matatus,
   privately owned minibuses, are the most popular form of local
   transport, and generally transport up to 12 people. Matatus operate
   within Nairobi and from Nairobi to other towns. The matatu's
   destination is imprinted on the side of the bus.

   Matatus were easily distinguishable by their extravagant paint schemes.
   Owners would paint their matau with their favourite football team or
   hip hop artist. They were notorious for their poor safety records,
   which was a result of overcrowding and reckless driving. Matatu drivers
   were pressured to make as many round trips as possible to maximize
   profits for their operator.

   However, in 2004 a law was passed in which all matatus had to include
   seat-belts, speed governors, and all be painted in a uniform white with
   yellow band across it. At first, this caused a furore amongst matatu
   operators, but they were pressured by government and public pressure to
   make the changes. The limit to matatus is now 80 kph.

   Citi Hoppa is the newest bus fleet operating in Nairobi. Run privately,
   the Citi Hoppa offer modern buses on many routes within the city. The
   Citi Hoppa buses are distinguishable by their green livery.

Railways

   Nairobi was founded as a railway town, and the Kenya Railways (KR) main
   headquarters are still situated there, near the city centre. The line
   runs through Nairobi, from Mombasa to Kampala. Its main use is freight
   traffic, but regular nightly passenger trains connect Mombasa, Nairobi
   and Kisumu. A number of morning and evening commuter trains connect the
   centre with the suburbs, but the city has no proper light rail, tramway
   or subway lines. A JKI airport shuttle rail service is being
   contemplated.

   Nairobi is also the junction for a branch railway to Nanyuki.

Central business district and skyline

   Nairobi skyline viewed from Westlands
   Enlarge
   Nairobi skyline viewed from Westlands

   Nairobi grew around the central business district. It takes a
   rectangular shape, around the Uhuru Highway, Haille Selasse Avenue, Moi
   Avenue and University Way. It includes many of Nairobi's important
   buildings, including the City Hall and Parliament Building. The city
   square is also located within the perimeter.

   A feature of the central business district that strikes foreign
   tourists the most is the skyline. Nairobi's skyline has been compared
   to many Asian and American cities. This is due to a construction boom
   after independence, and another construction boom in the late 1990s and
   early 2000s. Most of the skyscrapers in this region are the
   headquarters of businesses and corporations, such as I&M. The United
   States Embassy bombing took place in this district, prompting the new
   embassy building to be located in the suburbs.

   In 2006, a large beautification project took place in the CBD, as the
   city prepared to host the 2006 Afri-Cities summit. Iconic buildings
   such as the Kenyatta International Conference Centre had their
   exteriors cleaned and repainted.

   The district is bordered to the south-west by Nairobi's largest park:
   Uhuru Park and Central Park. The Mombasa to Kampala railway runs to the
   south-east of the district.

   Today, many businesses have, or are considering relocating or
   establishing their headquarters outside the Central Business District.
   This is because land is cheaper, and better facilities can be easily
   built and maintained elsewhere. Two areas that are seeing a growth in
   companies and office-space are Upper Hill, approximately 2 km from the
   CBD and Westlands, approximately the same distance. Companies that have
   moved from the CBD to Upper Hill include Citibank.

   To accommodate the large demand for floorspace in Nairobi, various
   commercial projects are being constructed. New business parks are being
   built along Mombasa Road, including the flagship Nairobi Business Park.
   Nairobi is currently being considered by a Middle-Eastern company,
   interested in building a high-rise headquarters in Africa.

List of Nairobi's tallest skyscrapers

     * New Central Bank Tower (140 m)
     * Teleposta Towers (120 m)
     * Kenyatta International Conference Centre (105 m)
     * NSSF Building (103 m)
     * I&M Bank Tower (100 m)
     * Government Office Conference Hall (98 m)
     * Rahimtulla Tower

Housing Conditions

   Between 500,000 and a million people in Nairobi live in the Kibera
   slum, the largest and poorest slum in Africa.
   Enlarge
   Between 500,000 and a million people in Nairobi live in the Kibera
   slum, the largest and poorest slum in Africa.

Slums

   Nairobi is home to several slums. The growth of these slums is a result
   of migration from rural areas to the capital. Unable to find work,
   these migrants settle in the slums.

   Kibera is the largest and poorest slum in Africa , and is situated to
   the west of Nairobi. Between 500,000 and 1 million people live in
   Kibera, which dates from a 1920 settlement for Nubian soldiers
   ("Kibera" is the Nubian word for "forest"). The slums cover two square
   kilometres and is on government land. Kibera has been the setting for
   several films, the most recent being the Constant Gardener.

   Other notable slums include Mathare and Korogocho. Among other low and
   lower-middle income estates are Kariokor, Dandora, Kariobangi,
   Embakasi, Huruma and Dagoretti. Somali immigrants have settled in
   Eastleigh, nicknamed 'Little Mogadishu'.

Residential Neighbourhoods

   A typical Nairobi residental suburb, with the Central Business District
   in the distance.
   Enlarge
   A typical Nairobi residental suburb, with the Central Business District
   in the distance.

   Most Nairobi non slum-dwellers live in relatively good housing
   conditions. Large houses can be found in many neighbourhoods,
   especially to the west of Nairobi. Historically, British immigrants
   have settled in Langata and Karen. Other middle and high income estates
   include Parklands, Westlands, Hurlingham, Milimani and Nairobi Hill.

   To accommodate the growing middle-class, many new apartments and
   housing developments are being built in and around the city. The most
   notable development is Greenpark, at Athi River town, 25 km from
   Nairobi's CBD. Over 5,000 houses, villas and apartments are being
   constructed at this development, including leisure, retail and
   commercial facilities. The development is being marketed at families,
   as are most within the city.

Crime

   Nairobi has struggled with rising crime, earning a reputation for being
   a dangerous city and the nickname "Nairobbery". In 2001, the United
   Nations International Civil Service Commission rated Nairobi as among
   the most insecure cities in the world, classifying the city as " status
   C." The head of one development agency cited the "notoriously high
   levels of violent armed robberies, burglaries and carjackings."

   Crime had risen within Nairobi, as many people left the countryside for
   the city. Due to their lack of wealth, they are left with no option but
   to settle in slums such as Kibera.

   Most large houses now have a watchguard, burglar grills on windows and
   doors, and dogs to patrol their grounds during the night. Tourists are
   advised not to show valuables, and try to avoid the city centre at
   night.

Universities in Nairobi

   Nairobi is home to several prestigious universities.

   The University of Nairobi is the oldest university in Kenya. It was
   established in 1956, as part of the University of East Africa, but
   became an independent university in 1970. The university has
   approximately 22,000 students.

   Kenyatta University is situated 23km from the centre of Nairobi, on
   over 1,000 acres of land. The university was established in 1985 after
   a long struggle for the status, which started in 1963.

   Strathmore University started in 1961 as an Advanced Level Sixth Form
   College offering Science and Arts subjects. The college started to
   admit accountancy students in March 1966, and thus became a university.
   In January 1993 Strathmore College merged with Kianda College and moved
   to Ole Sangale Road, Madaraka Estate, Nairobi.

   United States International University - Nairobi is a branch of the
   United States International University, which has campuses across the
   world. The Nairobi campus was established in 1969, with the first
   graduation taking place in 1979. The university has accreditation from
   the Western Association of Schools and Colleges, in USA and the
   Government of Kenya.

   Daystar University is a Christian liberal arts university in Nairobi,
   Kenya.

Sister Cities

   Nairobi's sister city is:
     * United States Denver, Colorado (United States of America)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nairobi"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
