   #copyright

Neil Young

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Performers and composers

   Neil Young
   Background information
   Also known as Bernard Shakey
   Joe Yankee
   Phil Perspective
   Shakey Deal
   Clyde Coil
   Born November 12, 1945 (age 61)
   in Omemee, Ontario, Canada
   Genre(s) Rock
   Folk rock
   Country Rock
   Hard rock
   Occupation(s) Vocalist
   Songwriter
   Musician
   Instrument(s) Guitar
   Harmonica
   Vocals
   Piano
   Banjo
   Years active 1963 - Present
   Label(s) Reprise Records
   Associated
   acts The Mynah Birds
   Buffalo Springfield
   Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young
   Crazy Horse
   The Stills-Young Band
   The Ducks
   Website Official website
   Notable instrument(s)
   Gibson R6 Les Paul Goldtop
   " Old Black"

   Neil Percival Young OM (born November 12, 1945, Omemee, Ontario) is a
   Canadian singer-songwriter and guitarist who grew up in Winnipeg,
   Manitoba. His work is characterized by deeply personal lyrics,
   distinctive guitar work, and an almost instantly recognizable nasal
   tenor (and frequently alto) singing voice. Although he accompanies
   himself on several different instruments —including piano and
   harmonica—his style of hammer-on acoustic guitar and often
   idiosyncratic soloing on electric guitar are the lynchpins of a
   sometimes ragged, sometimes polished, yet consistently evocative sound.
   In more recent years, Young has started to adopt elements from newer
   styles of music, such as industrial and grunge, the latter of which was
   profoundly influenced by his own style of playing.

Overview

   Although Young has experimented widely with differing music styles,
   including swing, jazz, rockabilly, blues and electronica throughout a
   varied career, his most accessible and best known work generally falls
   into either of two distinct styles: acoustic, country-tinged folk rock,
   as heard in songs such as " Heart of Gold", " Harvest Moon" and " Old
   Man," and crunchy, electric hard rock, in songs like " Cinnamon Girl",
   " Rockin' in the Free World" and " Hey Hey, My My (Into The Black)".

   Young first came to prominence as a member of the folk-rock band
   Buffalo Springfield in the mid-1960s and then as a solo performer
   backed by the band Crazy Horse. He reached his commercial peak during
   the singer-songwriter boom of the early 1970s with the albums After the
   Gold Rush and Harvest as well as with Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young. He
   has long been distrustful of commercial management in the music
   business, and has at times created highly accessible and durable
   popular music while at other times has indulged in outlandish and
   uncompromising experiments that have left audiences, critics, and—in
   one notable case—his record label baffled.

   Young has been inducted into the Canadian Music Hall of Fame and the
   Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In 2000, the cable music channel VH1 ranked
   Young 30th on a list of the Top 100 Artists of Rock and Roll. He was
   also 39th on VH1's list of Top 100 Hard Rock Artists.

   Young has directed or co-directed a number of films using the pseudonym
   Bernard Shakey, including Journey Through the Past (1973), Rust Never
   Sleeps (1979), Human Highway (1982), and Greendale (2003).

   He is also an outspoken advocate for environmental issues and small
   farmers, having co-founded the benefit concert Farm Aid, and in 1986
   helped found The Bridge School together with his wife Pegi.

   Young reportedly keeps every car he has ever owned. (Except the
   original Mort, a hearse that broke down in Blind River, Ontario, and is
   immortalized in the Young song "Long May You Run").

Biography

Early years

   Neil Young was born in Toronto to sportswriter and novelist Scott Young
   and Rassy Ragland Young. He spent his early years in Omemee, a small
   country town which he later memorialized in his song "Helpless". A bout
   of polio at the age of six left him with a weakened left side, and he
   still walks with a slight limp. He moved to New Smyrna Beach, Florida
   to recover for a year; his mother later moved there permanently. His
   parents divorced when Young was twelve, and he moved with his mother
   back to the family home of Winnipeg, Manitoba, where his music career
   began. While attending Kelvin High School in Winnipeg, he played in
   instrumental rock bands, one of which, the Squires, had a local hit
   called "The Sultan." He later worked folk clubs in Winnipeg, where he
   befriended guitarist Stephen Stills and Joni Mitchell, and spent
   summers in Thunder Bay, Ontario, playing at local clubs. In the 2006
   film Heart of Gold Young relates how he used to spend time as a
   teenager at Falcon Lake, Manitoba where he would endlessly plug coins
   into the jukebox to hear Ian Tyson's " Four Strong Winds."

   In 1966, after an aborted record deal on the Motown label with the Rick
   James-fronted Mynah Birds, Young and bass player Bruce Palmer relocated
   to Los Angeles, where they joined Stills, Richie Furay, and Dewey
   Martin to form Buffalo Springfield. A mixture of folk, country,
   psychedelia, and rock lent a hard edge by the twin lead guitars of
   Stills and Young made the Buffalo Springfield a critical success, and
   their first record Buffalo Springfield (1967) sold well after Stills'
   topical song " For What It's Worth" became a hit.

   Things did not go smoothly for long, and distrust of their management
   as well as the arrest and deportation of Palmer exacerbated already
   strained relations between group members. A second album, Buffalo
   Springfield Again, was released in late 1967, but two of Young’s three
   contributions were actually solo tracks recorded apart from the rest of
   the group.

   In many ways, these three songs on Buffalo Springfield Again are
   harbingers of much of Young's later work in that, although they all
   share deeply personal, almost idiosyncratic lyrics, they also present
   three very different musical approaches to the arrangement of what is
   essentially an original folk song. "Mr Soul," the only Young song of
   the three that all five members of the group perform together. In
   contrast, " Broken Arrow" was confessional folk rock of a kind that
   would characterize much of the music that emerged from the
   singer-songwriter movement. Young’s experimental production
   intersperses each verse with snippets of sound from other sources,
   including opening the song with a sound bite of Dewey Martin singing
   "Mr. Soul" and closing it with the thumping of a heartbeat. "Expecting
   to Fly" was a lushly produced ballad featuring a string arrangement
   that Young's co-producer for the track, Jack Nitzsche, would dub
   "symphonic pop."

   In May of 1968 the band split up for good, but in order to fulfill a
   contractual obligation, a final album, Last Time Around, was compiled
   primarily from recordings made earlier that year. Young contributed the
   songs “On the Way Home” and “I Am a Child,” although he sang lead only
   on the latter.

Breakthrough as a solo artist

   After the breakup of Buffalo Springfield, Young signed a solo deal with
   Reprise Records, home of his colleague and friend Joni Mitchell, with
   whom he shared a manager, Elliot Roberts. Young and Nitzsche
   immediately began work on Young's first solo record, Neil Young
   (November 1968), which received mixed reviews. In a 1970 interview ,
   Young deprecated the album as being "overdubbed rather than played,"
   and the quest for music that expresses the spontaneity of the moment
   has long been a feature of his career. Nevertheless, the album contains
   some tunes that remain a staple of his live shows, most notably "The
   Loner."

   For his next album, Young recruited three musicians from a band called
   Danny and The Rockets: Danny Whitten on guitar, Billy Talbot on bass
   guitar, and Ralph Molina on drums. These three took the name Crazy
   Horse (after the historical figure of the same name), and Everybody
   Knows This Is Nowhere (May 1969), is credited to "Neil Young with Crazy
   Horse." Recorded in just two weeks, the album opens with one of Young's
   most familiar songs, "Cinnamon Girl," and is dominated by two more,
   "Cowgirl in the Sand" and "Down by the River," that feature lengthy
   jams showcasing Young's idiosyncratic guitar soloing accompanied
   sympathetically by Crazy Horse. Young reportedly wrote both songs in
   the same day.

   Shortly after the release of Everybody Knows This Is Nowhere, Young
   reunited with Stephen Stills by joining Crosby, Stills, and Nash, who
   had already released one album as a trio. Over the next 24 months,
   Crosby, Stills, Nash, and Young would perform at Woodstock, release the
   album Déjà Vu (1970), release a single of Young's " Ohio," and record a
   summer concert tour, which was released the following year under the
   title Four Way Street (1971).

   “Ohio” was written following the Kent State massacre on May 4, 1970,
   and was a staple of anti-war rallies in the 1970s. Young was still
   performing it 20 years later, by which time he often dedicated it to
   the Chinese students who were killed during the Tiananmen Square
   protests of 1989.

   Also that year, Young released his second solo album, After the Gold
   Rush (1970), which featured, among others, a young Nils Lofgren,
   Stephen Stills, and CSNY bassist Greg Reeves. Aided by his newfound
   fame with CSNY, the album was a commercial breakthrough for Young and
   contains some of his best known work. Notable tracks include the title
   track, with dream-like lyrics that run a gamut of subjects from drugs
   and interpersonal relationships to environmental concerns, as well as
   Young’s controversial and acerbic condemnation of racism in " Southern
   Man," which, along with a later song entitled "Alabama," later prompted
   Lynyrd Skynyrd to decry Young by name in the lyrics to " Sweet Home
   Alabama."

   With CSNY splitting up and Crazy Horse having signed their own record
   deal, Young began the year 1971 with a solo tour entitled "Journey
   Through the Past." Later, he recruited a new group of country-music
   session musicians, whom he christened The Stray Gators, to record much
   of the new material that had been premiered on tour for the album
   Harvest (1972). Harvest was a massive hit (especially with the
   country-music crowd) and "Heart of Gold" became a US number one single.
   Another notable song was " The Needle and the Damage Done," a lament
   for, in Young’s own words, "all the great art that never got out
   because of heroin."

   The album's success, however, caught Young off guard, and his first
   instinct was to back away from stardom. In the handwritten liner notes
   to the Decade compilation, Young described 'Heart of Gold' as the song
   that "put me in the middle of the road. Travelling there soon became a
   bore, so I headed for the ditch. A rougher ride but I saw more
   interesting people there."

   On 8 September 1972, the Academy Award-nominated actress Carrie
   Snodgress, with whom he had been living, gave birth to Neil Young's
   first child. The boy, Zeke, would later be diagnosed with cerebral
   palsy.

The Ditch Trilogy

   Although a new tour had been planned to follow up on the success of
   Harvest, it became apparent during rehearsals that Danny Whitten could
   not function due to drug abuse. On November 18, 1972, shortly after he
   was fired from the tour preparations, Whitten was found dead of an
   overdose. Young described the incident to Rolling Stone’s Cameron Crowe
   in 1975, "[We] were rehearsing with him and he just couldn't cut it. He
   couldn't remember anything. He was too out of it. Too far gone. I had
   to tell him to go back to L.A. 'It's not happening, man. You're not
   together enough.' He just said, 'I've got nowhere else to go, man. How
   am I gonna tell my friends?' And he split. That night the coroner
   called me from L.A. and told me he'd ODed. That blew my mind. Fucking
   blew my mind. I loved Danny. I felt responsible. And from there, I had
   to go right out on this huge tour of huge arenas. I was very nervous
   and . . . insecure.”

   The album made in the aftermath of this incident has often been
   described by Young as his “least favorite record,” and it is, in fact,
   one of only two of Young’s early recordings that has yet to be
   re-released on CD (The other being the soundtrack album Journey Through
   the Past). The album was recorded live over a disastrous tour where
   Neil struggled with his voice and called David Crosby and Graham Nash
   to help perform the music. Nevertheless, Time Fades Away (1973)
   occupies a unique position in Young’s discography as the first of three
   albums known collectively as the " Ditch Trilogy." (Also called the
   "Doom Trilogy" by some writers.)

   In the second half of 1973, Young formed The Santa Monica Flyers, with
   Crazy Horse's rhythm section augmented by Nils Lofgren on guitar.
   Deeply affected by the drug-induced deaths of Whitten and roadie Bruce
   Berry, Tonight's the Night (1975) is a dark, brooding record of
   unrestrained blues and out-of-tune ballads that Reprise did not see fit
   to release until two years later and only after being pressured by
   Young to do so. The album received mixed reviews at the time, but is
   now regarded by some as a precursor to punk rock. In Young's own
   opinion, it was the closest he ever came to art, but the question of
   whether this is based on musical merits or the biographical
   significance of Young "exorcising his demons" is open to debate.
   Nevertheless, Tonight's the Night is a fan favorite.

   While his record company delayed the release of Tonight's the Night,
   Young recorded On the Beach (1974), which dealt with themes such as the
   downside of fame and the Californian lifestyle. Like Time Fades Away
   and Tonight's the Night, it sold poorly but would eventually become a
   critical favorite, presenting some of Young's most original work. In a
   review of the 2003 re-release on CD of On the Beach Derek Svennungsen
   described the music as "mesmerizing, harrowing, lucid, and bleary," a
   characterization that many would say is apt of the entire Ditch
   Trilogy.

Zuma and beyond

   Young reformed Crazy Horse with Frank Sampedro on guitar as his backup
   band for Zuma (1975). Many of the songs are overtly concerned with
   failed relationships, and even the epic " Cortez the Killer," outwardly
   a retelling of the Spanish conquest of Mexico from the viewpoint of the
   Aztecs, can be seen as an allegory of love lost—something that didn’t
   save it, however, from being banned in Franco's Spain.

   The following year, Young reunited with Stephen Stills for the album
   Long May You Run (1976), credited to The Stills-Young Band, the
   follow-up tour was ended midway through by Young, after having sent
   Stills a telegram that read: "Funny how some things that start
   spontaneously end that way. Eat a peach, Neil."

   In 1976, Young performed with The Band, Joni Mitchell, and other rock
   musicians in the high profile all-star concert The Last Waltz. The
   release of Martin Scorsese's movie of the concert was delayed while
   Scorsese unwillingly re-edited it to deemphasize the lump of cocaine
   that was clearly visible hanging from Young's nose during his
   performance of "Helpless." Young later said, "I'm not proud of that,"
   according to one of his biographers.

   American Stars 'N Bars (1977) contained two songs originally recorded
   for the unreleased Homegrown album, "Homegrown" and "Star of
   Bethelehem," as well as newer material. Performers included Linda
   Ronstadt, Emmylou Harris and Young protégé Nicolette Larson along with
   Crazy Horse. Also in 1977, Young released Decade: a personally selected
   career summary of material spanning every aspect of his various
   interests and affiliations, including a handful of unreleased songs.
   Comes a Time (1978) also featured Nicolette Larson and Crazy Horse and
   became Young's most commercially accessible album in quite some time,
   marked by a return to his folk roots.

   Young next set out on the lengthy "Rust Never Sleeps" tour, in which
   each concert was divided into a solo acoustic set and an electric set
   with Crazy Horse. Much of the electric set was later seen as a response
   to punk rock's burgeoning popularity. "Hey Hey, My My (Into the Black)"
   compared the changing public perception of Johnny Rotten with that of
   the recently deceased Elvis Presley, who himself had once been
   disparaged as a dangerous influence only to later become an icon.
   Rotten, meanwhile, returned the favour by playing one of Young's
   records on a London radio show. The accompanying albums Rust Never
   Sleeps (new material, culled from live recordings, but featuring studio
   overdubs) and Live Rust (a mixture of old and new, and a genuine
   concert recording) captured the two sides of the concerts, with solo
   acoustic songs on side A, and fierce, uptempo, electric songs on side
   B. A movie version of the concerts, also called Rust Never Sleeps
   (1979), was directed by Young under the pseudonym Bernard Shakey.

   Young was suddenly hip again, and the readers and critics of Rolling
   Stone voted him Artist Of The Year for 1979 (along with The Who),
   selected Rust Never Sleeps as Album Of The Year, and voted him Male
   Vocalist Of The Year as well.

Experimental years

   The 1980s were a lean time for Young both critically and commercially.
   After providing the incidental music to a biopic of Hunter S. Thompson
   entitled Where the Buffalo Roam, he recorded Hawks & Doves (1980), a
   folk/country record. Re-ac-tor (1981), once again with Crazy Horse, was
   a façade of distortion and feedback obscuring a relatively weak
   selection of songs, but his strangest record of the decade came with
   Trans (1982). Recorded almost entirely with vocoders, synthesizers, and
   other devices that modify instruments and vocals with electronic
   effects, it is sometimes considered an experiment to find technology
   that would become a means to communicate for Young’s son (with his wife
   Pegi), Ben, who has severe cerebral palsy and cannot speak. Many fans
   were baffled by the radical forms of this album and rockabilly-styled
   Everybody's Rockin' (1983), and record company head David Geffen even
   sued Young for making "unrepresentative" music - i.e. music that did
   not sound like Neil Young. Young later stated that he would have
   preferred to release the songs featuring the synclavier and vocoder as
   an EP, and that their inclusion with the Hawaiian-themed rockabilly was
   a mistake.

   in 1983, Young worked with zany Brit video director Tim Pope, making
   two videos - "Wonderin'" and "Cry, Cry, Cry."

   In 1985, he reunited with Crosby, Stills and Nash at Live Aid at
   Philadelphia's JFK Stadium. The two songs that they played, "Only Love
   Can Break Your Heart" and " Daylight Again/Find The Cost of Freedom,"
   were the first songs they had played as a quartet in front of a paying
   audience since 1974.

   Old Ways (1985) saw a return to country music, recorded with a group of
   friends and session musicians. Landing on Water (1986) is entertaining
   for the blending of synthesizers and other instruments related to the
   80's into Young’s own style, with lyrics that take pot shots at some
   favourite targets, including CSN in "Hippie Dream," with a chorus that
   goes: "But the wooden ships/Were just a hippie dream," and David Geffen
   in “Drifter,” with the line: “Don’t try to tell me what I gotta do to
   fit.” The resumption of his partnership with Crazy Horse on Life (1987)
   fulfilled his contract with Geffen, and Young was finally able to
   switch labels.

   Signing with Warner Brothers and returning to Reprise Records, Young
   produced This Note's For You (1988) with a new band, The Bluenotes,
   whose name rights were owned by musician Harold Melvin. The addition of
   a brass section provided a new jazzier sound and the title track became
   his first hit single of the decade. Accompanied by a witty video which
   parodied corporate rock, the pretensions of advertising and Michael
   Jackson in particular, the song was initially banned by MTV (although
   the Canadian music channel, MuchMusic ran it immediately) before being
   put into heavy rotation and finally given the MTV Video Music Award for
   Best Video of the Year for 1989. After Melvin sued over the use of the
   Bluenotes name, Young renamed his back-up group "Ten Men Workin'" for
   the balance of the concert tour.

   Young also contributed to that year's CSNY reunion American Dream
   (1988) and CSNY played a few benefit concerts. Young, however, refused
   to book a full tour with CSN and the foursome would not embark upon a
   nationwide tour until 2000.

The 90s and the return to country-rock roots

   Freedom completed the return to form, a mixture of acoustic and
   electric rock dealing with the state of the US and the world in 1989,
   alongside a set of love songs and a version of the standard "On
   Broadway." Rockin' in the Free World, two versions of which bookended
   the album, again caught the mood. Some say it became a de facto anthem
   during the fall of the Berlin Wall, a few months after the record's
   release. However, most Germans don't remember the song being related to
   the reunification, understandably so, since the lyrics are not about
   political repression. Like Bruce Springsteen's " Born in the U.S.A.",
   the anthemic use of this song was based on largely ignoring the verses,
   which evoke social problems and implicitly criticize American
   government policies. By 1990, grunge music was beginning to make its
   first inroads in the charts and many of its prime movers, including
   Nirvana's Kurt Cobain, cited Young as a major influence.

   Using a barn on his Northern California ranch as a studio, he rapidly
   recorded the aptly titled Ragged Glory with Crazy Horse, whose guitar
   riffs and feedback driven sound showed his new admirers that he could
   still cut it. Young then headed back out on the road with LA punk band
   Social Distortion and alternative rock elder statesmen Sonic Youth as
   support, much to the consternation of many of his old fans . Yet the
   influence of Sonic Youth could be clearly heard on the accompanying
   home video and live album, Weld, which also included a bonus CD
   entitled Arc, a single 35-minute-long collage of feedback and guitar
   noise that Neil included, evidently at the suggestion of Sonic Youth's
   Thurston Moore] . Arc was later sold separately.

   Young's next move was another return to country music. Harvest Moon
   (1992) was the long awaited sequel to Harvest and reunited him with
   some of the musicians from that session, as well as singers Linda
   Ronstadt and James Taylor. The title track was a minor hit and the
   record was reviewed and sold equally well, containing songs such as
   "From Hank to Hendrix" and "Unknown Legend", a tribute to his wife. His
   resurgent popularity saw him booked on MTV Unplugged in 1993. In 1992
   he accompanied fellow Winnipegger Randy Bachman on "Prairie Town," a
   song that recounts their days in the Winnipeg music scene of the 1960s.
   That year, he contributed music to the soundtrack of the Jonathan Demme
   movie Philadelphia, and his song "Philadelphia" was nominated for the
   Academy Award for Best Song, losing out to Bruce Springsteen's
   contribution to the same film. A summer tour covering both Europe and
   North America with Booker T. and the MGs (with whom he played two songs
   at a 1992 Bob Dylan tribute concert at Madison Square Garden) was
   widely praised as a triumph. On a few of these dates, the show ended
   with a rendition of "Rockin' in the Free World" played with Pearl Jam.

   Young was back with Crazy Horse for 1994's Sleeps with Angels, a much
   darker record. The title track told the story of Kurt Cobain's death
   after Young had allegedly tried to contact the singer prior to this
   event^[ citations needed]. Cobain had quoted Young's "It's better to
   burn out than fade away" (a line from " My My, Hey Hey (Out of the
   Blue)") in his alleged suicide note, causing Young to emphasise the
   line "'cause once you're gone you can't come back" in live performances
   at the time. Other songs dealt with drive-by shootings ("Driveby"),
   environmentalism ("Piece of Crap") and Young's own vision of America
   (the archetypal car metaphor of "Trans Am"). Young was inspired to make
   the record after viewing Cobain's performance on MTV Unplugged. Still
   admired by the prime movers of grunge, Young eventually performed with
   Pearl Jam at the MTV Music Awards during what was described as the
   highlight of a lackluster show . Their collaboration led to a joint
   tour, with the band and producer Brendan O'Brien backing Young. The
   accompanying album, Mirror Ball (1995), recorded as live in the studio
   captured their loose rock sound, and featured the standout track "I'm
   the Ocean."

   After composing an abstract, distorted feedback-led guitar instrumental
   soundtrack to the Jim Jarmusch film Dead Man Young recorded a series of
   loose jams with Crazy Horse that eventually appeared as the critically
   denigrated Broken Arrow. The return to Crazy Horse was prompted by the
   death of mentor, friend, and longtime producer David Briggs in late
   1995. The subsequent tours of Europe and North America in 1996 resulted
   in both a live album and a tour documentary directed by Jim Jarmusch.
   Both releases took the name Year of the Horse.

   In 1997, Young participated in the H.O.R.D.E. Festival's sixth annual
   tour.

   In 1998, Young shared the stage with the rock band Phish at the annual
   Farm Aid concert, and later offered them an opportunity to headline
   both nights of the Bridge School Benefit concert. Phish passed on
   Young's offer and also declined Young's later invitation to be his
   backing band on a 1999 tour .

   The decade ended with Looking Forward, another reunion with Crosby,
   Stills and Nash. The subsequent tour of the United States and Canada
   with the reformed super quartet was a huge success and brought in
   earnings of $42.1 million, making it the eighth largest grossing tour
   of 2000.

   Young's next album, Silver & Gold (2000), contained a number of
   understated songs with personal lyrics, which was promoted through a
   mini-tour of solo acoustic shows. This style was continued in Are You
   Passionate? (2002), an album of love songs dedicated to his wife, Pegi.

In the aftermath of 9/11

   Young's 2001 single " Let's Roll", was a tribute to the victims of the
   September 11 terrorist attacks, and the passengers and crew on Flight
   93 in particular. At the " America: A Tribute to Heroes" concert he
   performed a cover version of John Lennon's " Imagine". In 2002, Q
   magazine named Neil Young in their list of the "50 Bands To See Before
   You Die."

   Young hauled out his concept album Greendale in 2003 -- about an
   extended family in a small town called Greendale, and how they're torn
   apart by a murder. Greendale the album version was recorded with Crazy
   Horse members Billy Talbot and Ralph Molina. This tale of the Green
   family also resulted in a movie called Greendale, written and directed
   by Young (again using his "Bernard Shakey" pseudonym) and starring a
   few of his friends that act out and lip sync the songs from the album.
   The film was indeed thoroughly experimental, from Young's rambling
   on-stage between-song narratives, to his reading apparent
   transcriptions of these ramblings in the liner notes. "When I was
   writing this I had no idea what I was doing, so I was just as surprised
   as you are," Young said later. Young toured extensively with the
   Greendale material throughout 2003 and 2004, first with a solo,
   acoustic version in Europe, then with a full-cast stage show in North
   America, Japan, and Australia. While audience reaction was sometimes
   mixed (drunken requests for "Southern Man" being an aesthetic
   impediment at most Young performances), the live stage version of
   Greendale was for many critics the most satisfying incarnation of the
   material, and bootlegs of the shows have been widely traded. The second
   half of each concert consisted of high-decibel renditions of Young
   classics such as "Hey Hey, My My," "Cinnamon Girl," "Powderfinger," and
   Rockin' in the Free World, as well as rarities such as "The Losing
   End," "The Old Country Waltz," and "Danger Bird."

   Young spent the latter portion of 2004 giving a series of intimate
   acoustic concerts in various cities with his wife, Pegi, who is a
   trained vocalist.

Health scare, recovery, and most recent works

   On March 31, 2005, Young was admitted to a hospital in New York for
   treatment for a brain aneurysm. He was treated successfully by a
   minimally invasive neuroradiology procedure. Prior to undergoing the
   procedure, he wrote the first eight songs of a new album, Prairie Wind,
   in Nashville, with session musicians that included regular Young
   sideman Ben Keith on lap and pedal steel guitars. The last two songs on
   the album were written after his aneurysm procedure. Many of the songs,
   such as "Fallin' Off the Face of the Earth," seem to be inspired by
   Young's brush with mortality, the recent death of his father (who
   suffered senile dementia), as well as a connection with his Manitoba
   roots. Two days after the procedure, Young was forced to cancel a
   scheduled appearance on the Juno Awards telecast in Winnipeg when the
   area where the surgeons did his procedure (via the femoral artery)
   suddenly began to bleed.

   He next performed on July 2, 2005, at the close of the Live 8 concert
   in Barrie, Ontario. He presented a new song, a soft hymn called "When
   God Made Me," and ended with "Rockin' In The Free World." He began his
   set with a cover of the Canadian folk classic "Four Strong Winds" by
   Ian & Sylvia Tyson.

   On September 28, 2005, Prairie Wind was released as a regular CD, a
   special limited-edition CD and DVD package, and on vinyl. In an
   interview given to Time magazine, Young revealed that he had planned to
   keep the news of his aneurysm private until he had the bleeding scare,
   in which case he decided to make news of his condition public.

   In 2006, Neil Young: Heart of Gold, a film made by Jonathan Demme,
   premiered at the Sundance Film Festival. Filmed over two nights at the
   Ryman Auditorium in Nashville, Tennessee during the premiere of Prairie
   Wind, it includes both new and old songs as well as behind-the
   scenes-commentary by Young, his wife Pegi and others.

   In April 2006, Young confirmed on his website that he was going to
   release an album full of protest songs, titled Living With War, one of
   whose songs is titled "Let's Impeach the President." Recorded using his
   famous Les Paul electric guitar, " Old Black", along with Chad Cromwell
   (drums), Rick Rosas (bass) and Tommy Brea (trumpet), it was intended to
   be a stinging rebuke of President George W. Bush and the War in Iraq.
   The album was recorded in a two week period in April, and was then made
   available over the internet from 28 April 2006 before being released as
   a CD on 5 May. Living With War was Young's most talked about release
   for years, creating heated political debate and a return to form with
   perhaps his most critically-acclaimed album since the early 1990s
   'Godfather of Grunge' era when he was hailed as major influences on
   grunge pioneers Pearl Jam and seminal indie band Sonic Youth among
   others.
   Neil Young on the CSNY "Freedom Of Speech Tour '06"
   Enlarge
   Neil Young on the CSNY "Freedom Of Speech Tour '06"

   In April 2006, it was announced that Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young would
   embark on their "Freedom Of Speech Tour '06" with Chad Cromwell and
   Rick Rosas making up the rhythm section. The tour will see them play
   dates all across North America. The entire Living With War album is
   being performed on the tour, in addition to other CSN and Neil Young
   classics such as " Ohio" and " Rockin' in the Free World."

   In September 2006, the first release from his long awaited Archives
   project was announced. Live at the Fillmore East features a live set
   with Crazy Horse including Danny Whitten from 1970. Young has stated in
   interviews that the release will be followed by a much larger box set
   of recordings from his early career.

   In October 2006, it was announced that a remastered version of Living
   With War, titled Living With War-Raw, would be made available for
   digital download on November 7th. It was also announced CD/DVD set of
   the remastered album will be released on December 19th. The DVD will
   include videos directed by Young of every song on the album, and
   contain footage of the Iraq War, demonstrations in the US, and Al
   Gore's An Inconvenient Truth.

   Young currently lives on a 1500-acre ranch in Woodside, California,
   called Broken Arrow. He also has a home in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.

Other achievements

   Young was inducted into the Canadian Music Hall of Fame in 1982. He has
   been inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame twice: first in 1995
   for his solo work by Eddie Vedder and again in 1997 as a member of
   Buffalo Springfield.

   He has also directed three movies under his pseudonym Bernard Shakey,
   and released them through his own Shakey Pictures imprint: Journey
   Through the Past (1973), Human Highway (1982) (starring new wave band
   Devo), and Greendale (2003). The bonus DVDs included in both versions
   of Greendale and in Prairie Wind are also directed by Young under the
   Bernard Shakey alias, and all of Young's home video and DVD releases
   have been co-released under the Shakey Pictures imprint.

   As one of the founders of Farm Aid, he remains on their board of
   directors. For one weekend each October, in Mountain View, California,
   he and his wife host the Bridge School Concerts, which have been
   drawing international talent and sell-out crowds for nearly two decades
   with some of the biggest names in rock having performed at the event
   including Bruce Springsteen, David Bowie, The Who, Pearl Jam, Sonic
   Youth and Sir Paul McCartney. The concerts are a benefit for the Bridge
   School, which develops and uses advanced technologies to aid in the
   instruction of children with disabilities. Young's involvement stems at
   least partially from the fact that both of his sons have cerebral palsy
   and his daughter, like Young himself, has epilepsy.

   Young was nominated for an Oscar in 1994 for his song "Philadelphia"
   from the film Philadelphia (Bruce Springsteen ended up winning the
   award for his song " Streets of Philadelphia" from the same film). In
   his acceptance speech, Springsteen said that "the award really deserved
   to be shared by the other nominee's song." That same night, Tom Hanks
   accepted the Oscar for Best Actor and gave credit for his inspiration
   to the song "Philadelphia".

   Young owns Vapor Records, who have signed such artists as Jonathan
   Richman, Tegan and Sara and Catatonia. Since 1995 he has been part
   owner of Lionel, LLC, a company that makes toy trains and railroads.

   In a "100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time" list in the June 1996 issue
   of Mojo magazine, Young was ranked number 9.

   In 2000, Young was inducted into Canada's Walk of Fame.

   In 2001, Young was awarded the Spirit of Liberty award from the civil
   liberties group People for the American Way.

   In 1992, Neil Young Received a honorary Doctorate of Music from
   Lakehead University in Thunder Bay, Ontario.

   On May 27th, 2006, Neil Young and his wife Pegi received Honorary
   Doctorates of Humane Letters from San Francisco State University for
   their creation of the Bridge School.

   In a "Greatest Living Songwriters" list in 2006 by Paste Magazine Young
   was ranked number 2 behind Bob Dylan.

Instruments

   Neil Young is a collector of second-hand guitars, but in recording and
   performing, he frequently uses just a few instruments. As explained by
   his longtime guitar technician Larry Cragg in the film Neil Young:
   Heart of Gold, they include:
     * 1953 Gibson R6 Les Paul Goldtop – Nicknamed " Old Black", this is
       Young's primary electric guitar and is featured on Rust Never
       Sleeps and most other albums. Old Black got its name from a purely
       amateur paintjob applied to the originally-gold body of the
       instrument, sometime before Neil acquired the guitar in the late
       1960s. In 1972, a mini- humbucker pickup from a Gibson Firebird
       guitar was installed into the lead/treble position, replacing a
       P-90 as standard on Les Paul guitars from that era. This pickup,
       severely microphonic, is considered a crucial component of Neil's
       sound. A Bigsby tremelo unit was installed as early as 1969 on the
       guitar, and can be heard clearly during the opening of "Cowgirl in
       the Sand" from Everybody Knows This is Nowhere.
     * Martin D-45 – His primary steel-string acoustic guitar; used to
       write "Old Man" and many other hit songs.
     * Martin D-28 – Nicknamed "Hank" after its previous owner, Hank
       Williams. The guitar came into Young's possession after Hank
       Williams, Jr. had traded it to another owner for some shotguns and
       it went through a succession of other owners until it was located
       by Young's longtime friend Grant Boatwright. It is Young's primary
       guitar for the album, Prairie Wind and is used on Neil Young: Heart
       of Gold.
     * 1927 Gibson Mastertone – A six-string banjo, tuned like a guitar.
       It has been used on many recordings and was played by James Taylor
       on "Old Man".
     * Various vintage Fender Deluxe amplifiers – Neil's preferred
       amplifier for electric guitar is the dimunitive Fender Deluxe,
       specifically a Tweed-era model from 1959. Neil purchased his first
       vintage Deluxe in 1967 for $50 and has since acquired nearly 450
       different examples, all from the same era, but he maintains that
       it's the original model that sounds superior, and is a crucial
       component to his trademark sound. A notable and unique accessory to
       Young's Deluxe is the Whizzer, a device created specifically for
       Young, which physically changes the amplifier's settings to pre-set
       combinations. It has gone through many incarnations, and now
       includes effects pedals hardwired into its circuitry.
     * Gretsch 6120 (Chet Atkins) – Before Neil bought Old Black, this was
       his primary electric guitar used during his Buffalo Springfield
       days.
     * Gretsch White Falcon – Late '50s hollow body that Neil purchased
       near the end of the Buffalo Springfield era; in 1969 Neil acquired
       a stereo version from Stills (same vintage--see photo, top right),
       and this guitar is featured prominently during Neil's early '70s
       period, and can be heard on tracks like "Ohio," "Southern Man,"
       "Alabama," "L.A.," others.

Trivia

     * Two of the domesticated buffalo used in the production of the film
       Dances With Wolves were borrowed from Neil Young.
     * An edited version of Young's song "Rockin' in the Free World" plays
       in the ending credits of the Michael Moore documentary Fahrenheit
       9/11.
     * The piano Young played on After the Gold Rush was later purchased
       by Eels frontman Mark Oliver Everett and used to record Daisies of
       the Galaxy.
     * Young's greatest hobby is collecting model trains. He is a part
       owner in the Lionel company, pioneered several technological
       developments for Lionel, and has an extensive "train barn" on his
       Northern California ranch. In September, 2006, Neil was involved in
       aspects of audio capture for Lionel's NY MTA series.
     * Other hobbies of Young include collecting and restoring classic
       automobiles, and attending San Jose Sharks ice hockey games with
       his son, Ben Young.

Discography

Biographies

     * Don't Be Denied: the Canadian Years, John Einarson, published by
       Quarry Press in 1992, ISBN 1-55082-044-3
     * Neil Young, the Rolling Stones Files: the Ultimate Compendium of
       Interviews, Articles, Facts, and Opinions from the Files of Rolling
       Stone, published by Rolling Stone Press in 1994, ISBN 0-7868-8043-0
     * A Dreamer of Pictures, David Downing, published by Bloomsbury in
       1994, ISBN 0-7475-1881-5
     * Neil and Me, Scott Young, published by McClelland and Stewart in
       1997, ISBN 0-7710-9099-4
     * Neil Young: Zero to Sixty: A Critical Biography, Johnny Rogan,
       published by Omnibus Press in 2000, ISBN 0-9529540-4-4
     * Neil Young, Sylvie Simmons, published by MOJO Books in 2001, ISBN
       184195084
     * Shakey: Neil Young's Biography, Jimmy McDonough, published by
       Random House in 2002, ISBN 0-679-42772-4

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neil_Young"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
