   #copyright

Nelson Mandela

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Political People

   Nelson Mandela said "You are doing the right thing... with SOS
   Children. SOS Children homepage
   Nelson Mandela
   Nelson Mandela
     __________________________________________________________________

   11th President of South Africa
   In office
   27 April 1994 –  1999
   Vice President(s)   Frederik Willem de Klerk
   Thabo Mbeki
   Preceded by Frederik Willem de Klerk ( State President of South Africa)
   Succeeded by Thabo Mbeki
     __________________________________________________________________

   Born 18 July 1918
   Qunu, Mthatha, Transkei
   Political party African National Congress

   Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela ( IPA Image:Rolihlahla.png ) (born July 18,
   1918) was the first President of South Africa to be elected in
   fully-representative democratic elections. Before his presidency he was
   a prominent anti- apartheid activist and leader of the African National
   Congress. He was tried and imprisoned for his involvement in
   underground armed resistance activities. The armed struggle was a last
   resort; he had remained steadfastly committed to non-violence. Through
   his 27-year imprisonment, much of it spent in a cell on Robben Island,
   Mandela became the most widely known figure in the struggle against
   South African apartheid. Although the apartheid regime and nations
   sympathetic to it considered him and the ANC to be communists and
   terrorists, the armed struggle was an integral part of the overall
   campaign against apartheid. The switch in policy to that of
   reconciliation, which Mandela pursued upon his release in 1990,
   facilitated a peaceful transition to fully-representative democracy in
   South Africa.

   Having received over a hundred awards over four decades, Mandela is
   currently a celebrated elder statesman who continues to voice his
   opinion on topical issues. In South Africa he is often known as Madiba,
   an honorary title adopted by elders of Mandela's clan. The title has
   come to be synonymous with Nelson Mandela. Many South Africans also
   refer to him reverently as 'mkhulu' (grandfather).

Early life

   Mandela was born to a Thembu family in the small village of Qunu in the
   Mthatha district, capital of the Transkeian Territories of the Cape
   Province of the Union of South Africa. Mandela's father, Gadla Henry
   Mphakanyiswa, was a member for the royal council of the Thembu people,
   a position for which he was groomed from birth and which Mandela was
   also destined to inherit. Mandela's father was instrumental in the
   ascension to the Thembu throne of Jongintaba Dalindyebo, who would
   later return this favour by informally adopting Mandela upon Gadla's
   death. In total, Mandela's father had four wives, with whom he fathered
   a total of thirteen children (four boys and nine girls). Mandela was
   born to Gadla's third wife ('third' by a complex royal ranking system),
   Nosekeni Fanny in whose umzi or homestead Mandela spent much of his
   childhood. His name Rolihlahla means one who brings trouble to himself.

   At seven years of age, Rolihlahla Mandela became the first member of
   his family to attend a school, where he was given the name "Nelson",
   after the British admiral Horatio Nelson, by a Methodist teacher. His
   father died of tuberculosis when Rolihlahla was nine, and the Regent,
   Jongintaba, became his guardian. Mandela attended a Wesleyan mission
   school next door to the palace of the regent. Following Thembu custom,
   he was initiated at age sixteen, and attended Clarkebury Boarding
   Institute, learning about Western culture. He completed his Junior
   Certificate in two years, instead of the usual three.

   At age nineteen, in 1937, Mandela moved to Healdtown, the Wesleyan
   college in Fort Beaufort, which most Thembu royalty attended, and took
   an interest in boxing and running. After matriculating, he started to
   study for a B.A. at the Fort Hare University, where he met Oliver
   Tambo, and the two became lifelong friends and colleagues.

   At the end of his first year, he became involved in a boycott of the
   Students' Representative Council against the university policies, and
   was asked to leave Fort Hare. Shortly after this, Jongintaba announced
   to Mandela and Justice (the Regent's own son and heir to the throne)
   that he had arranged marriages for both of them. Both young men were
   displeased by this and rather than marry, they elected to flee the
   comforts of the Regent's estate to the only place they could:
   Johannesburg. Upon his arrival in Johannesburg, Mandela initially found
   employment as a guard at a mine. However, this was quickly terminated
   after the employer learned that Mandela was the Regent's runaway
   adopted son. He then managed to find work as an articled clerk at a law
   firm thanks to connections with his friend and fellow lawyer Walter
   Sisulu. While working, he completed his degree at the University of
   South Africa (UNISA) via correspondence, after which he started with
   his law studies at the University of Witwatersrand. During this time
   Mandela lived in a township called Alexandra.

Political activity

   After the 1948 election victory of the Afrikaner-dominated National
   Party with its apartheid policy of racial segregation, Mandela was
   prominent in the ANC's 1952 Defiance Campaign and the 1955 Congress of
   the People, whose adoption of the Freedom Charter provided the
   fundamental program of the anti-apartheid cause. During this time,
   Mandela and fellow lawyer Oliver Tambo operated the law firm of Mandela
   and Tambo, providing free or low-cost legal counsel to many blacks who
   would otherwise have been without legal representation.

   Initially committed to non-violent mass struggle, Mandela was arrested
   with 150 others on 5 December 1956, and charged with treason. The
   marathon Treason Trial of 1956–61 followed, and all were acquitted.
   From 1952–59 the ANC experienced disruption as a new class of Black
   activists (Africanists) emerged in the townships demanding more drastic
   steps against the National Party regime. The ANC leadership of Albert
   Luthuli, Oliver Tambo and Walter Sisulu felt not only that events were
   moving too fast, but also that their leadership was challenged. They
   consequently bolstered their position by alliances with small White,
   Coloured and Indian political parties in an attempt to appear to have a
   wider appeal than the Africanists. The 1955 Freedom Charter Kliptown
   Conference was ridiculed by the Africanists for allowing the
   100,000-strong ANC to be relegated to a single vote in a Congress
   alliance, in which four secretary-generals of the five participating
   parties were members of the secretly reconstituted South African
   Communist Party (SACP), strongly adhering to the Moscow line.

   In 1959, the ANC lost its most militant support when most of the
   Africanists, with financial support from Ghana and significant
   political support from the Transvaal-based Basotho, broke away to form
   the Pan Africanist Congress (PAC) under Robert Sobukwe and Potlako
   Leballo. Following the massacre of PAC supporters at Sharpeville, in
   March 1960, and the subsequent banning of PAC and ANC, the ANC/SACP
   followed the African Resistance Movement (renegade liberals) and PAC
   into armed resistance. Luthuli, criticised for inertia, was
   peripheralised, and the ANC/SACP used the All-In African Conference of
   1961, where all parties met to decide a joint strategy, for Mandela to
   issue a dramatic call to arms, announcing the formation of Umkhonto we
   Sizwe, modeled on the Jewish guerrilla movement, Irgun, and commanded
   by Mandela with SACP Jewish activists Denis Goldberg, Lionel "Rusty"
   Bernstein, and Harold Wolpe.

   Mandela then left the country secretly and met African leaders in
   Algeria and elsewhere. Startled to discover the depth of support for
   the PAC and the widespread belief that the ANC was a small Xhosa tribal
   association manipulated by White communists, Mandela returned to South
   Africa determined to reassert the African nationalist element in the
   Congress Alliance. It is widely suspected that a heated discussion with
   the communist leaders over this issue led to his subsequent betrayal
   and arrest near Howick.^[ weasel words] Mandela glossed over these
   events in his autobiography but at least one prominent SACP activist
   associated with him at that time was cold-shouldered on his return to
   South Africa.

Arrest and imprisonment

   In 1961, Mandela became the leader of the ANC's armed wing, Umkhonto we
   Sizwe (translated as Spear of the Nation, also abbreviated as MK),
   which he co-founded. He co-ordinated a sabotage campaign against
   military and government targets, and made plans for a possible
   guerrilla war if sabotage failed to end apartheid. A few decades later,
   MK did indeed wage a guerrilla war against the regime, especially
   during the 1980s, in which many civilians were killed. Mandela also
   raised funds for MK abroad, and arranged for paramilitary training,
   visiting various African governments.

   On 5 August 1962, he was arrested after living on the run for seventeen
   months and was imprisoned in the Johannesburg Fort. According to
   William Blum, a former U.S. State Department employee, the CIA tipped
   off the police as to Mandela's whereabouts. Three days later, the
   charges of leading workers to strike in 1961 and leaving the country
   illegally were read to him during a court appearance. On 25 October
   1962, Mandela was sentenced to five years in prison. Two years later on
   11 June 1964, a verdict had been reached concerning his previous
   engagement in the African National Congress (ANC).

   While Mandela was in prison, police arrested prominent ANC leaders on
   11 July 1963, at Liliesleaf Farm, Rivonia, north of Johannesburg.
   Mandela was brought in, and at the Rivonia Trial, Mandela, Ahmed
   Kathrada, Walter Sisulu, Govan Mbeki, Andrew Mlangeni, Raymond Mhlaba,
   Elias Motsoaledi, Walter Mkwayi (who escaped during trial), Arthur
   Goldreich (who escaped from prison before trial), Denis Goldberg and
   Lionel "Rusty" Bernstein were charged by Percy Yutar with the capital
   crimes of sabotage and crimes which were equivalent to treason, but
   easier for the government to prove.

   In his statement from the dock at the opening of the defence case in
   the trial on 20 April 1964 at Pretoria Supreme Court, Mandela laid out
   the clarity of reasoning in the ANC's choice to use violence as a
   tactic. His statement revealed how the ANC had used peaceful means to
   resist apartheid for years until the Sharpeville Massacre. That event
   coupled with the referendum establishing the Republic of South Africa
   and the declaration of a state of emergency along with the banning of
   the ANC made it clear that their only choice was to resist through acts
   of sabotage. Doing otherwise would have been tantamount to
   unconditional surrender. Mandela went on to explain how they developed
   the Manifesto of Umkhonto on 16 December 1961 intent on exposing the
   failure of the National Party's policies after the economy would be
   threatened by foreigners' unwillingness to risk investing in the
   country. He closed his statement with these words:


   Nelson Mandela

      During my lifetime I have dedicated myself to the struggle of the
     African people. I have fought against white domination, and I have
      fought against black domination. I have cherished the ideal of a
      democratic and free society in which all persons live together in
    harmony and with equal opportunities. It is an ideal which I hope to
   live for and to achieve. But if needs be, it is an ideal for which I am
                              prepared to die.


   Nelson Mandela

   Bram Fischer, Vernon Berrange, Joel Joffe, Arthur Chaskalson and George
   Bizos were part of the defence team that represented the accused.
   Harold Hanson was brought in at the end of the case to plead
   mitigation. All except Rusty Bernstein were found guilty, but they
   escaped the gallows and were sentenced to life imprisonment on 12 June
   1964. Charges included involvement in planning armed action, in
   particular four charges of sabotage, which Mandela admitted to, and a
   conspiracy to help other countries invade South Africa, which Mandela
   denied.

   Nelson Mandela was imprisoned on Robben Island where he was destined to
   remain for the next eighteen of his twenty-seven years in prison. It
   was there he wrote the bulk of his autobiography, Long Walk to Freedom.
   In that book Mandela did not reveal anything about the alleged
   complicity of Frederik de Klerk in the violence of the eighties and
   nineties, or the role of his ex-wife Winnie Mandela in that bloodshed.
   However, he later co-operated with his friend the journalist Anthony
   Sampson who discussed those issues in Mandela: The Authorised
   Biography. Another detail that Mandela omitted was the allegedly
   fraudulent book, Goodbye Bafana. Its author, Robben Island warder James
   Gregory, claimed to have been Mandela's confidante in prison and
   published details of the prisoner's family affairs in Goodbye Bafana.
   Sampson maintained that Mandela had not known Gregory well, but that
   Gregory censored the letters sent to the future president and thus
   discovered the details of Mandela's personal life. Sampson also averred
   that other warders suspected Gregory of spying for the government and
   that Mandela considered suing Gregory.

   While in prison, Mandela was able to maintain contact with the ANC,
   which published a statement from him on 10 June 1980, reading in part:


   Nelson Mandela

   Unite! Mobilize! Fight on! Between the anvil of united mass action and
         the hammer of the armed struggle we shall crush apartheid!


   Nelson Mandela

   Refusing an offer of conditional release in return for renouncing armed
   struggle in February 1985, Mandela remained in prison until sustained
   ANC and international campaigning with the resounding slogan Free
   Nelson Mandela! culminated in his release in February 1990. State
   President Frederik de Klerk simultaneously ordered Mandela's release,
   and the ending of the ban on the ANC.

   On the day of his release, 11 February 1990, Mandela made a speech to
   the nation. While declaring his commitment to peace and reconciliation
   with the country's white minority, he made it clear that the ANC's
   armed struggle was not yet over:


   Nelson Mandela

     Our resort to the armed struggle in 1960 with the formation of the
    military wing of the ANC ( Umkhonto we Sizwe) was a purely defensive
         action against the violence of apartheid. The factors which
    necessitated the armed struggle still exist today. We have no option
     but to continue. We express the hope that a climate conducive to a
      negotiated settlement would be created soon, so that there may no
                 longer be the need for the armed struggle.


   Nelson Mandela

   But he also said his main focus was to bring peace to the black
   majority and give them the right to vote in both national and local
   elections.

ANC presidency and presidency of South Africa

   South Africa's first democratic elections in which full enfranchisement
   was granted were held on 27 April 1994. The ANC won the majority in the
   election, and Mandela, as leader of the ANC, was inaugurated as the
   country's first black State President, with the National party's de
   Klerk as his deputy president in the Government of National Unity.

   As President from May 1994 until June 1999, Mandela presided over the
   transition from minority rule and apartheid, winning international
   respect for his advocacy of national and international reconciliation.

   Nelson Mandela encouraged black South Africans to get behind the
   previously hated South African national rugby union team as South
   Africa hosted the 1995 Rugby World Cup. After the Springboks won an
   epic final over New Zealand, Nelson Mandela wearing a Springbok shirt
   presented the trophy to captain Francois Pienaar, an Afrikaner. This
   was widely seen as a major step in the reconciliation of white and
   black South Africans.

   It was also during his administration that South Africa entered the
   space age with the launch of the SUNSAT satellite in February 1999. It
   was was designed by students of University of Stellenbosch and was used
   primarily for photographing land in South Africa related to vegetation
   and forestry concerns.

   However, his administration attracted some criticism. In what was South
   Africa's first post-apartheid military operation Mandela ordered troops
   into Lesotho in September 1998. Prime Minister Pakalitha Mosisili was
   elected in rigged elections which prompted fierce opposition
   threatening the unstable government. Lesotho is surrounded and
   economically dependent on its neighbour and also provides South Africa
   with jobs and remittances from workers. Troops were brought in to
   protect the government and secure the Katse dam project which provides
   water supplies to South Africa’s dry industrial heartland.

   Certain interest groups were also disappointed with the social
   achievements of his term of office, particularly the government's
   ineffectiveness in stemming the AIDS crisis. After his retirement,
   Mandela admitted that he may have failed his country by not paying more
   attention to the HIV/AIDS epidemic. He has taken many opportunities
   since to highlight this South African tragedy.

International diplomacy

   President Mandela took a particular interest in helping to resolve the
   long-running dispute between Libya on the one hand, and the United
   States and Britain on the other, over bringing to trial the two Libyans
   who were accused of sabotaging Pan Am Flight 103 on 21 December 1988
   with the loss of 270 lives. In November 1994, Mandela offered South
   Africa as a neutral venue for the Pan Am Flight 103 bombing trial but
   the offer was rejected by British Prime Minister John Major. A further
   three years elapsed until Mandela's offer was repeated to Major's
   successor, Tony Blair, when the president visited London in July 1997.
   Later the same year, at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting
   (CHOGM) at Edinburgh in October 1997, Mandela warned: "No one nation
   should be complainant, prosecutor and judge." A compromise solution was
   then agreed for a trial to be held at Camp Zeist in the Netherlands,
   governed by Scots law, and President Mandela began negotiations with
   Colonel Gaddafi for the handover of the two accused ( Megrahi and
   Fhimah) in April 1999.

   At the end of their nine-month trial, the verdict was announced on 31
   January 2001. Fhimah was acquitted but Megrahi was convicted and
   sentenced to 27 years in a Scottish jail. Megrahi's appeal was turned
   down in March 2002, and former president Mandela went to visit him in
   Barlinnie prison on 10 June 2002. "Megrahi is all alone", Mandela told
   a packed press conference in the prison's visitors room. "He has nobody
   he can talk to. It is psychological persecution that a man must stay
   for the length of his long sentence all alone." Mandela added: "It
   would be fair if he were transferred to a Muslim country — and there
   are Muslim countries which are trusted by the West. It will make it
   easier for his family to visit him if he is in a place like the kingdom
   of Morocco, Tunisia or Egypt." Megrahi was subsequently moved to
   Greenock jail and is no longer in solitary confinement. His case is
   currently being reviewed by the Scottish Criminal Cases Review
   Commission, which is expected to rule that Megrahi's case should be
   referred back to the Scottish High Court of Justiciary for a fresh
   appeal.

Marriages

   Mandela has been married three times. His first marriage was to Evelyn
   Ntoko Mase who, like Mandela, was also from what later became the
   Transkei area of South Africa, although they actually met in
   Johannesburg. The couple had two sons, Madiba Thembekile (Thembi) (born
   1946) and Makgatho (born 1950), and two daughters, both named Makaziwe
   (born 1947 and 1953). Their first daughter died aged nine months, and
   they named their second daughter in her honour. The couple broke up in
   1957 after 13 years, divorcing under the multiple strains of his
   constant absences, devotion to revolutionary agitation, and the fact
   she was a Jehovah's Witness, a religion which professes political
   neutrality. Thembi was killed in a car crash in 1969 at the age of 25,
   while Mandela was imprisoned on Robben Island. All their children were
   educated at the Waterford Kamhlaba.

   Mandela's second wife, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, also came from the
   Transkei area, although they, too, met in Johannesburg, where she was
   the city's first black social worker. They had two daughters, Zenani,
   born 4 February 1958, and Zindziswa (Zindzi), born 1960. Later, Winnie
   would be deeply torn by family discord which mirrored the country's
   political strife; while her husband was serving a life sentence on the
   Robben Island prison for terrorism and treason, her father became the
   agriculture minister in the Transkei. The marriage ended in separation
   (April 1992) and divorce (March 1996), fuelled by political
   estrangement.

   On his 80th birthday, he married Graça Machel, widow of Samora Machel,
   the former Mozambican president and ANC ally killed in an air crash 12
   years earlier.

Retirement

   After his retirement as President in 1999, Mandela went on to become an
   advocate for a variety of social and human rights organizations. He
   received many foreign honours, including the Order of Merit and the
   Order of St. John from Queen Elizabeth II and the Presidential Medal of
   Freedom from George W. Bush.

   As an example of his popular acclaim, in his tour of Canada in 1998, he
   included a speaking engagement in SkyDome in the city of Toronto where
   he spoke to 45,000 school children who greeted him with intense
   adulation. In 2001, he was the first living person to be made an
   honorary Canadian citizen (the only previous recipient, Raoul
   Wallenberg, was awarded honorary citizenship posthumously). Although
   the government of Canada had hoped that the vote to make Mandela a
   citizen would be unanimous, this was not possible due to Canadian
   Alliance MP Rob Anders who stood up in the Canadian House of Commons
   and claimed Mandela was a former "communist and a terrorist". While in
   Canada, he was also made an honorary Companion of the Order of Canada,
   one of the few foreigners to receive Canada's highest honour.

   In summer 2001, Mandela was diagnosed and treated for prostate cancer.
   He was treated with a seven week course of radiation .

   In 2003, Mandela attacked the foreign policy of the George W. Bush
   administration in a number of speeches. Criticizing the lack of UN
   involvement in the decision to begin the War in Iraq, he said "It is a
   tragedy, what is happening, what Bush is doing. But Bush is now
   undermining the United Nations," Mandela stated he would support action
   against Iraq only if it is ordered by the UN. Mandela also insinuated
   that President Bush may have been motivated by racism in not following
   the UN and its secretary-general Kofi Annan on the issue of the War in
   Iraq. "Is it because the secretary-general of the United Nations is now
   a black man? They never did that when secretary-generals were white",
   Mandela said.

   He urged the people of the US to join massive protests against Mr. Bush
   and called on world leaders, especially those with vetoes in the UN
   Security Council, to oppose him. "What I am condemning is that one
   power, with a president who has no foresight, who cannot think
   properly, is now wanting to plunge the world into a holocaust." He
   attacked the United States for its record on human rights and for
   dropping atomic bombs on Japan during World War II. "If there is a
   country that has committed unspeakable atrocities in the world, it is
   the United States of America. They don't care." The comments caused a
   rare moment of controversy and criticism for Mandela, even among some
   supporters.
   Mandela at 46664 Arctic in Tromsø
   Enlarge
   Mandela at 46664 Arctic in Tromsø

   Later that same year, he lent his support to the 46664 AIDS fundraising
   campaign, named after his prison number.

   In June 2004, at age 85, Mandela announced that he would be retiring
   from public life. His health had been declining, and he wanted to enjoy
   more time with his family. He has made an exception, however, for his
   commitment to the fight against AIDS. In July 2004, he flew to Bangkok
   to speak at the XV International AIDS Conference. His son, Makgatho
   Mandela, died of AIDS on 6 January 2005.

   Mandela has also expressed his support for the international Make
   Poverty History movement of which the ONE Campaign is a part.

   On 23 July 2004, the city of Johannesburg bestowed its highest honour
   on Mandela by granting him the freedom of the city at a ceremony in
   Orlando, Soweto.

   Today, Mandela remains a key figure to strong educational organisations
   which strongly uphold his ideals of international understanding and
   peace, like the United World Colleges and the Round Square. For the
   IOC's Celebrate Humanity Campaign for the 2006 Winter Olympics, Mandela
   appears in a televised public service announcement.

Orders and decorations

     * Amnesty International's Ambassador of Conscience Award (2006)
     * Nobel Peace Prize (1993)
     * Honorary Companion of The Order of Canada
     * Order of St. John
     * Presidential Medal of Freedom
     * Lenin Peace Prize (1990)
     * Bharat Ratna (1990)
     * Order of Merit (1995)
     * Freedom of the City of Johannesburg (2004)
     * Honorary Canadian Citizenship

Trivia

     * Mandela became the oldest elected President of South Africa when he
       took office at the age of 75.
     * He speaks fluent Afrikaans, a language once hated by black people
       because of its association with Apartheid.
     * In the final scene of the 1992 American film Malcolm X, Mandela --
       recently released after 27 years of political imprisonment --
       appears as a schoolteacher in a classroom in Soweto. He recites a
       portion of one of Malcolm X's most famous speeches, including the
       following sentence: "We declare our right on this earth to be a
       human being, to be respected as a human being, to be given the
       rights of a human being in this society, on this earth, in this
       day, which we intend to bring into existence . . . ." The final
       phrase of that sentence is " by any means necessary." Mandela
       informed director Spike Lee that he could not utter this phrase on
       camera, stating that the apartheid government would somehow use it
       against him if he did. Lee understandingly obliged, and the final
       seconds of the film feature black-and-white footage of the real
       Malcolm X speaking the words "by any means necessary".
     * Queen and Paul Rodgers performed a song titled "Say It's Not True"
       in their concert Return Of The Champions, which was written for
       Nelson Mandela's 46664 campaign. It was written by Roger Taylor,
       the Queen drummer.
     * The famous Ska band The Specials, best known for their Two-Tone
       records promoting racial unity in England recorded a song " Free
       Nelson Mandela." In 1984, the Student Union of Wadham College,
       Oxford passed a motion to end every college 'bop' (disco) with this
       song in memory of Nelson Mandela, a tradition that continues
       despite his release. After his release he went to visit the college
       and was made an honourary member of the Student Union.
     * Mandela is known for his fondness of Batik textiles. He is often
       seen wearing Batik, even on formal occasions. Shirts in this style
       are fondly known as "Madiba shirts" in South Africa.
     * In 2003, Mandela's death was incorrectly announced by CNN when his
       pre-written obituary (along with those of several other famous
       figures) was inadvertently published on CNN's web site due to a
       lapse in password protection.
     * The Mayor of London, Ken Livingstone, wants a statue of Nelson
       Mandela installed on the north terrace of Trafalgar Square,
       although thus far he has run into opposition.
     * Johnny Clegg dedicated a song to Mandela entitled Asimbonanga
       (Mandela), in which fellow anti-apartheid activists Steve Biko,
       Victoria Mxenge, and Neil Aggett are also recognised.
     * Mandela has become a cultural icon of freedom and equality
       comparable with Mohandas Gandhi to many around the world.
     * Goodbye Bafana, a feature film that focuses on Mandela's life, is
       in production. It is due to be released in 2006.
     * As a member of the U.S. House of Representatives, Dick Cheney voted
       against a congressional resolution calling for Mandela's release
       from prison. Years later, Mandela would call Cheney a "dinosaur."
     * Mandela spoke in the Olympics "Celebrate Humanity" campaign with
       the words:

   For seventeen days, they are roommates. For seventeen days, they are
   soulmates. And for twenty-two seconds, they are competitors. Seventeen
   days as equals. Twenty-two seconds as adversaries. What a wonderful
   world that would be. That's the hope I see in the Olympic Games.
     * Mandela was made an honorary member of Manchester United as the
       club toured South Africa in the Summer of 2006.
     * According to the Time 100, he is one of only four people in history
       to have shaped both the 20th century and the early 21st. The other
       three are Bill Gates, Pope John Paul II, and Oprah Winfrey.
     * In 1992 he was awarded the Atatürk Peace Price by Turkey. He
       refused the award citing human rights violations committed by
       Turkey during that time.
     * In Civilization IV, each game concludes with various statistics and
       a scale comparing the player's score to various historical figures.
       Nelson Mandela is ranked 6 out of 20, above Emperor Constantine but
       below Winston Churchill.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nelson_Mandela"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
