   #copyright

Nepal

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Asian Countries;
Countries

   SOS Children works in Nepal. For more information see SOS Children in
   Nepal
   नेपाल अधिराज्य
   Nepāl Adhirājya
   Kingdom of Nepal

   Flag of Nepal Emblem of Nepal
   Flag          Emblem
   Motto: Sanskrit: जननी जन्मभूमिष्च स्वर्गादपि गरीयसी
   ("Mother and motherland are dearer than the heavens")
   Anthem: Rastriya Gaan
   Location of Nepal
   Capital Kathmandu
   27°42′N 85°19′E
   Largest city Kathmandu Kantipur
   Official languages Nepali
   Government Transitional government
    - King Gyanendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev
    - Prime Minister Girija Prasad Koirala
   Unification December 21, 1768
   Area
    - Total 147,181 km² ( 93rd)
   56,827 sq mi
    - Water (%) 2.8
   Population
    - July 2005 estimate 27,133,000 ( 42nd)
    - 2002 census 23,151,423
    - Density 184/km² ( 56th)
   477/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total $39.14 billion ( 87th)
    - Per capita $1,675 ( 153rd)
   HDI  (2003) 0.526 (medium) ( 136th)
   Currency Rupee ( NPR)
   Time zone NPT ( UTC+5:45)
    - Summer ( DST) not observed ( UTC+5:45)
   Internet TLD .np
   Calling code +977

   Nepal ( [neˈpaːl] ), officially the Kingdom of Nepal, is a landlocked
   Himalayan country in South Asia, bordered by China ( Tibet) to the
   north and by India to the south, east and west. Nepal is a kingdom of
   various geographical features, and is culturally rich. More than 80% of
   Nepalese follow Hinduism, which is higher than the percentage of Indian
   Hindus, making it the single most Hinduic nation in the world. For a
   small territory, the Nepali landscape is uncommonly diverse, ranging
   from the humid Terai in the south to the lofty Himalayas in the north.
   Nepal boasts eight of the world's fourteen highest mountains, including
   Mount Everest on the border with China. Kathmandu is the capital and
   largest city. The other main cities include Bharatpur, Biratnagar,
   Bhairahawa, Birgunj, Janakpur, Pokhara, Nepalgunj, and Mahendranagar.
   The origin of the name Nepal is uncertain, but the most popular
   understanding is that it derived from Ne (holy) and pal (cave).

   After a long and rich history, during which the region splintered and
   coalesced under a variety of absolute rulers, Nepal became a
   constitutional monarchy in 1990. However, the monarchy retained many
   important and ill-defined powers. This arrangement was marked by
   increasing instability, both in the parliament and, since 1996, in
   large swathes of the country that have been fought over by Maoist
   insurgents. The Maoists, alienated from mainstream political parties,
   went underground and started a guerrilla war against both monarchy and
   mainstream political parties. They have sought to overthrow feudal
   institutions, including the monarchy, and establish a republic. This
   has led to the ongoing Nepalese Civil War in which more than 13,000
   people have died. On the pretext of quashing the insurgents, who now
   control about 60% of the country, the king closed down the parliament
   and sacked the elected prime minister in 2002 and started ruling
   through prime ministers appointed by him. He then unilaterally declared
   a state of emergency early in 2005, and assumed all executive powers.
   Following the Loktantra Andolan, the king agreed to relinquish the
   sovereign power back to the people and reinstated the dissolved House
   of Representatives on April 24, 2006. Using its newly acquired
   sovereign authority, on May 19, 2006, the newly resumed House of
   Representatives unanimously passed a motion to curtail the power of the
   king and declared Nepal a secular state. As of September, 2006, a
   complete rewrite of the country's constitution was still expected to
   happen in the near future.

History

   Neolithic tools found in the Kathmandu Valley indicate that people have
   been living in the Himalayan region for at least 9,000 years. It
   appears that people who were probably of Tibeto-Burman ethnicity lived
   in Nepal 2,500 years ago.

   Indo-Aryan tribes entered the valley around 1500 BC. Around 1000 BC,
   small kingdoms and confederations of clans arose. One of the princes of
   the Shakya confederation was Siddharta Gautama (563–483 BC), who
   renounced his royalty to lead an ascetic life and came to be known as
   the Buddha ("the one who has awakened"). By 250 BC, the region came
   under the influence of the Mauryan empire of northern India, and later
   became a puppet state under the Gupta Dynasty in the 4th century. From
   the late 5th century, rulers called the Licchavis governed the area.
   The Licchavi dynasty went into decline in the late 8th century and was
   followed by a Newari era, from 879, although the extent of their
   control over the entire country is uncertain. By late 11th century,
   southern Nepal came under the influence of the Chalukya Empire of
   southern India. Under the Chalukyas, Nepal's religious establishment
   changed as the kings patronised Hinduism instead of the prevailing
   Buddhism.
   Hindu temples in Patan, the capital of one of the three medieval
   kingdoms
   Enlarge
   Hindu temples in Patan, the capital of one of the three medieval
   kingdoms
   Nepalese royalty in the 1920s
   Enlarge
   Nepalese royalty in the 1920s

   By the early 13th century, leaders were emerging whose names ended with
   the Sanskrit suffix malla ("wrestler"). Initially their reign was
   marked by upheaval, but the kings consolidated their power over the
   next 200 years. By late 14th century much of the country began to come
   under a unified rule. This unity was short-lived: in 1482 the kingdom
   was carved into three – Kathmandu, Patan, and Bhadgaon – which had
   petty rivalry for centuries.

   In 1765, the Gorkha ruler Prithvi Narayan Shah set out to unify the
   kingdoms, after first seeking arms and aid from Indian kings and buying
   the neutrality of bordering Indian kingdoms. After several bloody
   battles and sieges, he managed to unify Nepal three years later.
   However, the actual war never took place while conquering the Kathmandu
   Valley. Infact, it was during the Indra Jaatra, when all the valley
   citizens were celebreting the festival, Prithvi Narayan Shah with his
   troops captured the valley, virtually without any effort. This marked
   the birth of the modern nation of Nepal. A dispute and subsequent war
   with Tibet over control of mountain passes forced Nepal to retreat and
   pay heavy repatriations to China, who came to Tibet's rescue. Rivalry
   with the British East India Company over the annexation of minor states
   bordering Nepal eventually led to the brief but bloody Anglo-Nepalese
   War (1815–16), in which Nepal defended its present day borders but lost
   its territories west of the Kali River, including present day
   Uttaranchal state and several Punjab Hill States of present day
   Himachal Pradesh. The Treaty of Sugauli also ceded parts of the Terai
   and Sikkim to the Company in exchange for Nepalese autonomy.

   Factionalism among the royal family led to instability after the war.
   In 1846, a discovered plot to overthrow Jang Bahadur, a fast-rising
   military leader by the reigning queen, led to the Kot Massacre. Armed
   clashes between military personnel and administrators loyal to the
   queen led to the execution of several hundred princes and chieftains
   around the country. Bahadur won and founded the Rana dynasty, leading
   to the Rana autocracy. The king was made a titular figure, and the post
   of Prime Minister was made powerful and hereditary. The Ranas were
   staunchly pro-British, and assisted the British during the Sepoy
   Rebellion in 1857, and later in both World Wars. In 1923 the United
   Kingdom and Nepal formally signed an agreement of friendship, in which
   Nepal's independence was recognised by the UK.

   In the late 1940s, emerging pro-democracy movements and political
   parties in Nepal were critical of the Rana autocracy. Meanwhile, China
   occupied Tibet in 1950, making India keen on stability in Nepal, to
   avoid an expansive military campaign. Thus India sponsored Tribhuvan as
   Nepal's new king in 1951, and a new government, mostly comprising the
   Nepali Congress Party. After years of power wrangling between the king
   and the government, the democratic experiment was dissolved in 1959,
   and a "partyless" panchayat system was made to govern Nepal. In 1989,
   the "Jan Andolan" (People's) Movement forced the monarchy to accept
   constitutional reforms and establish a multiparty parliament in May
   1991. Nepali Congress Party wins first democratic elections. Girija
   Prasad Koirala becomes prime minister.

Current events

   Map of Nepal
   Enlarge
   Map of Nepal

   On June 1, 2001, the Heir Apparent Dipendra reportedly went on a
   killing spree in the royal palace, in response to his parents'
   rejection of his choice of wife. His parents were killed and he died 3
   days later. Following the carnage, the throne was inherited by
   Birendra's brother Gyanendra. In the face of unstable governments and a
   Maoist siege on the Kathmandu Valley in August 2004, popular support
   for the monarchy waned.

   On February 1, 2005 Gyanendra dismissed the entire government and
   assumed full executive powers in the name of combating the Maoist
   movement. In September 2005, the Maoists declared a three-month
   unilateral ceasefire which was not reciprocated by the royal
   government; the latter vowed to defeat the rebels by force. A few weeks
   later, the government stated that parliamentary elections would be held
   by 2007 even after the failed municipal elections.

   The seven parliamentary parties (SPA), with support from the Maoists,
   arranged a mass uprising against the reign of King Gyanendra. The royal
   government used various means to quell the uprising. Frustrated by lack
   of security, jobs and good governance, thousands of people took to the
   streets to demand that the king renounce power outright, but the royal
   government turned even more ferocious and continued its atrocities
   including daytime curfews amid a Maoist blockade. Food shortages hit
   people so that they prepared to march into the city centre and encircle
   the royal palace. The security forces turned brutal and the king seemed
   to think nothing had happened so far. Thousands were injured and 21
   people died in the uprising, which was meant to be peaceful but turned
   violent due to the actions of the government and its vigilantes.

   Foreign pressure continued to increase on King Gyanendra to surrender
   power so that on April 21, 2006 Gyanendra announced that he was giving
   up absolute power and that "Power was being returned to the People". He
   called on the seven party coalitions to name a possible Prime Minister
   and that elections would be held as soon as possible. Many Nepalese
   protesters however, still carried out rallies in numerous cities and
   vowed to continue the stir until they would achieve complete
   abolishment of the monarchy. Finally after 19 days of protests, on
   April 24 midnight, the king called for the country's parliament to
   reassemble on April 28.

   Parliament has since reassembled and stripped the king of his power
   over the military, abolished his title as the descendent of a Hindu
   God, and required royalty to pay taxes. Furthermore, several royal
   officials have been indicted, and the Nepalese government is no longer
   referred to as "His Majesty's Government", but rather as the
   "Government of Nepal". An election of the constituent assembly to
   rewrite the constitution has been declared unanimously to be held in
   the near future, with the possible abolition of the monarchy as part of
   constitutional change.

   Following Gyanendra's relinquishing of absolute power, the Nepalese
   government and Maoist rebels agreed on a ceasefire. In August 2006,
   both parties came to an agreement on the issue of arms accountability,
   agreeing to ask the United Nations to oversee and keep track of the
   weapons cache of both sides. The government and the Maoists are trying
   to come to an agreement on the future of the monarchy.

   As of 21 November 2006, Maoists and the Seven Party Alliance have
   signed a peace deal. This will reportedly end the Nepal Civil War,
   which has claimed more than 13,000 lives to date.

Geography

   Topographic map of Nepal
   Enlarge
   Topographic map of Nepal
   The arid and barren Himalayan landscape
   Enlarge
   The arid and barren Himalayan landscape

   Nepal is of roughly rectangular shape, 650 kilometres (400  mi) wide
   and 200 kilometres (125 mi) broad, with an area of 147,181  square
   kilometres (56,827  sq mi). Nepal is commonly divided into three
   physiographic areas: the Mountain, Hill, and Terai Regions. These
   ecological belts run east-west and are bisected by Nepal's major river
   systems.

   The Terai Plains bordering India are part of the northern rim of the
   Indo-Gangetic plains. They were formed and are fed by three major
   rivers: the Kosi, the Narayani (India's Gandak River), and the Karnali.
   This region has a hot, humid climate.

   The Hill Region (Pahad in Nepali) abuts the mountains and varies from
   1,000 to 4,000 metres (3,300–13,125  ft) in altitude. Two low mountain
   ranges, the Mahabharat Lekh and Shiwalik Range (also called the Churia
   Range) dominate the region. The hilly belt includes the Kathmandu
   Valley, the country's most fertile and urbanised area. Despite its
   geographical isolation and limited economic potential, the region
   always has been the political and cultural centre of Nepal. Unlike the
   valleys, elevations above 2,500 metres (8,200 ft) are sparsely
   populated.

   The Mountain Region contains the highest region in the world. The
   world's highest mountain, Mount Everest (Sagarmatha in Nepali) at 8,850
   metres (29,035 ft) is located on the border with China. Eight of the
   world's fourteen highest mountains are located in Nepal. Kanchenjunga,
   the world's third highest peak, is also located in Nepal. Deforestation
   is a major problem in all regions, with resulting erosion and
   degradation of ecosystems.

   Nepal has five climatic zones, broadly corresponding to altitude. The
   tropical and subtropical zones lie below 1,200 metres (3,940 ft), the
   temperate zone 1,200 to 2,400 metres (3,900–7,875 ft), the cold zone
   2,400 to 3,600 metres (7,875–11,800 ft), the subarctic zone 3,600 to
   4,400 metres (11,800–14,400 ft), and the arctic zone above 4,400 metres
   (14,400 ft). Nepal experiences five seasons: summer, monsoon, autumn,
   winter and spring. The Himalaya blocks cold winds from Central Asia in
   winter, and forms the northern limit of the monsoon wind patterns.

   Although Nepal shares no boundary with Bangladesh, the two countries
   are separated by a narrow strip of land about 21 kilometre (13 mi)
   wide, called the Chicken's Neck. Efforts are underway to make this area
   a free-trade zone.

   Mt Everest is the tallest mountain in the world, and is situated
   between Nepal and Tibet. The South-east ridge on the Nepalese side of
   the mountain is technically easier to climb, which is why so many keen
   climbers are pouring in through Nepal to climb Mt Everest. Also other
   Mountains including Annapurna I, II, III and IV are located in the
   Annapurna Mountain Range in Nepal.

Economy

   Agriculture sustains 76% of the population and accounts for about 39%
   of the GDP; services comprise 42%, and industry 21%. Hilly and
   mountainous terrain in the northern two-thirds of the country has made
   the building of roads and other infrastructure difficult and expensive.
   There are just over 4,000 km of paved roads, and one 59 km railway line
   in the south. Aviation is in a better state, with 46 airports, nine of
   them with paved runways. There is less than one telephone per 46
   people; landline services are poor, although mobile telephony is in a
   reasonable state in some parts of the country. There are around 100,000
   Internet connections, but after the imposition of the "state of
   emergency", intermittent losses of service have been reported.

   Its landlocked location and technological backwardness and the
   long-running civil war have also prevented Nepal from fully developing
   its economy. The country receives foreign aid from China, the United
   States, Japan and the European Union. The government's budget is about
   US$665 million, with expenditures of $1.1bn. The inflation rate has
   dropped to 2.9% after a period of higher inflation during the 1990s.
   The Nepalese Rupee has been tied to the Indian Rupee at an exchange
   rate of 1.6 for many years. Since the loosening of exchange rate
   controls in the early 1990s, the black market for foreign exchange has
   all but disappeared. A long-standing economic agreement underpins a
   close relationship with India.

   The distribution of wealth among people is consistent with that in many
   developed and developing countries: the highest 10% of households
   control 39.1% of the national wealth and the lowest 10% control only
   2.6%.
   Terraced farming on the foothills of the Himalayas
   Enlarge
   Terraced farming on the foothills of the Himalayas

   Nepal's workforce of about 10 million suffers from a severe shortage of
   skilled labour. Agriculture employs 81% of the workforce, services 16%
   and manufacturing/craft-based industry 3%. Agricultural produce——mostly
   grown in the Terrai region bordering India——includes rice, corn, wheat,
   sugarcane, root crops, milk, and water buffalo meat. Industry mainly
   involves the processing of agricultural produce, including jute,
   sugarcane, tobacco, and grain. The spectacular landscape and deep,
   exotic culture of Nepal represents considerable potential for tourism,
   but growth in this export industry has been stifled by recent political
   events. The rate of unemployment and underemployment approaches half of
   the working-age population. Thus many Nepalese move to India in search
   of work, the Gulf countries and Malaysia being new sources of work.
   Poverty is acute. Nepal receives US$50 million a year through the
   Gurkha soldiers who serve in the Indian and British armies and are
   highly esteemed for their skill and bravery. The total remittance value
   is worth around 1 billion USD, including money sent from Arabia and
   Malaysia, who combined employ around 200,000 Nepalese.

   Nepal's GDP for the year 2005 is estimated at just over US$37 billion
   (adjusted to Purchasing Power Parity), making it the 83rd-largest
   economy in the world. Per-capita income is around US$1,402, ranked
   163rd. Nepal's exports of mainly carpets, clothing, leather goods, jute
   goods and grain total $568 million. Import commodities of mainly gold,
   machinery and equipment, petroleum products and fertiliser total
   US$1.419 bn. India (48.8%), the US (22.3%), and Germany (8.5%) are its
   main export partners. Nepal's import partners include India (43%), the
   United Arab Emirates (10%), China (10%), Saudi Arabia (4.4%), and
   Singapore (4%).

Government and politics

   Until 1990, Nepal was an absolute monarchy running under the executive
   control of the king. Faced with a people's movement against the
   absolute monarchy, King Birendra, in 1990, agreed to large-scale
   political reforms by creating a parliamentary monarchy with the king as
   the head of state and a prime minister as the head of the government.

   Nepal's legislature was bicameral consisting of a House of
   Representatives and a National Council. The House of Representatives
   consists of 205 members directly elected by the people. The National
   Council had 60 members, 10 nominated by the king, 35 elected by the
   House of Representatives and the remaining 15 elected by an electoral
   college made up of chairs of villages and towns. The legislature had a
   five-year term, but was dissolvable by the king before its term could
   end. All Nepalese citizens 18 years and older became eligible to vote.

   The executive comprised the King and the Council of Ministers (the
   Cabinet). The leader of the coalition or party securing the maximum
   seats in an election was appointed as the Prime Minister. The Cabinet
   was appointed by the king on the recommendation of the Prime Minister.
   Governments in Nepal have tended to be highly unstable; no government
   has survived for more than two years since 1991, either through
   internal collapse or parliamentary dissolution by the monarch.

Military and foreign affairs

   Namche Bazaar in the Khumbu region close to Mount Everest. The town is
   built on terraces in what resembles a giant Greek amphitheatre.
   Enlarge
   Namche Bazaar in the Khumbu region close to Mount Everest. The town is
   built on terraces in what resembles a giant Greek amphitheatre.

   Nepal's military consists of the Nepalese Army which includes the
   Nepalese Army Air Service, (the air force unit under it), and the
   Nepalese Police Force. On May 19, 2006 The House unanimously passed the
   proposal to rename Royal Nepal Army (RNA) as the “Nepali Army”. Service
   is voluntary and the minimum age for enlistment is 18 years. Nepal
   spends $99.2 million (2004) on its military—1.5% of its GDP. The Nepali
   Army has 90,000 soldiers, who are currently engaged in the civil war
   against the Maoist insurgents.

   Nepal has close ties with both of its neighbours, India and China. In
   accordance with a long-standing treaty, Indian and Nepalese citizens
   may travel to each others' countries without a passport or visa.
   Nepalese citizens may work in India without legal restriction. Although
   Nepal and India typically have close ties, from time to time Nepal
   becomes caught up in the problematic Sino-Indian relationship. India
   considers Nepal as part of its realm of influence, and views Chinese
   aid with concern. Some Indians consider Nepal to be part of a greater
   pan-Indian state, an attitude that has caused Nepalese antagonism
   towards India.Moreover,there is a growing anti-indian sentiment among
   Nepali youths. In 2005, after King Gyanendra took over, Nepalese
   relations with India, the U.S., and the UK have worsened. These three
   foreign countries have been vociferous opponents to the crackdown on
   civil liberties in Nepal. China mainly seeks cooperation with Nepal on
   the issue of Tibetan independence, including the degree of freedom that
   Nepal gives the thousands of Tibetan refugees living in its territory
   and the approximately 2,000-3,000 Tibetans that seek to escape Tibet
   through Nepal each year. Outside of Asia, Nepal has especially friendly
   relations with Germany,Japan and has historical military links with the
   United Kingdom.

Administrative divisions

   Nepal is divided into 14 zones and 75 districts grouped into five
   development regions. Each district is headed by a fixed chief district
   officer responsible for maintaining law and order and coordinating the
   work of field agencies of the various government ministries.
   The 14 zones are:
   1 Bagmati     8 Lumbini
   2 Bheri       9 Mahakali
   3 Dhawalagiri 10 Mechi
   4 Gandaki     11 Narayani
   5 Janakpur    12 Rapti
   6 Karnali     13 Sagarmatha
   7 Koshi       14 Seti

Demographics

   The Shaivaite Pashupatinath temple.
   Enlarge
   The Shaivaite Pashupatinath temple.

   Nepal has a total population of 27,676,547 as of July 2005, with a
   growth rate of 2.2%. 39% of the population is up to 14 years old, 57.3%
   are aged between 15 and 64, and 3.7% above 65. The median age is 20.07
   (19.91 for males and 20.24 for females). There are 1,060 males for
   every 1,000 females. Life expectancy is 59.8 years (60.9 for males and
   59.5 for females). Nepal is the only country in the world where males
   outlive females. Total literacy rate is 53.74% (68.51% for males and
   42.49% for females).

   According to the 2001 census, Hindus constitute 80.6% of the
   population. Buddhists make up 10.7%, Muslims 4.2%, Kirant 3.6%, other
   religions 0.9%. The largest ethnic group is the Chhettri (15.5%). Other
   groups are the Brahman-Hill 12.5%, Magar 7%, Tharu 6.6%, Tamang 5.5%,
   Newar 5.4%, Kami 3.9%, Yadav 3.9%, other 32.7%, unspecified 2.8%.
   Nepali is the national language with 47.8% of the population speaking
   it as their first language. Other languages include Maithili 12.1%,
   Bhojpuri 7.4%, Tharu (Dagaura/Rana) 5.8%, Tamang 5.1%, Nepal Bhasa
   3.6%, Magar 3.3%, Awadhi 2.4%, other 10%, unspecified 2.5%. Differences
   between Hindus and Buddhists have been in general very subtle and
   academic in nature due to the intermingling of Hindu and Buddhist
   beliefs. Both share common temples and worship common deities and many
   of Nepal's Hindus could also be regarded as Buddhists and vice versa.
   Buddhists are mostly concentrated in the eastern regions and the
   central Terrai. Buddhism was relatively more common among the Newar and
   Tibeto-Nepalese groups. Among the Tibeto-Nepalese, those most
   influenced by Hinduism were the Magar, Sunwar, Limbu and Rai peoples.
   Hindu influence is less prominent among the Gurung, Bhutia, and Thakali
   groups, who employ Buddhist monks for their religious ceremonies.

   The northern mountains are sparsely populated. A majority of the
   population live in the central highlands despite the migration of a
   significant section of the population to the fertile Terrai belt in
   recent years. Kathmandu, with a population of 800,000, is the largest
   city in the country.

Culture

   Nepali culture is influenced by the cultures of Tibet, which borders to
   the north, and India, which borders to the south. There are
   similarities in clothing, language and food. A typical Nepali meal is
   dal-bhat - boiled dal served with rice and vegetables, and some spicy
   relish. This is consumed twice daily, once in the morning and again
   after sunset. Between these main meals, snacks such as chiura (beaten
   rice) and tea are consumed. Meat, eggs, and fish are considered a treat
   and eaten on special occasions only. In the mountainous region the
   staple diet are based on wheat, maize, millet and potatoes.
   Millet-based alcoholic drinks known as " Tongba" and other cereal based
   alcohol are popular, including chhaang and the distilled rakshi.
   However, the Newar community enjoys its own special Newari cuisine.

   Traditional Nepali folklore retains a strong influence in society and
   its stories are widely acted out in dance and music. The Newari culture
   is the richest culture amongst all ethnic groups. Most of the festivals
   observed in the country are the Newari festivals. The Newar people are
   well known for masked dance that tell stories of the gods and heroes.
   The associated music is percussion-based, sometimes with flutes or
   shawm accompanying the intense, nasal vocal lines. Musical styles are a
   variety of pop, religious and folk music, among other styles. Musical
   genres from Tibet and India have had a strong influence on traditional
   Nepali music. Women, even of the musician castes, are less likely than
   men to play music, except in specific situations such as traditional
   all-female wedding parties.
   Houses in rural parts of Nepal are made up of stones and clay.
   Enlarge
   Houses in rural parts of Nepal are made up of stones and clay.

   The sarangi, a four-stringed, hand-carved instrument is usually played
   by wandering minstrels. Since the sixties, Nepali rock or rock music,
   sung to Nepali lyrics, has become popular among youth. Also catching on
   fast is Nepali rap and Nepali reggae which has blossomed with the
   advent of the music video industry. There are also many heavy metal
   bands. Football is the most popular sport, followed by cricket and
   kabaddi. The Martyrs Memorial Football League is the national football
   championship.

   Television was only introduced to Nepal in the 1980s. Currently there
   are four television broadcasting channels: Nepal Television - the
   national television channel; NTV 2 Metro - a city channel owned by the
   government; and two private channels - Kantipur Television and Image
   Channel. Also many other networks, particularly those that originate in
   India, are available with the installation of increasingly popular
   satellite dishes, although lack of electrification makes this
   difficult. Radio is listened to throughout the kingdom; as of 2000,
   there were 12 radio stations.

   The Nepali year begins in mid-April and is divided into 12 months.
   Saturday is the official weekly day of rest. Main holidays include the
   National Day (birthday of the late king Tribhuvan) December 28, Prithvi
   Jayanti, ( January 11), and Martyr's Day ( February 18) and a mix of
   Hindu and Buddhist festivals such as Teej, Dashai in autumn, and Tihar
   late autumn. Most marriages are arranged, and divorce is rare. Polygamy
   is banned by law; relatively isolated tribes in the north, such as the
   Dolpo, practise polyandry. Nepal has a rich tradition of ceremonies,
   such as nwaran (the christening of a child), and the Pasni, the day a
   child is first fed rice, and bratabandha (the penance ceremony) and
   gupha for prepubescent boys and girls, respectively. In bel bibaha,
   preadolescent girls are "married" to the bel fruit tree, ensuring that
   the girl becomes and remains fertile.

   Most houses in rural Nepal are made up of a tight bamboo framework with
   mud and cow- dung walls. These dwellings remain cool in summers and
   retain warmth in the winter. Dwellings at higher altitudes are mostly
   timber-based.

   Woman's status in Nepal has been steadily rising. The first lady to
   have gained the prestigious chartered accountant status is Samikshya
   Shrestha in August 2004.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nepal"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
