   #copyright

New Caledonia

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Oceania
(Australasia)

      Territoire des Nouvelle-Calédonie et Dependances
   Territory of New Caledonia and Dependencies

   Flag of New Caledonia Emblem of New Caledonia
   Flag                  Emblem
   Anthem: La Marseillaise
   Location of New Caledonia
   Capital
   (and largest city)           Nouméa
        Official languages      French
   Government                   Overseas territory of France
    - President of France       Jacques Chirac
    - High Commissioner         Michel Mathieu
    - President                 Marie-Noëlle Thémereau
   Overseas territory of France since 1853
                             Area
    - Total                     18,575 km² ( 154th)
                                7,359 sq mi
                          Population
    - July 2005 estimate        237,000 ( 182nd)
    - Sep 2004 census           230,789
    - Density                   13/km² ( 200th)
                                34/sq mi
            GDP ( PPP)          2003 estimate
    - Total                     $3.158 billion ( not ranked)
    - Per capita                $14,800 ( not ranked)
           HDI  (2003)          n/a (unranked) ( n/a)
             Currency           CFP franc ( XPF)
            Time zone           ( UTC+11)
           Internet TLD         .nc
           Calling code         +687

   New Caledonia, the foreshortened form of Territory of New Caledonia and
   Dependencies (French: Nouvelle-Calédonie or Territoire des
   Nouvelle-Calédonie et Dependances; popular names: Kanaky, Le caillou),
   is a " sui generis collectivity" (in practice an overseas territory) of
   France, made up of a main island (Grande Terre) and several smaller
   islands. It is located in the region of Melanesia in the southwest
   Pacific. At about half the size of Taiwan, it has a land area of
   18,575.5 square kilometres (7,172  sq mi). The population at the 2004
   census was 230,789 inhabitants. It has an Internet country code
   top-level domain ( ccTLD) of .nc. The capital and largest city of the
   territory is Nouméa. The currency is the CFP franc.

   Since 1986 the United Nations Committee on Decolonization has included
   New Caledonia on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing
   Territories. New Caledonia will decide whether to remain within the
   French Republic or become an independent state in a referendum sometime
   after 2014.

   Its capital Nouméa is the seat of the regional organization the
   Secretariat of the Pacific Community (formerly the South Pacific
   Commission).

Name

   The name Caledonia derives from the Latin name of an area corresponding
   to modern Scotland. The name Kanaky is also in common usage in French,
   English and the indigenous languages. This name is favored by
   Melanesian nationalists. The word comes from kanaka, a Polynesian word
   meaning human used by Polynesians to call themselves. The word was
   later used by the French to call all the native inhabitants of the
   South Pacific Ocean, including the Melanesian (non-Polynesian) native
   inhabitants of New Caledonia. The word, turned into Canaque in French,
   became derogative. In the 1960s and 1970s, when the Melanesian native
   inhabitants started to organize themselves into political parties and
   ask for independence, this derogative word was turned into a symbol of
   political emancipation and pride. In 1983, during the period of
   political turmoil, the terms KANAK and KANAKY became political brand
   names and Caucasians ( Caldoches) realized the name had changed into a
   political statement.

Geography

   New Caledonia is located around 21°30′S 165°30′E in the southwest
   Pacific Ocean, approximately 1,200 kilometres (746 mi) east of
   Australia and 1,500 kilometres (932 mi) northwest of New Zealand. The
   island nation of Vanuatu lies to the northeast.

   New Caledonia is made up of a main island, the Grande Terre, and
   several smaller islands, the Belep archipelago to the north of the
   Grande Terre, the Loyalty Islands to the east of the Grande Terre, the
   Île des Pins to the south of the Grande Terre, the Chesterfield Islands
   and Bellona Reefs further to the west.

   The Grande Terre is by far the largest of the islands, and the only
   mountainous island. It has an area of 16,372 square kilometres
   (6,321 sq mi), and is elongated northwest-southeast, 350 kilometres
   (217 mi) in length and 50 to 70 kilometres (31–44 mi) wide. A mountain
   range runs the length of the island, with five peaks over 1,500 meters
   (4,900 ft). The highest point is Mont Panié at 1,628 meters (5,341 ft)
   elevation . The total area of New Caledonia is 19,060 square
   kilometres, 18,575 square kilometres of those being land.

   New Caledonian soils contain a considerable wealth of
   industrially-significant elements and minerals, including about
   one-quarter of the world's nickel resources. Mining is therefore a
   significant industry that greatly benefits the national economy.
   However, the country is also home to numerous, critically-important
   ancient ecosystems. Thus, widely-practiced and indiscriminate open-pit
   mining across much of New Caledonia, has been (and continues to be)
   responsible for severe deterioration of the nation's irreplaceable
   natural heritage.

Climate

   New Caledonia from space
   Enlarge
   New Caledonia from space
   "Baie des Tortues" (Turtles bay) near "La roche percée" (The bored
   rock) at Bourail in New Caledonia.
   Enlarge
   "Baie des Tortues" (Turtles bay) near "La roche percée" (The bored
   rock) at Bourail in New Caledonia.

   New Caledonia lies astride the Tropic of Capricorn, between 19° and 23°
   south latitude. The climate of the islands is tropical, and rainfall is
   highly seasonal, brought by trade winds that usually come from the
   east. Rainfall averages about 1,500 millimetres (59 in) yearly on the
   Loyalty Islands, 2,000 millimetres (79 in) at low elevations on eastern
   the Grande Terre, and 2,000-4,000 millimetres (79–157.5 in) at high
   elevations on the Grande Terre. The western side of the Grande Terre
   lies in the rain shadow of the central mountains, and rainfall averages
   1,200 millimetres (47 in) per year.

Ecology

   New Caledonia is considered one of the world's most
   botanically-important, and critically endangered hotspots. Unlike many
   of the Pacific Islands which are of relatively recent volcanic origin,
   New Caledonia is an ancient fragment of the Gondwana super-continent.
   New Caledonia and New Zealand separated from Australia 85 million years
   ago, and from one another 55 million years ago. This isolated New
   Caledonia from the rest of the world's landmasses, and made it a Noah's
   Ark of sorts, preserving a snapshot of what the ancient forests of
   Gondwana looked like, millions of years ago. The country still shelters
   an extraordinary diversity of unique, endemic, and extremely primitive
   plants and animals of Gondwanan origin. For more information on the
   significance of this country's flora and fauna, as well as the dangers
   it faces, and its effects on national social, economic, and political
   life, see Biodiversity of New Caledonia and Endemic Birds of New
   Caledonia.

   Although the majority of the country's citizens are unaware of the
   extraordinary nature of their country's biological patrimony, a few of
   the country's animals and plants have become somewhat emblematic in
   local culture. Among the best known, is a hen-sized, flightless bird,
   commonly-known as the Cagou or Kagu, which has a large crest and an odd
   cooing call. Its song and image are frequently seen as
   nationally-recognized icons. Another frequently used cultural emblem is
   the Columnar or Cook's Pine (Araucaria columnaris), an important symbol
   in Kanak culture. The Niaouli tree (also native to Australia and New
   Guinea), is of medicinal interest, locally and abroad. Its sap (which
   contains Gomenol, a camphor-smelling compound), is used to treat head
   colds, and as an antiseptic. It also shows potential to treat other
   medical ailments. Before the Europeans arrived, there was no mammal
   other than the Roussette (aka flying fox), a large vegetarian bat,
   considered a local delicacy. Less well-known by the local population,
   is the fact their country is home to a species of plant, ( Amborella
   trichopoda), believed to be genetically close to the ancestor of all
   flowering plants, or the fact their nation boasts the largest number
   and diversity of conifer species in the world, per geographic area (a
   remarkable fact, given that conifers are usually relatively rare in
   tropical regions).

   The islands contain two precipitation zones: Higher-rainfall areas
   (located on the Loyalty Islands, Isle of Pines (Île des Pins), and on
   the eastern side of Grand Terre) which support New Caledonia rain
   forests, and a more arid region, home to the now exceedingly-endangered
   New Caledonia dry forests, located in the rain shadow on the western
   side of Grand Terre. Europeans settled on the dry west coast of Grand
   Terre, leaving the east (as well as the Loyalty Islands and the Isle of
   Pines) to the Kanaks, and resulting in an ethno-cultural division which
   coincides with the natural one. Extensive farming by Europeans in the
   dry forest areas, has caused these forest ecosystems to virtually
   disappear.

   It is a vast oversimplification, however, to merely describe New
   Caledonia's extremely important, complex and diverse ecology in terms
   of precipitation zones. Species and ecological diversity is further
   complicated by soil type (degree and type of mineralization), altitude,
   and geographic location (for instance, Loyalty Islands and Isle of
   Pines have flora that is distinct from Grand Terre).

   In addition to the remarkable terrestrial environment of New Caledonia,
   the country is also home to important aquatic ecosystems. Its
   freshwater ecology also evolved in long isolation, and the New
   Caledonia rivers and streams are home to many endemic species.
   Moreover, the New Caledonia Barrier Reef, which surrounds Grande Terre
   and the Isle of Pines (Île des Pins), is the second-largest coral reef
   in the world after Australia's Great Barrier Reef, reaching a length of
   1,500 kilometres (930 mi). Like its terrestrial counterpart, the
   Caledonian reef system has great species diversity, is home to
   endangered dugongs (Dugong dugon), and is an important nesting site for
   the Green Sea Turtle (Chelonia mydas). The Nautilus is a living-fossil
   species, once common during the age of the dinosaurs, and survives
   today in the waters surrounding New Caledonia.

Administration

   Official emblem (Nautilus).
   Enlarge
   Official emblem ( Nautilus).

   Along with other Pacific Ocean's territories of French Polynesia and
   Wallis and Futuna, New Caledonia is part of the French Republic. Its
   official status, unique in the French Republic, is said to be sui
   generis, because New Caledonia is the only French subdivision that is
   not a collectivité territoriale. New Caledonia was a colony until 1946,
   then an overseas territory ( territoire d'outre-mer, or TOM) from 1946
   to 1999. The capital is Nouméa, the only major conurbation in the
   territory.

Administrative divisions

   Administratively, the archipelago is divided into three provinces:
   Islands Province (Province des Îles = Loyalty Islands), North Province
   (Province Nord = the northern mainland) and South Province (Province
   Sud = the southern mainland). It is further subdivided into
   thirty-three communes.

   In addition, a parallel layer of administration exists for Kanak tribal
   affairs; these are called aires coutumières ("traditional spheres") and
   are eight in number ( see map of the "aires coutumières"). Their
   jurisdiction does not encompass non-Kanaks living within these zones.
   The aires coutumières more or less correspond to the indigenous
   language areas and/or areas of pre-French tribal alliances.

History

   The western Pacific was first populated about 50,000 years ago. The
   Austronesians moved into the area later. The diverse group of people
   that settled over the Melanesian archipelagos are known as the Lapita.
   They arrived in the archipelago now commonly known as New Caledonia and
   the Loyalty Islands around 1500 BC. The Lapita were highly skilled
   navigators and agriculturists with influence over a large area of the
   Pacific.

   From about the 11th century Polynesians also arrived and mixed with the
   populations of the archipelago.

   Europeans first sighted New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands in the
   late 18th century. The British explorer James Cook sighted Grande Terre
   in 1774 and named it New Caledonia. Caledonia being the Latin name for
   Scotland. During the same voyage he also named the islands to the North
   of New Caledonia the New Hebrides.

   British and North American whalers and sandalwood traders became
   interested in New Caledonia and tensions developed as their approach
   became increasingly dishonest (an arrogant attitude and cheating became
   commonplace). Europeans used alcohol and tobacco amongst other things
   to barter for commodities. Contact with Europeans brought new diseases
   such as smallpox, measles, dysentery, influenza, syphilis and leprosy.
   Many people died as a result of these diseases. Tensions developed into
   hostilities and in 1849 the crew of the Cutter were killed and eaten by
   the Pouma clan.

   As trade in sandalwood declined it was replaced by a new form of trade.
   Blackbirding involved enslaving people from New Caledonia, the Loyalty
   Islands, Vanuatu, Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands to work in
   sugar cane plantations in Fiji and Queensland. The trade ceased at the
   start of the 20th century.

   Catholic and Protestant missionaries first arrived in the nineteenth
   century. They had a profound effect on indigenous culture. They
   insisted people should wear clothes to cover themselves. They
   eradicated many local practices and traditions.

   The island was made a French possession in 1853 in an attempt by
   Napoleon III to rival the British colonies in Australia and New
   Zealand. Following the example set by the British in nearby Australia,
   between 1854 and 1922 France sent a total of 22,000 convicted felons to
   penal colonies along the south-west coast of the island; this number
   includes regular criminals as well as political prisoners such as
   Parisian socialists and Kabyle nationalists. Towards the end of the
   penal colony era, free European settlers (including former convicts)
   and Asian contract workers by far out-numbered the population of forced
   workers. The indigenous Kanak populations declined drastically in that
   same period due to introduced diseases and an apartheid-like system
   called Code de l'Indigénat which imposed severe restrictions on their
   livelihood, freedom of movement and land ownership.

   New Caledonia has been on a United Nations list of non-self-governing
   territories since 1986. This list includes such places as the American
   Samoa, the British Falkland Islands or the New Zealand territory of
   Tokelau, but noticeably it does not include places like Tibet or West
   Papua, which has led to its reputation as a politically biased list.
   Agitation by the Front de Libération Nationale Kanak Socialiste (
   FLNKS) for independence began in 1985. The FLNKS (led by the late
   Jean-Marie Tjibaou, assassinated in 1989) advocated the creation of an
   independent state of 'Kanaky'. The troubles culminated in 1988 with a
   bloody hostage taking in Ouvéa. The unrest led to agreement on
   increased autonomy in the Matignon Accords of 1988 and the Nouméa
   Accord of 1998. This Accord describes the devolution process as
   "irreversible" and also provides for a local Caledonian citizenship,
   separate official symbols of Caledonian identity (such as a "national"
   flag), as well as mandating a referendum on the contentious issue of
   independence from the French Republic sometime after 2014.

Politics

   Flag of the independence movements.
   Enlarge
   Flag of the independence movements.

   The unique status of New Caledonia is in between that of an independent
   country and a normal overseas département of France. On the one hand, a
   territorial Congress ( Congrès du territoire) and a government of the
   territory have been established, and a devolution of powers is
   organized by the 1998 Nouméa Accord. Key areas such as taxation, labour
   law, health and hygiene and foreign trade are already in the hands of
   the territorial Congress. Further competence will supposedly be given
   to the territorial Congress in the near future. Eventually, the French
   Republic should only remain competent for foreign affairs, justice,
   defense, public order, and treasury.

   A New Caledonian "citizenship" has also been introduced: only New
   Caledonian "citizens" have the right to vote in the local elections.
   This measure has been criticised, because it creates a second-class
   status for French citizens living in New Caledonia who do not possess
   New Caledonian "citizenship" (because they settled in the territory
   recently). New Caledonia is also allowed to engage in international
   cooperation with independent countries of the Pacific Ocean. Finally,
   the territorial Congress is allowed to pass statutes that are
   derogatory to French law in a certain number of areas.

   On the other hand, New Caledonia remains a part of the French Republic
   but not perhaps an integral part. The four departments d'outremer
   proper of Reunion, Guadeloupe, Martinique and French Guyana all use the
   euro as their sole official currency but New Caledonia does not. The
   Inhabitants of New Caledonia are French citizens and carry French
   passports. They take part in the legislative and presidential French
   elections. New Caledonia sends two representatives to the French
   National Assembly and one senator to the French Senate. The
   representative of the French central state in New Caledonia is the High
   Commissioner of the Republic ( Haut-Commissaire de la République,
   locally known as "haussaire"), who is the head of civil services, and
   who seats in the government of the territory.

   It was decided in the Nouméa Accord that the territorial Congress will
   have the right to call for a referendum on independence after 2014, at
   a time of its choosing.

   The current president of the government elected by the territorial
   Congress is Marie-Noëlle Thémereau, from the loyalist (i.e.
   anti-independence) Avenir Ensemble party ("Future Together"), which
   toppled the long-time ruling RPCR ( Rally for Caledonia inside the
   Republic) in May 2004. "Future Together" is a party of mostly Caucasian
   and Polynesian New Caledonians opposed to independence but tired of the
   hegemonic and allegedly corrupt anti-independence RPCR. Their toppling
   of the RPCR (that was until then seen as the only voice of New
   Caledonian whites) was a surprise to many, and a sign that the society
   of New Caledonia is undergoing changes. "Future Together", as the name
   implies, is opposed to a racial vision of New Caledonian society,
   opposing Melanesian native inhabitants and the descendants of European
   settlers, and is in favour of a multicultural New Caledonia, better
   reflecting the existence of large populations of Polynesians,
   Indonesians, Chinese, and other immigrants. Some members of "Future
   Together" are even in favour of independence, though not necessarily on
   the same basis as the Melanesian independence parties.

Demographics

   Though still the largest group, the indigenous Melanesian Kanak
   community now represents 42.5% of the whole population, their
   proportion of the population having declined due to immigration and
   other factors. The rest of the population is made up of ethnic groups
   that arrived in New Caledonia in the last 150 years: Europeans (37.1%)
   (the majority French with German, British and Italian minorities),
   Polynesians (Wallisians, Tahitians) (11.8%), Indonesians (2.6%),
   Vietnamese (1.4%), Ni-Vanuatu (1.2%), and various other groups (3.9%),
   such as Malabaris and Tamils, Indians (Hindu and Muslim), Sri Lankans,
   Bengalis, Berbers, Japanese, Chinese, Fijians (Native Fijians and Fiji
   Indians), Arabs, West Indian (mostly from other French territories) and
   a small number of ethnic Africans. Some of this immigration was a
   direct consequence of various conflicts around the world but in
   particular of the crumbling of the French colonial empire. The Kanak
   are known officially as Melanesians. Similarly, those whose roots are
   in French Polynesia are known either as Tahitians (which excludes
   persons originating in the other archipelagoes of French Polynesia) or
   simply as Polynesians (which would include both Tahitians and
   Wallisians, as well as many other minor groups). Whites that have lived
   in New Caledonia for several generations are locally known as
   Caldoches, whereas newcomers who have immigrated from metropolitan
   France are called Métros or Métropolitains. Within the official
   statistical category "Europeans" no distinction is made between
   Caledonian-born whites and French-born whites, however it is estimated
   that approximately two thirds identify themselves with the Caldoche
   community while the rest see themselves primarily as French immigrants.
   There is a significant contingent of people that arrive from France to
   work for a year or two and others that have come to retire. The
   Caldoche usually refer to themselves simply as calédoniens and may be
   either white (mostly French or German) or white with an admixture of
   Asian, Melanesian or Polynesian ancestry. Caldoche culture has many
   similarities with Australian and Afrikaner culture. Until very recently
   the Kanak population held an economically disadvantaged position in New
   Caledonian society, while wealthy French expatriates formed the top of
   the socio-economic hierarchy. The Asian and Polynesian inhabitants
   dominate certain segments of the local economy.

   There have been frequent accusations by the pro-independence movement
   that the French government is attempting to skew the demographic
   balance between the ethnic communities by clandestinely settling
   thousands of people from mainland France among the white Caledonians.
   Censuses are extremely critical to the balance of power in New
   Caledonia, and the organisation of a new census was regularly postponed
   after 1996. Eventually the census was carried out in August and
   September 2004, amidst raging controversies over ethnic questions. Due
   to an intervention by French president Jacques Chirac, questions asking
   for the ethnicity of people were deleted from the 2004 census,
   officially because they were deemed to contravene the French
   Constitution, which states that no distinction based on ethnicity or
   religion should be made among French citizens. The indigenous
   Melanesian Kanak leaders, who are extremely sensitive to ethnic balance
   issues, called for New Caledonians of Kanak ethnicity not to return
   census forms if questions regarding ethnicity were not asked,
   threatening to derail the census process. Eventually, the stalemate was
   resolved when the local New Caledonian statistical office (a branch of
   the national French statistical office INSEE) agreed to ask questions
   regarding ethnicity. However, it is not known whether questions
   regarding ethnicity were asked to all residents of New Caledonia, and
   at any rate no data have been released, leaving the ethnic tables from
   the 1996 census as the only information on ethnicity currently
   available.

   According to the 2006 census, there were 219 246 inhabitants in New
   Caledonia as of July 2006. Kanak leaders were fearful of a large influx
   of white people from metropolitan France which would alter the ethnic
   balance in the territory but this has not happened.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Caledonia"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
