   #copyright

Newcastle upon Tyne

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

                          City of Newcastle upon Tyne
                                   Newcastle
                                   Geography
   Status:             Metropolitan borough, City (1882)
   Region:             North East England
   Ceremonial County:  Tyne and Wear
   Traditional County: Northumberland
   Area:
   - Total             Ranked 229th
                       113.44 km²
   Admin. HQ:          Newcastle upon Tyne
   ONS code:           00CJ
                                  Demographics
   Population:
   - Total (2005 est.)
   - Density           Ranked 28th
                       276,400
                       2,437 / km²
   Ethnicity:          93.1% White
                       4.4% S.Asian
                                    Politics
                    Arms of Newcastle upon Tyne City Council
   Newcastle upon Tyne City Council
   http://www.newcastle.gov.uk/
   Leadership:         Leader & Cabinet
   Executive:          Liberal Democrats
   MPs:                Nick Brown, David Clelland, Jim Cousins, Doug Henderson
   The Tyne Bridge, Newcastle's best known landmark. The earlier Swing
   Bridge is in the foreground.
   Enlarge
   The Tyne Bridge, Newcastle's best known landmark. The earlier Swing
   Bridge is in the foreground.

   Newcastle upon Tyne, often shortened to Newcastle, is a city and
   metropolitan borough of Tyne and Wear situated on the north bank of the
   River Tyne, in North East England. The city was founded in Roman times
   under the name Pons Aelius, with the current name being adopted from
   1080 onwards. It was once the county town of Northumberland .

   The city is the 20th most populous in England and the Tyneside
   conurbation, of which Newcastle forms part, is the 5th most populous
   conurbation in England. Newcastle is a member of the English Core
   Cities Group.

   Technically, people from Newcastle are Novocastrians (a Latin term
   which can equally be applied to residents of any place called
   Newcastle), although the term Geordie is now more commonly used.

   The name of the city is pronounced new-CASS-el in the north of England,
   and NEW-cah-sel in the south.

History

Early development

   Newcastle, known at the time as "Pons Aelius" was founded by the Roman
   Emperor Hadrian, whose Wall is still visible in parts of Newcastle,
   particularly along the West Road. The course of the "Roman Wall" can
   also be traced eastwards to Wallsend ( Segedunum).

   After the Roman withdrawal from Britain, Newcastle became part of the
   powerful Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Northumbria and was known throughout
   this period as Monkchester. After a series of conflicts with the Danes
   and the devastation north of the River Tyne inflicted by Odo after the
   1080 rebellion against the Normans, Monkchester was all but destroyed.
   Because of its strategic position, Robert Curthose, son of William the
   Conqueror, erected a wooden castle there in 1080 and the town was
   henceforth known as Novum Castellum or New Castle.

   Throughout the Middle Ages, Newcastle was England's northern fortress.
   A 25ft high stone wall was built around the town to defend it from
   invaders during the Border war against Scotland. The Scots king William
   the Lion was imprisoned in Newcastle in 1174, and Edward I brought the
   Stone of Scone and William Wallace south through the town. Newcastle
   was successfully defended against the Scots three times during the 14th
   century and around this time became a county corporate.

   King Charles bestowed upon Newcastle the East of England coal trading
   rights. This monopoly helped Newcastle prosper, but it had its impact
   on the growth of near-neighbours Gateshead and Sunderland, causing a
   North of Tyne/South of Tyne and a Tyne-Wear rivalry that still exists.
   During the English Civil War, Newcastle supported the king and in 1644
   was stormed ('with roaring drummes') by Cromwell's Scots allies, based
   in pro-Parliament Sunderland. The grateful King bestowed the motto
   "Fortiter Defendit Triumphans" ("Triumphing by a brave defence") upon
   the town. Ironically, Charles was imprisoned in Newcastle by the Scots
   in 1646-7.

   In the 18th century, Newcastle was the country's largest print centre
   after London, Oxford and Cambridge, and the Literary and Philosophical
   Society of 1793, with its erudite debates and large stock of books in
   several languages predated the London Library by half a century.
   Newcastle also became the greatest glass producer in the world.
   Newcastle's development as a major city, however, owed most to its
   central role in the export of coal. The phrase taking coals to
   Newcastle was first recorded in 1538. In the nineteenth century,
   shipbuilding and heavy engineering were central to the city's
   prosperity; and the city was a powerhouse of the Industrial Revolution.
   Innovation in Newcastle and surrounding areas included the development
   of Safety lamps, Stephenson's Rocket, Lord Armstrong's artillery,
   Joseph Swan's electric light bulbs, and Charles Parsons' invention of
   the steam turbine, which led to the revolution of marine propulsion and
   the production of cheap electricity.

   Heavy industries in Newcastle declined in the second half of the
   twentieth century; office and retail employment are now the city's
   staples.

Urban development

   Looking through Newcastle's bridges

   Jesmond Dene ca. 1900.

   Chinatown Arch and St. James' Park

Notable architecture

   The city has an extensive neoclassical centre, largely developed in the
   1830s by Richard Grainger and John Dobson, and recently extensively
   restored. Grey Street, which curves down from Grey's Monument towards
   the valley of the River Tyne, was voted as England's finest street in
   2005 in a survey of BBC Radio 4 listeners. A portion of Grainger Town
   was demolished in the 1960s to make way for the Eldon Square shopping
   centre, including all but one side of the original Eldon Square itself.

Parks and open space

   Immediately to the northwest of the city centre is Leazes Park,
   established in 1873 after a petition by 3,000 working men of the city
   for "ready access to some open ground for the purpose of health and
   recreation". Just outside one corner of this is St James' Park, the
   stadium home of Newcastle United F.C. which dominates the view of the
   city from the south.

   Another green space in Newcastle is the vast Town Moor, lying
   immediately north of the city centre. It is larger than Hyde Park and
   Hampstead Heath put together and the freemen of the city have the right
   to graze cattle on it. Unlike other cities where similar rights exist,
   they often take advantage of this, leading to the somewhat bizarre
   sight of cattle grazing within yards of the city's town hall or "Civic
   Centre". The right incidentally extends to the pitch of St James' Park,
   Newcastle United Football Club's ground, though this is not exercised.
   Honorary freemen include Bob Geldof, Nelson Mandela, Alan Shearer and
   the Royal Shakespeare Company. The Hoppings funfair, said to be the
   largest travelling fair in Europe, is held here annually in June.

   The wooded gorge of the Ouseburn in the east of the city is known as
   Jesmond Dene and forms another popular recreation area, linked by
   Armstrong Park and Heaton Park to the Ouseburn Valley, where the river
   finally reaches the River Tyne.

Recent developments

   The development of the city in the 1960s and 1970s saw the demoliton of
   part of Graingertown as a prelude to the modernist rebuilding
   initiatives of T. Dan Smith, the leader of Newcastle City Council. A
   corruption scandal was uncovered involving Smith and John Poulson, a
   property developer, and both were jailed. Echoes of the scandal were
   revisited in the late 1990s in the BBC TV mini-series, Our Friends in
   the North.

   The Tyne gorge between Newcastle (on the north Bank) and Gateshead (an
   administratively separate borough) on the south, is famous for a series
   of dramatic bridges, including the Tyne Bridge of 1928 and Robert
   Stephenson's High Level Bridge of 1849, the first road/rail bridge in
   the world. Large-scale regeneration has replaced former shipping
   premises with imposing new office developments; an innovative tilting
   bridge, the Gateshead Millennium Bridge was commissioned by Gateshead
   and has integrated the older Newcastle Quayside more closely with major
   cultural developments in Gateshead, including the BALTIC Centre for
   Contemporary Art and the Norman Foster-designed Sage music centre.
   NewcastleGateshead Quayside is now a thriving, cosmopolitan area with
   an abundance of bars, restaurants and public spaces. As a tourist
   promotion, Newcastle and Gateshead have linked together under the
   banner "NewcastleGateshead", but otherwise remain separate.

   Notable Newcastle housing developments include Ralph Erskine's the
   Byker Wall designed in the 1960s and now Grade II-listed. It is on
   UNESCO's list of outstanding 20th century buildings.

   Newcastle's thriving Chinatown lies in the northwest of Grainger Town,
   centered on Stowell Street. A new Chinese Arch, or paifang, providing a
   landmark entrance, was handed over to the City with a ceremony in 2005.

Science city

   The UK's first Biotechnology Village, the " Centre for Life" is located
   in the City Centre close to the Central Station. The village is the
   first step in the City Council's plans to transform Newcastle into a
   Science city .

Geography

   Newcastle is situated in the North East of England, in the ceremonial
   county of Tyne and Wear. The city itself is located on the northern
   bank of the Tyne Valley at a latitude of 54.97°N and a longitude of
   1.62°W.

   The geology of the area is most famous for its large deposits of coal.
   Whilst the local bedrock consists mainly of carboniferous rocks,
   millstone grit and oolite are also present.

Climate

   The climate in Newcastle is temperate, although significantly warmer
   than some other locations at a similar latitude due to the warming
   influence of the Gulf Stream (via the North Atlantic Drift). Being in
   the rain shadow of the North Pennines, it is among the driest cities in
   the UK. The prevailing winds are south-westerly due to the North
   Atlantic Current.

Law and government

   Newcastle is governed using the leader and cabinet system, and the
   executive is currently Liberal Democrat, as they have 48 councillors
   against the Labour Party's 30. No other parties hold seats on the
   city's council.

Administrative districts

   Newcastle has 26 electoral wards.
     * Benwell and Scotswood
     * Blakelaw
     * Byker
     * Castle
     * Dene
     * Denton
     * Gosforth (East and West)
     * Elswick
     * Fawdon
     * Fenham
     * Heaton (North and South)
     * Jesmond (North and South)

                                  * Kenton
                                  * Lemington
                                  * Newburn
                                  * Ouseburn
                                  * Parklands
                                  * Walker
                                  * Walkergate
                                  * Westerhope
                                  * Westgate
                                  * Wingrove
                                  * Woolsington

Demographics

Population

   According to the UK Government's 2001 census , the unitary authority of
   Newcastle has a population of around 259,500. However, the metropolitan
   boroughs of North Tyneside (population c.190,000), South Tyneside
   (population c. 150,000) and Gateshead (population c.200,000) are also
   part of Newcastle's conurbation, giving the Newcastle-Gateshead
   metropolitan area a population of 799,000. According to the same
   statistics, the average age of people living in Newcastle is 37.8 (the
   national average being 38.6). 93.1% of the population are of White
   ethnic background (the national average being 91.3%). Other ethnic
   groups in Newcastle, in order of population size, are Pakistani at 1.9%
   and Indians at 1.2%. There are also small but significant Chinese and
   Jewish populations.

Religion

   St. Nicholas' Cathedral from the Castle
   Enlarge
   St. Nicholas' Cathedral from the Castle

   The city is largely Christian at 70.6%, with Islam (3.6%) the only
   other significantly practised religion. A large number (16%) have no
   religion.

   Newcastle has two cathedrals, the Anglican St. Nicholas, with its
   elegant lantern tower of 1474, and the Roman Catholic St. Mary's,
   designed by Augustus Welby Pugin. Both cathedrals began their lives as
   parish churches. St Mary's became a cathedral in 1850 and St Nicholas'
   in 1882. Cardinal Basil Hume, Archbishop of Westminster ( 1976- 1999)
   was born in the city in 1923. A statue of the Cardinal, (unveiled by
   the Queen in 2002), stands outside St Mary's Cathedral in a memorial
   garden dedicated to the religious leader.

Health

   Of the population, 11.8% described themselves as "not healthy" in the
   12 months before the 2001 census, compared to a national average of
   9.2%. Additionally, 21.6% of the inhabitants said they had a long-term
   illness, as against 18.2% nationally.

   Newcastle Hospitals Trust One has one of the lowest mortality rates in
   the country and is ranked second in the country for confidence in
   doctors. Staffing levels are high - in the top 70 in England for
   doctors and the top ten for nurses. Newcastle has three large teaching
   hospitals: the Royal Victoria Infirmary, whose organ donor system has
   been featured on television; the Newcastle General Hospital and the
   Freeman Hospital, which amongst other things, performs transplant
   surgery.

Transport and infrastructure

   Grey's Monument, above the Monument Tyne and Wear Metro station
   Enlarge
   Grey's Monument, above the Monument Tyne and Wear Metro station

Air

   Located on the northern outskirts of the city, near Ponteland, is
   Newcastle Airport, which has recently been rebranded as Newcastle
   International. The airport currently handles over five million
   passengers per year, and is one of the fastest growing airports in the
   UK. As of 2006, more than 80 destinations are available world-wide. It
   is currently the UK's ninth biggest airport. A large scale development
   in unused land near the edge of the city close to the airport should
   help growth further. The development is called Newcastle Great Park. If
   Newcastle's super casino bid is a success then that should also
   contribute to growth.

   A recent article revealed that the airport hoped to achieve 10 million
   passangers by 2016, and 15 million by 2030.

Bus

   Newcastle and the surrounding area has an extensive bus network that is
   coordinated by Nexus, the Tyne and Wear Passenger Transport Executive.
   Buses are operated mainly by Go North East, Arriva and Stagecoach North
   East.

   Quayside Transit (operated by Stagecoach Newcastle), a £5m bus scheme
   using ultra low emission hybrid diesel-electric vehicles was launched
   in July 2005.

Metro

   In 1904, the North Eastern Railway built an electric suburban railway
   serving both banks of the Tyne, and the northern suburbs. The system
   was transformed into the Tyne and Wear Metro which opened in 1980, and
   extends as far as Newcastle Airport, Tynemouth and South Hylton in
   Sunderland. The system is one of only four underground systems in the
   United Kingdom.

   The Metro is usually described as Britain's first modern light rail
   system. It carries approximately 40 million passenger journeys per
   year, and is co-ordinated by the Tyne and Wear Passenger Transport
   Executive. It is the second biggest metropolitan train system in the
   UK.

Rail

   Newcastle is a principal stop on the East Coast Main Line and Cross
   Country Route. The central station was the first covered railway
   station in the world and was much copied across the UK. It has a fine
   neoclassical frontage originally designed by the architect John Dobson
   and was constructed in collaboration with Robert Stephenson. The
   station was opened in 1850 by Queen Victoria, with the first services
   being operated by the North Eastern Railway company.

   Today, train operator GNER provides a half-hourly frequency of trains
   to London, with a journey time of a little less than three hours.
   Virgin Trains, Northern Rail and Transpennine Express operate regular
   services to many other destinations including Birmingham, Bristol,
   Cardiff, Carlisle, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Leeds, Liverpool and Sheffield.

   The city's other mainline station, Manors, is situated to the north
   east of the city centre.

Road

   Major roads in the area include:
     * A1 (Gateshead Newcastle western-bypass), stretching north/south
       between London and Edinburgh
     * A19 heading south past Sunderland and Middlesbrough to York and
       Doncaster
     * A69 heading west to Carlisle
     * A167 the old Great North Road heading south to Gateshead,
       Chester-le-Street, Durham and Darlington
     * A1058 "coast road" which runs from Jesmond to the east coast
       between Tynemouth and Cullercoats

   Many of these designations are recent - upon completion of the western
   bypass, and its designation as the new line of the A1, the roads
   between this and the former line through the Tyne Tunnel were
   renumbered wholesale, with many city centre roads changing from a
   6-prefix to their present 1-prefix numbers.

Sea

   Newcastle also has access to an international Ferry Terminal, located
   at nearby North Shields, offering services to destinations including
   Amsterdam, Kristiansand, Gothenburg, Stavanger, Haugesund and Bergen.

   The ferry to Gothenburg, Sweden (currently run by the Danish company
   DFDS Seaways), will cease at the end of October 2006. The company cited
   high fuel prices and new competition from low-cost air services,
   especially Ryanair (which now flies to Glasgow Prestwick and London
   Stansted from Gothenburg City Airport), as being the cause. DFDS
   Seaways' sister company, DFDS Tor Line, will continue to run scheduled
   freight ships between Gothenburg and several English ports, including
   Newcastle, and these have limited capacity for passengers, but not
   private vehicles. It is unclear if the Newcastle-Kristiansand route
   will continue.

Sport

   The City has a strong sporting tradition, being home to Premiership
   football team Newcastle United, and Guinness Premiership rugby union
   side Newcastle Falcons, for whom England player Jonny Wilkinson
   features.

   The city's Metro Radio Arena is home to Newcastle Vipers ice hockey
   team, and Newcastle Eagles basketball team. The City's Speedway team
   Newcastle Diamonds are based at Brough Park in Byker, a venue that is
   also home to greyhound racing. The greatest Speedway rider of all time,
   Ivan Mauger, who hailed from New Zealand was World Champion six times
   and rode for the Diamonds in the 1960's. Newcastle Racecourse at High
   Gosforth Park holds regular meets, including the prestigious race for
   the Northumberland Plate, first run in 1838, which takes place in June
   each year.

   Newcastle also hosts the start of the annual BUPA Great North Run, the
   world's largest half- marathon in which participants famously race over
   the Tyne Bridge into Gateshead and then towards the finish line 13.1
   miles away on the coast at neighbouring South Shields. Another famous
   athletic event is the 10k Blaydon Race, which has taken place annually
   in nearby Blaydon, since 1981, on June 9 to commemorate the celebrated
   Blaydon Races horse races.

Education

   The city has two universities, Newcastle University which earned the
   coveted Sunday Times University of the Year award in 2000 and the newer
   Northumbria University that was established in 1992 and was voted 'Best
   New University' by The Times Good University Guide 2005.

   There are eleven LEA-funded 11 to 18 schools and seven independent
   schools with sixth forms in Newcastle. The largest independent school
   is the Royal Grammar School located in Jesmond. There are a number of
   successful state schools, including Gosforth High School, Heaton Manor,
   St Cuthbert's, Kenton School and Sacred Heart. Newcastle College is the
   largest general further education college in the North East, and there
   are two smaller colleges in the Newcastle area. Newcastle College is
   also one of the select few beacon colleges in the United Kingdom.

   Some 45% of Newcastle's school pupils live in wards which are amongst
   the 10% most deprived in England.

Culture

Dialect

   The Geordie dialect is more than an alternative pronunciation of
   English. There is a large amount of vocabulary that does not exist in
   other parts of England, and words often have different meanings. Much
   of the dialect can be traced back to the Old Norse and Old English
   languages and certain words are very similar to their equivalents in
   modern Swedish.

Entertainment

Nightlife

   Newcastle has a reputation for being a fun-loving city with many bars,
   restaurants and nightclubs. More recently, Newcastle has become popular
   as a destination for Stag and Hen parties. Newcastle was also placed
   7th in the 'Worldwide best places for a Night-Out', in 2000. 'The Rough
   Guide to Britain' has placed the nightlife in Newcastle upon Tyne as a
   top attraction in Great Britain for tourists.

   There are notable concentrations of pubs, bars and nightclubs around
   the Bigg Market, and the Quayside area areas of the city centre. Other
   popular areas for nightlife are Collingwood Street, Neville Street, the
   Central Station area and Osborne Road in the Jesmond area of the city.
   In recent years "The Gate" has opening in the city centre, a new indoor
   complex consisting of bars, upmarket clubs, restaurants and a 12-screen
   Empire multiplex cinema.

   Focused on the Times Square area near the Centre for Life, the "Pink
   Triangle" is the centre of Newcastle's gay scene and hosts
   approximately many bars and pubs and two clubs, Powerhouse and The
   Loft. The community has seen much expansion in the past five years,
   with further growth planned in the future. The Pink Triangle was a
   planned development promoted by the Regional Development Agency.

   The city is also home to several historic and traditional pubs,
   including The Crown Posada, The Cooperage, The Bodega and The Bacchus.

Theatre

   Frontage of the Theatre Royal
   Enlarge
   Frontage of the Theatre Royal

   A growth in theatre culture has taken place in recent years, centred on
   the impressive Theatre Royal on Grey Street, which for over 25 years
   has hosted a season of performances from the Royal Shakespeare Company.
   The Theatre Royal is currently closed for refurbishment and is set to
   reopen in October 2006 in time for the travelling West End musical,
   Grease and the annual RSC season. Other theatres in the City include
   the Tyne Opera House, the Northern Stage, the Live Theatre, the
   People's Theatre and the Gulbenkian Studio. There are several other
   venues in and around Newcastle, such as Newcastle City Hall, Newcastle
   Arena and The Sage Gateshead.

Festivals and fairs

   The Hoppings, reputedly the largest travelling fair in Europe, takes
   place on Newcastle Town Moor every June. The event had its origins in
   the Temperance movement during the early 1880s and coincides with the
   annual race week at High Gosforth Park.

   A new music festival, the Hi Fi Festival took place in May 2006, at
   Matfen on the outskirts of the City. May also sees Newcastle and
   Gateshead host the Orange Evolution, which culminates with the
   Freevolution free music festival held on the Newcastle and Gateshead
   Quaysides over the Spring Bank Holiday, with performances from well
   known and up and coming acts from the world of Rock, Indie and Dance
   Music. Surrounding Tyneside has many festivals, including MOTFest (The
   Mouth Of Tyne Festival) held at Tynemouth, a coastal village 8 miles
   East of Newcastle.

Shopping

   There are several major shopping areas in Newcastle city centre. The
   largest of these is the Eldon Square shopping centre, which
   incorporates the largest Fenwick department store in the UK and a John
   Lewis store (formerly known as Bainbridge), which is often cited as the
   first department store in the UK. Eldon Square is currently undergoing
   a full redevelopment which will include a new bus station, replacing
   the old underground bus station and redeveloping the fascia of the
   centre that faces Grainger Town to allow the 60's concrete to be
   replaced by more forgiving materials to accommodate its architectural
   surroundings. As part of the redevelopment the 1970's Green Market will
   be closed down in early 2007 and rebuilt.

   The main shopping street in the city is Northumberland Street. In a
   2004 report, it was ranked as the most expensive shopping road in the
   UK for rent, outside London. Other shopping centres in Newcastle
   include the relatively modern Eldon Garden and Monument Mall complexes,
   the Newgate Centre, Central Arcade and the traditional Grainger Market.
   The largest suburban shopping areas are Gosforth and Byker. The largest
   indoor shopping centre in Europe, The MetroCentre in Gateshead is also
   nearby.

   Out of town, just a few miles to the East lie the coastal resorts of
   Tynemouth, Whitley Bay and Cullercoats which offer a great selection of
   shopping attractions. The up and coming Saville Quarter of North
   Shields, just 15 minutes from Newcastle City Centre is home to the
   North Shields Fish Quay with its eclectic mix of pubs and restaurants.
   Relax after shopping with a pint and a bar meal at the ubiquitous
   Magnesia Bank which is just around the corner, or the upmarket Saville
   Exchange across the road. The attractions described here can also be
   easily reached by Metro, bus, car, the Shields Ferry that runs between
   North and South Shields and the DFDS seaways ferry at the North Shields
   terminal, adjacent to the Royal Quays retail outlet which is also well
   worth a visit.

Famous residents

   Engineer and industrialist Lord Armstrong, Catholic leader Cardinal
   Basil Hume, musician Sting, comedian Rowan Atkinson, entertainers Ant
   and Dec, and international footballers Paul Gascoigne, Peter Beardsley,
   Chris Waddle and Alan Shearer are a few of the many famous people born
   in or associated with Newcastle. For a full list, see List of famous
   residents of Newcastle upon Tyne.

Museums and places of interest

   Key
   National Trust        National Trust
   English Heritage      English Heritage
   Forestry Commission   Forestry Commission
   Country Park          Country Park
   Accessible open space Accessible open space
   Museum (free)
   Museum                Museums (free/not free)
   Heritage railway      Heritage railway
   Historic house        Historic House

In Newcastle

     * Bessie Surtees House English Hertiage property
     * Blackfriars Accessible open space
     * Centre for Life Accessible open space
     * Discovery Museum Museum (free)
     * Eldon Square
     * Hancock Museum Museum (not free)
     * Hatton Gallery Museum (free)
     * Laing Art Gallery Museum (not free)
     * Museum of Antiquities Museum (free)
     * Newcastle Castle Keep and Blackgate
     * Newcastle Cathedral Church of England
     * Newcastle town wall
     * Quayside Accessible open space
     * Seven Stories, The Centre for Children's Books
     * St James' Park Football Stadium
     * St Mary's Cathedral Roman Catholic

In the surrounding area

     * Arbeia Roman Fort Museum (not free)
     * BALTIC Centre for Contemporary Art Museum (free)
     * Beamish Open Air Museum Heritage railway Museum (not free)
     * Bede's World Museum (free)
     * Blue Reef Aquarium
     * Cragside National Trust property Historic house
     * MetroCentre
     * The Sage Gateshead
     * Segedunum Roman Fort Museum (not free)
     * Shipley Gallery Museum (free)
     * South Shields Museum Museum (free)
     * St Mary's Lighthouse Museum (not free)
     * Stephenson Railway Museum Heritage railway Museum (not free)
     * Tanfield Railway Museum Heritage railway Museum (not free)
     * Washington Old Hall National Trust property Historic house
     * Woodhorn Colliery Museum Museum (not free)

Twin cities

     * Norway - Bergen – Norway
     * Netherlands - Groningen – Netherlands
     * Germany - Gelsenkirchen – Germany
     * France - Nancy – France
     * People's Republic of China - Taiyuan – China

     * United States - Atlanta – United States
     * Israel - Haifa – Israel
     * Australia - Newcastle – Australia, on the Hunter River and also a
       coal hub.
     * South Africa - Newcastle – South Africa
     * Sweden - Malmö – Sweden

Foreign consulates

   The following countries have consular offices in Newcastle:
     * Norway The Royal Norwegian Consulate: 14 Grey Street, NE1 6AE
     * Netherlands Honorary Consulate of the Netherlands : The Cube,
       Barrack Road, NE4 6DB
     * Sweden Honorary Consulate of Sweden: 2 Osborne Road, Jesmond, NE2
       2AA
     * Italy Honorary Consulate of Italy: 63 High Bridge, NE1 1DU

Gallery

   Bessie Surtees House (Quayside)

   Civic Centre

   The interior of Newcastle Central station

   The Millennium Bridge and Sage Music Centre (Quayside)

   View of the Millennium Bridge at night from the Newcastle side

   Steps from the castle keep to the quayside

   View across the Tyne to Gateshead

   Castle keep from the southeastern side

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newcastle_upon_Tyne"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
