   #copyright

Newsround

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Television

                             newsround
   The Newsround titles received a slight refresh in May 2006.
         Genre       Children's news magazine
       Starring      Ellie Crisell
                     Adam Fleming
                     Lizzie Greenwood
                     Sonali Gudka
                     Laura Jones
                     Lizo Mzimba
                     Gavin Ramjaun
   Country of origin United Kingdom
                            Production
      Produced by    Georgie Bevan
                     Simon Goretzki
                     Sinéad Rocks
     Running time    10 minutes
                             Broadcast
   Original channel  BBC One, CBBC
     Original run    5 April 1972 – present
                            Chronology
     Related shows   Newsround Extra
                     Sportsround

   Newsround (originally called John Craven's Newsround, before the
   departure of Craven) is a BBC children's news programme, which has run
   continuously since 4 April 1972, and was the world's first television
   news magazine aimed specifically at children.

History

   Originally called John Craven's Newsround, it was mostly presented by
   John Craven between 4 April 1972 and 22 June 1989, though presenters
   including Roger Finn and Helen Rollason also presented during the
   1980s.

   On Craven's departure, the show was renamed Newsround, and its
   presenters who regularly rotate have included Juliet Morris, Krishnan
   Guru-Murthy, Julie Etchingham, Chris Rogers, Kate Sanderson, Matthew
   Price, and Becky Jago. Regular reporters on the programme, who have
   also presented it, include Paul McDowell, Paul Welsh and Terry Baddoo.
   For over 25 years, it was usually broadcast on BBC One at 5 p.m.

   Newsround was the first BBC television programme to break the news of
   the loss of the Space Shuttle Challenger on 28 January 1986. As the
   event was shown during the opening titles, it is often erroneously
   stated that the tragedy happened live on air, but it in fact happened
   about fifteen minutes earlier. This edition was presented by Roger
   Finn, who had only recently joined the programme.

Current format and presenters

   The Newsround edition broadcast at 5:25 pm on CBBC One has Ellie
   Crisell as its main anchor, with Lizo Mzimba taking Ellie's main role
   when she is absent. All of the presenters make reports. On the CBBC
   Channel, the Newsround bulletins are read by Sonali Gudka and Gavin
   Ramjaun. The other reporters are Laura Jones and Adam Fleming. Lizzie
   Greenwood is a reporter for Sportsround, Newsround's sister show.

   Newsround's editor is Tim Levell with deputy editor Sinead Rocks. The
   main TV producer is Paul Arnold. The main online producer is Clare
   Youell.

Newsround Extra

   A variation on the regular format of Newsround is a series of short
   (typically ten-minute) documentary films broadcast under the title
   Newsround Extra, which have been a regular feature since the late
   1970s. There are two or three series of these documentaries during the
   year, which replace the regular bulletins on one day of the week
   (usually Monday, although sometimes on Fridays, particularly during the
   1980s).

   There was a Newsround Extra on 1 December 2006 called The Wrong
   Trainers a rather dark film consisting of six short animations dealing
   with child poverty and related issues. In one of the presentations
   Chris says the Government is not spending money as wisely as they
   should be. Afterwards, there was a linked BBCi special following up the
   issues. Newsround - The Wrong Trainers won the Royal Television Society
   Award for best children's programme 2006.

Newsround Showbiz

   Originally called Newsround Lite, Newsround Showbiz ran from 2003 to
   2005 and was a weekly round-up of showbiz news. It was aired every
   Saturday and Sunday at 3.50pm on the CBBC Channel, and was hosted by
   Lizzie, Adam, Rachel or Thalia who were regular Newsround presenters.
   The show lasted for ten minutes and contained celebrity news and
   gossip.

Newsround Investigates

   Newsround Investigates is a special half-hour documentary series for
   CBBC, taking an in-depth look at issues affecting children’s lives. The
   first edition on May 8, 2006 investigated the subject of arson in
   schools.

Sportsround

   In September 2005, a new spin-off of Newsround was launched, entitled
   Sportsround. It contains reoprts from major sporting events and local
   sport competitions. The show is presented by Jake Humphrey.

Newsround on the web

   Newsround has its own website as part of the main CBBC web site,
   featuring:
     * The latest news headlines, grouped into the relevant sections (e.g.
       World, UK, Sci-Tech, etc.)
     * An RSS feed for each of the sections (e.g. an RSS feed for World
       news, UK news, etc.)
     * A games section, with many Flash games.
     * Message boards for different topics (e.g. Current News, Doctor Who,
       etc.)
     * A voting section, where users can vote on different popular topics
       such as favourite film, etc.
     * Quizzes.
     * Competitions.
     * Presenter blogs.

   In February, an online video podcast was released called And Finally .
   This is a summary of the entire week's news, and a new edition is
   released every Thursday. There is also a podcast for Sportsround called
   Action Replay. This can either be downloaded as an MPEG-4 Part 14 file
   or as a podcast which includes both And Finally and Action Replay.

Newsround Quiz

   From 18 December 2006 to 5 January 2007, digital satellite and Freeview
   viewers could access the free and interactive Newsround Review of The
   Year Quiz by pressing the red button on their remote control. Viewers
   watched video questions and then selected their answer by pressing the
   coloured keys on their remote control.

Criticisms

   The programme has been criticized by young people, on its own CBBC
   message boards, as being "patronizing." In one instance, a caption
   banner read "Chechnians are from Chechnya" and also "David Tennant: The
   10th Doctor, he is the Tenth Person to play Doctor Who". From a
   diversity perspective, Newsround discriminates against LGBT people by
   not including relevant issues or storiesFor instance, when Matt Lucas
   and Kevin McGee "married" in December 2006, the story was quite widely
   reported in the press but it went unreported on Newsround. Posts about
   gay rights have been removed from Newsround's messageboards.

   Also, the programme's website appears to discriminate against older
   children. It frequently reports news stories and asks for people's
   thoughts on the stories. Although they say that they will try to put up
   as many replies as possible, very few replies from 14 and 15 year olds
   are published.

   Newsround's editor, Tim Levell, was involved in commissioning a filmed
   report about a 9 year old bullfighter in Mexico. A number of people
   were angry that the BBC had carried the item, and two viewers aired
   their complaints on the 12 January 2007 edition of BBC's Newswatch
   programme. One complained about "portraying this medieval barbaric
   ritual as a cultural form of entertainment." Mr Levell explained his
   reasoning on Newswatch. He said that children in the UK would find the
   9 year old Mexican bullfighter "absolutely fascinating."

Former presenters

     * John Craven April 1972- 22 June 1989
     * Paul McDowell 1979?-1985
     * Roger Finn 1985-1991
     * Helen Rollason 1986-1990
     * Juliet Morris 1990- October 1994
     * Krishnan Guru-Murthy 1991-October 1994
     * Julie Etchingham October 1994- February 1998
     * Chris Rogers October 1994- 1999
     * Kate Sanderson July 1997- September 2001
     * Matthew Price 1999- 2002
     * Becky Jago September 2001- February 2003

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newsround"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
