   #copyright

Niagara Falls

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: North American Geography


   This is a featured article. Click here for more information.

   Niagara Falls is a set of massive waterfalls located on the Niagara
   River in eastern North America, on the border between the United States
   and Canada. Niagara Falls (French: les Chutes du Niagara) comprises
   three separate waterfalls: the Horseshoe Falls (sometimes called the
   Canadian Falls), the American Falls, and the smaller, adjacent Bridal
   Veil Falls. While not exceptionally high, Niagara Falls is very wide.
   With more than 6 million cubic feet (168,000  m³) of water falling over
   the crestline every minute in high flow, and almost 4 million cubic
   feet (110,000  m³) on average, it is the most powerful waterfall in
   North America.

   Geographically, Niagara Falls is located about twenty minutes away from
   the U.S. city of Buffalo and about an hour and a half (90 minutes) away
   from the Canadian city of Toronto.

   Some sources erroneously quote that the Niagara River has an average
   flow of about 12 million cubic feet per minute (200,000 cu ft/s) or
   even slightly more. This figure is derived from the average rate of
   flow (202,000 cu ft/s) of the Niagara River. This volume would pass
   over the falls if there were no hydroelectric water diversion upstream
   from the falls; however, water is diverted continuously from Niagara
   and this figure is approximately three times the actual average flow
   volume over the falls.

   Niagara Falls is renowned for its beauty, and is both a valuable source
   of hydroelectric power and a challenging project for environmental
   preservation. A popular tourist site for over a century, the natural
   wonder is shared between the twin cities of Niagara Falls, Ontario and
   Niagara Falls, New York.
   An aerial overview of Niagara Falls
   Enlarge
   An aerial overview of Niagara Falls

Formation

   The historical roots of Niagara Falls lie in the Wisconsin glaciation,
   which ended some 10,000 years ago. The North American Great Lakes and
   the Niagara River are effects of this last continental ice sheet, an
   enormous glacier that crept across the area from eastern Canada. The
   glacier drove through the area like a giant bulldozer, grinding up
   rocks and soil, moving them around, and deepening some river channels
   to make lakes. It dammed others with debris, forcing these rivers to
   make new channels. It is thought that there is an old valley, buried by
   glacial drift, at the approximate location of the present Welland
   Canal.
   A view of the Niagara Falls Canadian skyline
   Enlarge
   A view of the Niagara Falls Canadian skyline

   After the ice melted back, drainage from the upper Great Lakes became
   the present-day Niagara River, which could not follow the old filled
   valley, so it found the lowest outlet on the rearranged topography. In
   time the river cut a gorge across the Niagara Escarpment, the north
   facing cliff or cuesta formed by erosion of the southwardly dipping
   (tilted) and resistant Lockport formation between Lake Erie and Lake
   Ontario. In doing so it exposed old marine rocks that are much older
   than the geologically recent glaciation. Three major formations are
   exposed in the gorge that was cut by the Niagara River.
   A view of Skylon Tower from USA side
   Enlarge
   A view of Skylon Tower from USA side

   When the newly established river encountered the erosion-resistant
   Lockport dolostone, the hard layer eroded much more slowly than the
   underlying softer rocks. The aerial photo clearly shows the hard
   caprock, the Lockport Formation (Middle Silurian), which underlies the
   rapids above the falls and approximately the upper third of the gorge
   wall. It is composed of very dense, hard and very strong limestone and
   dolostone.

   Immediately below, comprising about two thirds of the cliff is the
   weaker, softer, and more crumbly and sloping Rochester Formation (Lower
   Silurian). It is mainly shale, though it has some thin limestone
   layers, and contains large quantities of fossils. Because it erodes
   more easily, the river has undercut the hard cap rock and created the
   falls.

   Submerged in the river in the lower valley, hidden from view, is the
   Queenston Formation (Upper Ordovician), which is composed of shales and
   fine sandstones. All three formations were laid down in an ancient sea,
   and their differences of character derive from changing conditions
   within that sea.
   Niagara Falls from space, April 2001
   Enlarge
   Niagara Falls from space, April 2001

   The original Niagara Falls were near the sites of present-day Lewiston,
   New York, and Queenston, Ontario, but erosion of their crest has caused
   the waterfalls to retreat several miles southward. Just upstream from
   the Falls' current location, Goat Island splits the course of the
   Niagara River, resulting in the separation of the Horseshoe Falls to
   the west from the American and Bridal Veil Falls to the east. Although
   erosion and recession have been slowed in this century by engineering,
   the falls will eventually recede far enough to drain most of Lake Erie,
   the bottom of which is higher than the bottom of the falls. Engineers
   are working to reduce the rate of erosion to retard this event as long
   as possible.

   The Falls drop about 170 feet (52 m), although the American Falls have
   a clear drop of only 70 feet (21 m) before reaching a jumble of fallen
   rocks which were deposited by a massive rock slide in 1954. The larger
   Canadian Falls are about 2,600 feet (792 m) wide, while the American
   Falls are 1,060 feet (323 m) wide. The volume of water approaching the
   Falls during peak flow season is 202,000 cubic feet per second
   (5,720 m³/s). During the summer months, when maximum diversion of water
   for hydroelectric power occurs, 100,000  ft³/s (2,832 m³/s) of water
   actually traverses the Falls, some 90% of which goes over the Horseshoe
   Falls. This volume is further halved at night, when most of the
   diversion to hydroelectric facilities occurs.

Historical background

   1837 woodcut of Niagara Falls, from Etats Unis d'Amerique by Roux de
   Rochelle.
   Enlarge
   1837 woodcut of Niagara Falls, from Etats Unis d'Amerique by Roux de
   Rochelle.

   The name "Niagara" is said to originate from an Iroquois word
   "Onguiaahra" meaning "The Strait." The region's original inhabitants
   were the Ongiara, an Iroquois tribe named the Neutrals by French
   settlers, who found them helpful in mediating disputes with other
   tribes.

   Native American legend tells of Lelawala, a beautiful maid betrothed by
   her father to a brave she despised. Rather than marry, Lelawala chose
   to sacrifice herself to her true love He-No, the Thunder God, who dwelt
   in a cave behind the Horseshoe Falls. She paddled her canoe into the
   swift current of the Niagara River and was swept over the brink. He-No
   caught her as she plummeted, and together their spirits are said to
   live forever in the Thunder God's sanctuary behind the Falls.
   The Niagara Movement, a civil liberties organization, first met here in
   1905
   Enlarge
   The Niagara Movement, a civil liberties organization, first met here in
   1905

   Some controversy exists over which European first gave a written,
   eyewitness description of the Falls. The area was visited by Samuel de
   Champlain as early as 1604. Members of his party reported to him on the
   spectacular waterfalls, which he wrote of in his journals but may never
   have actually visited. Some credit Finnish-Swedish naturalist Pehr Kalm
   with the original firsthand description, penned during an expedition to
   the area early in the 18th century. Most historians however agree that
   Father Louis Hennepin observed and described the Falls much earlier, in
   1677, after traveling in the region with explorer René Robert Cavelier,
   Sieur de la Salle, thus bringing them to the world's attention.
   Hennepin also first described the Saint Anthony Falls in Minnesota. His
   subsequently discredited claim that he also traveled the Mississippi
   River to the Gulf of Mexico cast some doubt on the validity of his
   writings and sketches of Niagara Falls. Hennepin County in Minnesota
   was named after Father Louis Hennepin.

   There is credible evidence, however, that Reverend Paul Ragueneau
   (1608–1680) discovered the falls prior to Hennepin's claim. Ragueneau
   was a French Jesuit who was working among the Huron natives in Canada.
   Born in Paris, Father Ragueneau entered the Society of Jesus about 1626
   at the age of 18 and wrote more about his work than any other Jesuit in
   Canada. Ragueneau described the natural wonder in his writings some 35
   years before Hennepin's visit.

   During the 19th century tourism became popular, and it was the area's
   main industry by mid-century. Napoleon Bonaparte's brother Jérôme
   visited with his bride in the early 19th century. Demand for passage
   over the Niagara River led in 1848 to the building of a footbridge and
   then Charles Ellet's Niagara Suspension Bridge. This was supplanted by
   German-born John Augustus Roebling's Niagara Falls Suspension Bridge in
   1855. After the American Civil War, the New York Central railroad
   publicized Niagara Falls as a focus of pleasure and honeymoon visits.
   With increased railroad traffic, in 1886 Leffert Buck replaced
   Roebling's wood and stone bridge with the predominantly steel bridge
   that still carries trains over the Niagara River today. The first steel
   archway bridge near the Falls was completed in 1897. Known today as the
   Whirlpool Rapids Bridge, it carries vehicles, trains, and pedestrians
   between Canada and the U.S. just below the Falls. In 1941 the Niagara
   Falls Bridge Commission completed the third current crossing in the
   immediate area of Niagara Falls with the Rainbow Bridge, carrying both
   pedestrian and vehicular traffic.

   Especially after World War I, tourism boomed again as automobiles made
   getting to the Falls much easier. The story of Niagara Falls in the
   20th century is largely that of efforts to harness the energy of the
   Falls for hydroelectric power and to control the rampant development on
   both the American and Canadian sides which threatened the area's
   natural beauty.

Impact on industry and commerce

   The enormous energy of the Falls was long recognized as a potential
   source of power. The first known effort to harness the waters was in
   1759, when Daniel Joncairs built a small canal above the Falls to power
   his sawmill. Augustus and Peter Porter purchased this area and all of
   American Falls in 1805 from the New York state government, and enlarged
   the original canal to provide hydraulic power for their gristmill and
   tannery. In 1853, the Niagara Falls Hydraulic Power and Mining Company
   was chartered, which eventually constructed the canals which would be
   used to generate electricity. In 1881, under the leadership of Jacob
   Schoellkopf, enough power was produced to send direct current to
   illuminate both the Falls themselves and nearby Niagara Falls village.
   American Falls (large waterfall on the left) and Bridal Veil Falls
   (smaller waterfall on the right)
   Enlarge
   American Falls (large waterfall on the left) and Bridal Veil Falls
   (smaller waterfall on the right)

   When Nikola Tesla, for whom a memorial was later built at Niagara
   Falls, invented the three-phase system of alternating current power
   transmission, distant transfer of electricity became possible. In 1883,
   the Niagara Falls Power Company, a descendant of Schoellkopf's firm,
   hired George Westinghouse to design a system to generate alternating
   current. By 1896, with financing from moguls like J.P. Morgan, John
   Jacob Astor IV, and the Vanderbilts, they had constructed giant
   underground conduits leading to turbines generating upwards of 100,000
   horsepower (75 MW), and were sending power as far as Buffalo, twenty
   miles (32  km) away. Private companies on the Canadian side also began
   to harness the energy of the Falls, employing both domestic and
   American firms in their efforts. The Government of Ontario eventually
   brought power transmission operations under public control in 1906,
   distributing Niagara's energy to various parts of that province.
   Currently between 50% and 75% of the Niagara River's flow is diverted
   via four huge tunnels that arise far upstream from the waterfalls. The
   water then passes through hydroelectric turbines that supply power to
   nearby areas of the United States and Canada before returning to the
   river well past the Falls.

   The most powerful hydroelectric stations on the Niagara River are Sir
   Adam Beck 1 and 2 on the Canadian side, and the Robert Moses Niagara
   Power Plant and the Lewiston Pump Generating Plant on the American
   side. All together, Niagara's generating stations can produce about 4.4
   GW of power.

   In August 2005, Ontario Power Generation, which is now responsible for
   the Sir Adam Beck stations, announced plans to build a new 10.4 km (6½
   mile) tunnel to tap water from farther up the Niagara river than is
   possible with the existing arrangement. The project is expected to be
   completed in 2009, and will increase Sir Adam Beck's output by about
   182 MW (4.2%).
   Both American and the Canadian falls seen from Canada in a panoramic
   view.
   Enlarge
   Both American and the Canadian falls seen from Canada in a panoramic
   view.

   Ships can bypass Niagara Falls by means of the Welland Canal, which in
   the 1960s was improved and incorporated into the Saint Lawrence Seaway.
   While the seaway diverted water traffic from nearby Buffalo and led to
   the demise of its steel and grain mills, other industries in the
   Niagara River valley flourished until the 1970s with the help of the
   electric power produced by the river. Since then the region has
   declined economically.
   A closer view of the Horseshoe Falls at the Canadian side of the
   Niagara Falls.
   Enlarge
   A closer view of the Horseshoe Falls at the Canadian side of the
   Niagara Falls.

   The twin cities of Niagara Falls, Ontario and Niagara Falls, New York
   are connected by three bridges, including the Rainbow Bridge, just
   downriver from the Falls, which affords the closest view of the Falls
   and is open to non-commercial vehicle traffic and pedestrians. The
   Whirlpool Rapids Bridge, 1.5 km (1 mi.) down from the Rainbow bridge
   and the oldest bridge over the Niagara river is open only to NEXUS Pass
   holders a limited amount of hours. The newest bridge, the
   Lewiston-Queenston Bridge, is located near the escarpment. Nearby
   Niagara Falls International Airport and Buffalo Niagara International
   Airport were named after the waterfall, as were Niagara University,
   countless local businesses, and even an asteroid.

Preservation efforts

   For the first two centuries after European settlement of the area, land
   on both sides of Niagara Falls was privately owned. Development and
   commercial ventures threatened the natural beauty of the area, and
   visitors sometimes had to pay entrepreneurs a fee to view the Falls
   through holes in a fence. Public dissatisfaction led to the Free
   Niagara movement, which included the artist Frederick Church, the
   landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted, New York Assemblyman Thomas
   Vincent Welch, and the journalist Jonathan Baxter Harrison. A series of
   Harrison's letters to newspapers in Boston and New York (collected in
   the 1882 pamphlet The Condition of Niagara Falls, and the Measures
   Needed to Preserve Them) were particularly influential in turning
   public opinion in favour of preservation.
   A closer view of the Horseshoe (Canadian) Falls in the early morning.
   Enlarge
   A closer view of the Horseshoe (Canadian) Falls in the early morning.

   In 1885, New York state began to purchase land from developers, under
   the charter of the Niagara Reservation State Park. In the same year,
   Ontario established the Queen Victoria Niagara Falls Park for the same
   purpose. Both organizations have proved remarkably successful
   operations that have restricted development on both sides of the Falls
   and the Niagara River. On the Canadian side, the Niagara Parks
   Commission governs land usage along the entire course of the Niagara
   River, from Lake Erie to Lake Ontario.

   Until the modern era, the Falls were receding southward owing to
   erosion from two to ten feet (0.6 to 3.0 m) per year. This process was
   slowed initially by diversion of increasing amounts of flow from the
   Niagara River into hydroelectric plants in both the United States and
   Canada. On January 2, 1929 Canada and the United States reached an
   agreement on an action plan to preserve the Falls. In 1950, the two
   countries signed the Niagara River Water Diversion Treaty, which more
   specifically addressed the issue of water diversion.
   American Falls "shut off" during erosion control efforts in 1969 (see
   text)
   Enlarge
   American Falls "shut off" during erosion control efforts in 1969 (see
   text)

   In addition to the effects of diversion of water to the power stations,
   erosion control efforts have included underwater weirs to redirect the
   most damaging currents, and actual mechanical strengthening of the top
   of the Falls. The most dramatic such work was performed in 1969. In
   June of that year, the Niagara River was completely diverted away from
   the American Falls for several months through the building of a
   temporary rock and earth dam (clearly visible in the photo at right),
   effectively shutting off the American Falls. While the Horseshoe Falls
   absorbed the extra flow, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers studied the
   riverbed and mechanically bolted faults which would otherwise have
   hastened the retreat of the American Falls. A plan to remove the huge
   mound of talus deposited in 1954 was abandoned owing to cost, and in
   November 1969, the temporary dam was dynamited, restoring flow to the
   American Falls. Even after these undertakings, Luna Island, the small
   piece of land between the main waterfall and the Bridal Veil, remained
   off limits to the public for years owing to fears that it was unstable
   and could collapse into the gorge at any time.

   Preservation efforts have extended beyond and above the Falls
   themselves. Recent construction of several tall buildings (most of them
   hotels) on the Canadian side has caused the airflow over the Falls to
   change direction. Students at the University of Guelph demonstrated,
   using scale models, that the air passes over the top of the new hotels,
   causing a breeze to roll down the south sides of the buildings and
   spill into the gorge below the Falls, where it feeds into a whirlpool
   of moisture and air. The result is that the viewing areas on the
   Canadian side are now often obscured by a layer of mist. Another
   possible explanation for the mist is a rise in local ground
   temperatures due to global warming. In either case, solving the problem
   will be difficult.

The falls in entertainment and popular culture

Over The Falls

   Bobby Leach and his barrel after his trip over Niagara Falls, 1911
   Enlarge
   Bobby Leach and his barrel after his trip over Niagara Falls, 1911

   In October 1829, Sam Patch, who called himself The Yankee Leaper,
   jumped over the Horseshoe Falls and became the first known person to
   survive the plunge. This began a long tradition of daredevils trying to
   go over the Falls and survive. In 1901, 63-year-old Annie Edson Taylor
   was the first person to go over the Falls in a barrel; she survived
   virtually unharmed. Soon after exiting the barrel, she said, "No one
   should ever try that again." Since Taylor's historic ride, 14 other
   people have intentionally gone over the Falls in or on a device,
   despite her advice. Some have survived unharmed, but others have
   drowned or been severely injured. Survivors of such stunts face charges
   and stiff fines, as it is illegal, on both sides of the border, to
   attempt to go over the Falls.

   Other daredevils have made crossing the Falls their goal, starting with
   the successful passage by Jean François "Blondin" Gravelet in 1859.
   These tightrope walkers drew huge crowds to witness their exploits.
   Their wires ran across the gorge, near the current Rainbow Bridge, not
   over the waterfall itself. Among the many was Ontario's William Hunt,
   who billed himself as "Signor Fanini" and competed with Blondin in
   performing outrageous stunts over the gorge. Englishman Captain Matthew
   Webb, the first man to swim the English Channel, drowned in 1883 after
   unsuccessfully trying to swim across the whirlpools and rapids
   downriver from the Falls with nine other people. Two others drowned
   with him, and the other seven gave up before finishing their course.

   In what some called the "Miracle at Niagara", Roger Woodward, a
   seven-year-old American boy, was swept over the Horseshoe Falls
   protected only by a life vest on July 9, 1960, as two tourists pulled
   his 17-year-old sister Deanne from the river only 20 feet (6 m) from
   the lip of the Horseshoe Falls at Goat Island.. The two men, both from
   New Jersey, and having never met previously, sprang into action. John
   R. Hayes, a truck driver for a local oil company and an auxiliary
   police officer from Union, New Jersey climbed over the rail, stretched
   out his arm and pleaded with Deanne. She later said that his pleading
   voice made her swim harder and she grabbed his thumb just inches from
   going over the Falls. Fearful that the current might break the hold on
   the young girl, Hayes shouted for help. Climbing over the railing was
   John Quattrochi of Pennsgrove, New Jersey, came to aid the rescue and
   the two pulled the teenager to safety. Once on land Deanne's concern
   was for her brother. Quattrochi realizing another was still out there
   quietly whispered "Pray for him." Minutes later, Roger was plucked from
   the roiling plunge pool beneath the Horseshoe Falls after grabbing a
   life ring thrown to him by the crew of the Maid of the Mist boat. His
   survival, which no one thought possible, made news throughout the
   world.

   On July 2, 1984, Canadian Karel Soucek from Hamilton, Ontario
   successfully plunged over the Horseshoe Falls in a barrel with only
   minor injuries. Soucek was fined $500 for performing the stunt without
   a license. In 1985, he was killed while attempting to re-create the
   stunt at the Houston Astrodome by climbing into a barrel and dropping
   180 feet into a water tank in front of 45,000 people; his barrel hit
   the side of the tank.

   In August 1985, Steve Trotter, an aspiring stuntman from Rhode Island,
   became the youngest person ever (age 22) and the first American in 25
   years to go over the Falls in a barrel. Ten years later, Trotter went
   over the Falls again, becoming the second person to go over the Falls
   twice and survive. It was also the second-ever "duo"; Lori Martin
   joined Trotter for the barrel ride over the Falls. The first two-person
   trip over the brink goes to Jeffrey Petkovich (25) and Peter Debernardi
   (42) on September 27, 1989.

   Kirk Jones of Canton, Michigan became the first known person to survive
   a plunge over the Horseshoe Falls without a flotation device on October
   20, 2003. While it is still not known whether Jones was determined to
   commit suicide, he survived the 16-story fall with only battered ribs,
   scrapes, and bruises.

   No human has ever survived a plunge over the American Falls, owing to
   the many boulders and the relatively weak current. All survivors and
   daredevils have passed over the Horseshoe Falls, where there are fewer
   boulders and the current can "throw" a person farther away from the
   brink and (hopefully) avoid the boulders.

Movies and television

   The popular Clifton Hill on the Canadian side lit up at night
   Enlarge
   The popular Clifton Hill on the Canadian side lit up at night

   Already a huge tourist attraction and favorite spot for honeymooners,
   Niagara Falls visits rose sharply in 1953 after the release of Niagara,
   a movie starring Marilyn Monroe. Later in the 20th century, the Falls
   was a featured location in 1980's movie Superman II, and was itself the
   subject of a popular IMAX movie. Much of the episode Return of the
   Technodrome in the 1987 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles cartoon series
   take place near the Niagara Falls and its hydroelectric plant.
   Illusionist David Copperfield performed a trick in which he appeared to
   travel over the Horseshoe Falls in 1990. The Falls, or more
   particularly, the tourist-supported complex near the Falls, was the
   setting of the short-lived American television show Wonderfalls in
   early 2004. With the recent influx of more international tourists,
   annual visits exceeded 14 million in 2003.

Other

   On August 4, 2005, professional golfer John Daly attempted to drive a
   golf ball over Niagara Falls, an approximate distance of 362 yards
   (331 m), falling just short in 20 attempts.

   The phrase "Niagara Falls" is often the "triggering" statement in an
   old Vaudeville routine more generally known as " Slowly I Turned".

   The song "Over the Falls" by Primus is about a man who attempts to go
   over Niagara Falls in a barrel.

   Charles Dickens described his visit to the falls in his 1842
   travelogue, American Notes:

          When we were seated in the little ferry-boat, and were crossing
          the
          swollen river immediately before both cataracts, I began to feel
          what it was: but I was in a manner stunned, and unable to
          comprehend the vastness of the scene. It was not until I came on
          Table Rock, and looked - Great Heaven, on what a fall of bright-
          green water! - that it came upon me in its full might and
          majesty.

          Then, when I felt how near to my Creator I was standing, the
          first
          effect, and the enduring one - instant and lasting - of the
          tremendous spectacle, was Peace. Peace of Mind, tranquillity,
          calm
          recollections of the Dead, great thoughts of Eternal Rest and
          Happiness: nothing of gloom or terror. Niagara was at once
          stamped upon my heart, an Image of Beauty; to remain there,
          changeless and indelible, until its pulses cease to beat, for
          ever.

Tourism

   Man and woman on Canadian side of Niagara Falls, circa 1858
   Enlarge
   Man and woman on Canadian side of Niagara Falls, circa 1858

   Peak numbers of visitors occur in the summertime, when Niagara Falls
   are both a daytime and evening attraction. From the Canadian side,
   floodlights illuminate both sides of the Falls for several hours after
   dark (until midnight).
   Tourist spot at the bottom of the Falls
   Enlarge
   Tourist spot at the bottom of the Falls

   From the American side, the American Falls can be viewed from walkways
   along Prospect Park, which also features an observation tower. Nearby,
   the Cave of the Winds trail leads hikers down some three hundred steps
   to a point beneath Bridal Veil Falls. The Niagara Scenic Trolley offers
   guided trips along the American Falls.

   On the Canadian side, Queen Victoria Park features manicured gardens,
   platforms offering spectacular views of both the American and Horseshoe
   Falls, and underground walkways leading into observation rooms which
   yield the illusion of being within the falling waters. The observation
   deck of the nearby Skylon Tower offers the highest overhead view of the
   Falls, and in the opposite direction gives views as far as distant
   Toronto. Along with the Minolta Tower (formerly the Konica Minolta
   Tower), it is one of two towers in Canada with a view of the Falls.
   Niagara Falls at night
   Enlarge
   Niagara Falls at night

   Along the Niagara River, the Niagara River Recreational Trail runs the
   35 miles (56 km) from Fort Erie to Fort George, and includes many
   historical sites from the War of 1812.

   The Maid of the Mist cruises, named for an ancient Ongiara Indian
   mythical character, have carried passengers into the whirlpools beneath
   the Falls since 1846. The Whirlpool Aero Car, built in 1916 from a
   design by Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres y Quevedo, is a cable car
   which takes passengers over the whirlpool on the Canadian side.

   The Journey Behind the Falls - accessible by elevators from the street
   level entrance - consists of an observation platform and series of
   tunnels near the bottom of the Horseshoe Falls on the Canadian side.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Niagara_Falls"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
