   #copyright

Niccolò dell'Abbate

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Artists

   Portrait of a Young Man (c. 1540). Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna.
   Portrait of a Young Man (c. 1540). Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna.
   Baby Moses on the Water (1560). Musée du Louvre.
   Baby Moses on the Water (1560). Musée du Louvre.

   Nicolò dell' Abate, sometimes Niccolò, (1509 or 1512 – 1571) was an
   Italian Mannerist painter and decorator, of the Emilian school, who was
   part of the staff of artists called the School of Fontainebleau that
   introduced the Italianate Renaissance to France.

Biography

   Niccolò dell'Abbate was born in Modena, the son of a sculptor.

   He trained in the studio of a local Modenese sculptor, his early
   influence including Ferrarese painters such as Garofalo and Dosso
   Dossi. He specialized in long friezes with secular and mythological
   subjects, including for the Palazzo dei Beccherie (1537); in various
   rooms of the Rocca at Scandiano owned by the counts Boiardo, notably a
   courtly ceiling Concert composed of a ring of young musicians seen in
   perspective, sotto in su (early 1540s), and the Hercules Room in the
   Rocca dei Meli Lupi at Soragna (c. 1540–43), and possibly the loggia
   frescoes removed from Palazzo Casotti at Reggio Emilia.

   His style was modified by exposure to notably Correggio and
   Parmigianino, when he moved to Bologna in 1547. In Bologna, most of his
   painting depicted elaborate landscapes and aristocratic genre scenes of
   hunting and courtly loves, often paralleled in mythologic narratives.
   It was during this time that he decorated the Palazzo Poggi, and
   executed a cycle of frescoes illustrating Orlando Furioso in the ducal
   palace at Sassuolo, near Modena.

   In 1552, Nicolò moved to France, where he worked at the royal Château
   de Fontainebleau as a member of the decorating team under the direction
   of Francesco Primaticcio. Within two years of his arrival he was
   drawing a project for a decor commemorating Anne de Montmorency
   (preparatory drawing at the Louvre). In Paris, he frescoed the chapel
   ceiling in the Hôtel de Guise (destroyed), following Primaticcio's
   designs. He also executed private commissions for portable canvases of
   mythological subjects sited in landscapes. Much of his output reflected
   an often overlooked function of artists of the time: the ephemeral
   festive decorations erected to celebrate special occasions in the court
   circle, for example, the decorations for the triumphal entry into Paris
   staged for Charles IX and his bride Elisabeth of Austria in 1571. That
   year, Nicolò died in France.

   Nicolò is best known for his landscapes enshrouding a mythologic
   narrative, a thematic which would inspire Claude Lorrain and Nicolas
   Poussin, and for his profuse and elegant drawings.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Niccol%C3%B2_dell%27Abbate"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
