   #copyright

Nigella

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Plants

          This article is about the plant. Nigella can also be a personal
          name; see e.g. Nigella Lawson.

                  iNigella
   Nigella damascena seed capsule
   Nigella damascena seed capsule
         Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Plantae
   Division: Magnoliophyta
   Class:    Magnoliopsida
   Order:    Ranunculales
   Family:   Ranunculaceae
   Genus:    Nigella
             L.

                                   Species

   About 14, including:
   Nigella arvensis
   Nigella ciliaris
   Nigella damascena
   Nigella hispanica
   Nigella integrifolia
   Nigella nigellastrum
   Nigella orientalis
   Nigella sativa

   Nigella is a genus of about 14 species of annual plants in the family
   Ranunculaceae, native to southern Europe, north Africa and southwest
   Asia. Common names applied to members of this genus are Devil-in-a-bush
   or Love in the mist.

   The species grow to 20-90 cm tall, with finely divided leaves, the leaf
   segments narrowly linear to threadlike. The flowers are white, yellow,
   pink, pale blue or pale purple, with 5-10 petals. The fruit is a
   capsule composed of several united follicles, each containing numerous
   seeds; in some species (e.g. Nigella damascena), the capsule is large
   and inflated. Spread some in your yard, and it will reseed itself every
   year.

Uses

   The seeds of N. sativa, known as kalonji, black cumin or just nigella,
   are used as a spice in Indian and Middle Eastern cuisine. The black
   seeds taste mostly like oregano crossed with pepper. Most people use it
   as a "pepper" in recipes with pod fruit, vegetables, salads and
   poultry. Several species are grown as ornamental plants in gardens,
   popular for their seed capsules, which are used in dried flower
   arrangements.

   -Drying Nigella-

   Nigella can be easily dried. Nigella is cut when pods reach maximum
   size and colour. Nigella pods range from deep green to deep burgundy,
   with stripes in between. The first few pods are picked with as long a
   stem as possible, one at a time. The plants flowers profusely and so
   when most of the flowers become seed pods, pull the entire plant and
   cut the stems. Then wrap a rubber band around a small bundle of stems
   and then hang them upside down for drying in a dark, airy place until
   dry.

   -Uses of Nigella-

   Love in the mist are used exclusively for dried arrangements. These
   flowers are the best to add texture to any dried flower arrangement.
   The delicate, purple striped pods are used in several arrangements for
   an airy effect. Dry roasted nigella seeds flavor curries, vegetables
   and pulses.

   They are also used to repel insects from clothes and are given to treat
   intestinal worms and nerve defects to reduce flatulence, and induce
   sweating. Dried pods are sniffed to restore a lost sense of smell.

   Painting of Nigella arvensis
   Enlarge
   Painting of Nigella arvensis
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nigella"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
