   #copyright

Niue

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Oceania
(Australasia)

                                                             CAPTION: Niue


                                                             Flag of Niue
                                                             Flag of Niue

                                       Image:LocationNiue.png
                                Official languages         Niuean, English
                                           Capital                   Alofi
                                     Head of State            Elizabeth II
                                       New Zealand
                                 High Commissioner             Anton Ojala
                                           Premier            Young Vivian
                                              Area
                                         – Total
                                         – % water
                                                                  260 km²
                                                                         0
                                        Population
                              – Total ( July 2006)
                                                                     2,166
                                     Establishment
                                            – Date Niue Constitution Act
                                                           19 October 1974
                                          Currency      New Zealand dollar
                                               GDP           $ 7.6 Million
                                         Time zone                 UTC -11
                                   National anthem        Ko e Iki he Lagi
                                      Calling Code                     683
                                      Internet TLD                     .nu
                                             Map of Niue

   Niue (pronounced: "new-way") is an island nation located in the South
   Pacific Ocean. It is commonly known as "Rock of Polynesia". The natives
   call it the Rock. Although it is self-governing, it is in free
   association with New Zealand. This means that the sovereign in right of
   New Zealand is also the head of state of Niue, and most diplomatic
   relations are conducted by New Zealand on Niue's behalf. Niue is
   located 2,400 kilometres north-east of New Zealand in a triangle
   between Tonga, Samoa and the Cook Islands.

History

   European involvement in Niue began in 1774 with Captain James Cook's
   sighting (landing was refused) of what he named "Savage Island". Legend
   has it that Cook so named the island because the natives that "greeted"
   him were painted in what appeared to Cook and his crew to be blood.

   The next major arrival was the London Missionary Society in 1846. Niue
   was briefly a protectorate, the UK's involvement being passed on in
   1901 when New Zealand annexed the island. Independence in the form of
   self-government was granted by the New Zealand parliament in the 1974
   constitution.

   In January of 2004, Niue was hit by the fierce tropical storm Cyclone
   Heta which killed two people, caused extensive damage to the entire
   island, and wiped out most of South Alofi.

   Niue has licensed the .nu top-level domain on the internet to a private
   company, but the company and the government of Niue now dispute the
   amount and type of compensation that Niue receives from the licensor.

Politics

   The Niue Constitution Act 1974 (NZ) vests executive authority in Her
   Majesty the Queen in Right of New Zealand and the Governor-General of
   New Zealand. The constitution specifies that in everyday practice, it
   is exercised by a Cabinet of the Premier of Niue and three other
   ministers. The premier and ministers must be members of the Niue
   Assembly, the nation's legislative assembly.

   The assembly consists of twenty democratically elected members,
   fourteen by the electors of village constituencies. The remaining six
   are elected the same way, except several constituencies are combined
   for each seat. Electors must be New Zealand citizens, resident for at
   least three months, and candidates must have been electors, resident
   for twelve months. The speaker is elected from among the members.

Geography

   Niue is a 269 km² island located in the southern Pacific Ocean, east of
   Tonga. The geographic cordinates of Niue are 19°03′48″S, 169°52′11″W.

   There are three geographically outlying coral reefs within the
   Exclusive Economic Zone, that do not have any land area:
    1. Beveridge Reef, at 20°00'S, 167°48'W, 240 km southeast, submerged
       atoll drying during low tide, 9.5 km North-South, 7.5 km East-West,
       total area 56 km², no land area, lagoon 11 meters deep
    2. Antiope Reef, at 18°15'S, 168°24'W, 180 km southeast, is a circular
       plateau approximately 400 meters in diameter, with a least depth of
       9.5 meters
    3. Haran Reef (Harans Reef), at 21°33'S, 168°55'W, reported to break
       furiously, 294 km southeast
    4. Albert Meyer Reef, at 20°53'S, 172°19'W, almost 5 km long and wide,
       least depth 3 meters, 326 km southwest, not officially claimed by
       Niue
    5. Haymet Rocks, at 26°S, 160°W, 1273 km ESE, existence doubtful

   Niue is one of the world's largest coral islands. The terrain of Niue
   consists of steep limestone cliffs along the coast with a central
   plateau rising to about 60 metres above sea level. A coral reef
   surrounds the island, with the only major break in the reef being in
   the central western coast, close to the capital, Alofi. A notable
   feature of the island is the number of limestone caves found close to
   the coast.

   The island is roughly oval in shape (a diameter of about 18
   kilometers), with two large bays indenting the western coast (Alofi Bay
   in the centre, and Avatele Bay in the south). Between these is the
   promontory of Halagigie Point. A small peninsula, TePāPoint (or
   Blowhole Point) is located close to the settlement of Avatele in the
   southwest. Most of the island's population reside close to the west
   coast, around the capital and in the northwest.

   The island has a tropical climate, with most rainfall occurring between
   November and April.

Defence and foreign affairs

   Niue has been self-governing in free association with New Zealand since
   1974; Niue is fully responsible for internal affairs; New Zealand
   retains responsibility for foreign affairs and defence; however, these
   responsibilities confer no rights of control and are only exercised at
   the request of the Government of Niue. Niue has no regular indigenous
   military forces.

Economy

   Niue's economy is very small with a GDP of around $7.6 million
   estimated in 2000. Most economic activity centres around government and
   work on family plantations. It uses the New Zealand Dollar and relies
   on New Zealand aid to sustain its government.

   However, in August 2005 an Australian mining company, Yamarna
   Goldfields, has suggested that Niue might have the world's largest
   deposit of uranium. It has permission to drill on the island to confirm
   geological data that suggests the presence of a very large deposit. It
   will require government permission, however, to convert its prospecting
   licence to a mining lease.

   Foreign aid, principally from New Zealand and also from Australia, has
   been the island's principal source of income. Tourism generates some
   revenue, but there is very little industry on the island. Remittances
   from Niuean expatriates, generally from New Zealand, constitute a
   significant proportion of Niue's income as well.

   Government expenses consistently exceed revenue to a substantial
   degree, with aid from New Zealand subsidising public service payrolls.
   The government also generates some limited income from the sale of its
   postage stamps to foreign collectors. The government briefly flirted
   with the creation of "offshore banking" but, under pressure from the US
   Treasury, agreed to end its support for schemes designed to minimise
   tax in countries like New Zealand. Niue now provides an automated
   Companies Registration ( www.companies.gov.nu) which is administered by
   the New Zealand Ministry of Economic Development.

   Niue's economy suffered from the devastating tropical Cyclone Heta of
   2004.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Niue"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
