   #copyright

Norfolk Island

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Oceania
(Australasia)

   CAPTION: Territory of Norfolk Island


   Flag of Norfolk Island Coat of Arms of Norfolk Island
   ( Flag)                ( Coat of Arms)
                               Motto: Inasmuch
                           Anthem: Pitcairn Anthem
                         Location of Norfolk Island
                   Other Australian States and Territories
   Capital Kingston
   Largest city Burnt Pine
   Official languages English, Norfuk
   Government
    • Administrator
    • Chief Minister Const. monarchy
   Grant Tambling
   David Buffett
   Status
    • Self-governing territory External Territory
   Norfolk Island Act 1979
   Area
    • Total
    • Water (%)
   34.6  km² ( 226th)
   0%
   Population
    • 2004 est.
    • Density
   1,841 ( 232nd)
   53.2/km² ( 191st)
   Currency Dollar ( AUD)
   Time zone ( UTC + 11:30)
   Internet TLD .nf
   Calling code +6723

   Norfolk Island ( Norfuk: Norfuk Ailen) is a small inhabited island in
   the Pacific Ocean located between Australia, New Zealand and New
   Caledonia, and along with two neighbouring islands forms one of
   Australia's external territories.

   The Norfolk Island pine, a symbol of the island pictured in its flag,
   is a striking evergreen tree endemic to the island and is quite popular
   in Australia, where two related species also grow.

Geography

   Norfolk Island is located in the South Pacific Ocean, east of
   Australia. Norfolk Island is the main island of the island group the
   territory encompasses and is located at 29°02′S 167°57′E. It has an
   area of 34.6 km² (13.3 mi²), with no large-scale internal bodies of
   water but 32 km of coastline. The island's highest point is Mt. Bates
   (319 m above sea level), located in the northwest quadrant of the
   island. The majority of the terrain is suitable for farming and other
   agricultural uses. Philip Island, the second largest island of the
   territory, is located at 29°07′S 167°57′E, several kilometres south of
   the main island.

   The coastline of Norfolk Island consists, to varying degrees, of cliff
   faces. A downward slope exists towards Sydney Bay and Emily Bay, the
   site of the original colonial settlement of Kingston. There are no safe
   harbour facilities on Norfolk Island, with loading jetties existing at
   Kingston and Cascade Bay. All goods not domestically produced are
   brought in by ship, usually to Cascade Bay. Emily Bay, protected from
   the Pacific Ocean by a small coral reef, is the only safe area for
   recreational swimming, although surfing waves can sometimes be found in
   Ball Bay.

   The climate is subtropical and mild, with little seasonal
   differentiation. The island is a volcanic formation with mostly rolling
   plains.
   Panoramic view of Norfolk Island with Nepean and Philip Islands in the
   distance.
   Enlarge
   Panoramic view of Norfolk Island with Nepean and Philip Islands in the
   distance.
   Location of Norfolk Island

   The area surrounding Mt. Bates is preserved as the Norfolk Island
   National Park. The park, covering around 10% of the land of the island,
   contains remnants of the forests which originally covered the island,
   including stands of subtropical rainforest.

   The park also includes the two smaller islands to the south of Norfolk
   Island, Nepean Island and Philip Island. The vegetation of Philip
   Island was devastated due to the introduction during the penal era of
   pest animals such as pigs and rabbits, giving it a red-brown colour as
   viewed from Norfolk; however, pest control and remediation work by park
   staff has recently brought some improvement to the Philip Island
   environment.

   The major settlement on the Island is Burnt Pine, located predominantly
   along Taylor's Road, where the shopping centre, post office, liquor
   store, telephone exchange and community hall are located. Settlement
   also exists over much of the island, consisting largely of
   widely-separated homesteads.

   Government House, the official residence of the Administrator, is
   located on Quality Row in what was the penal settlement of Kingston.
   Other government buildings, including the court, Legislative Assembly
   and Administration, are also located there. Kingston's role is largely
   a ceremonial one, however, with most of the economic impetus coming
   from Burnt Pine.

History

Early history

   Norfolk Island was first settled by East Polynesian seafarers, either
   from the Kermadec Islands north of New Zealand, or from the North
   Island of New Zealand. They arrived in the fourteenth or fifteenth
   century, and survived for several generations before disappearing.
   Their main village site has been excavated at Emily Bay, and they also
   left behind stone tools, the Polynesian Rat, and banana trees as
   evidence of their sojourn. The final fate of these early settlers
   remains a mystery.

   The first European known to have sighted the island was Captain James
   Cook, in 1774, on his second voyage to the South Pacific on HMS
   Resolution. He named it after the Duchess of Norfolk, wife of Edward
   Howard, 9th Duke of Norfolk (1685-1777). The Duchess was dead at the
   time of the island's sighting by Cook, but Cook had set out from
   England in 1772 and could not have known of her May 1773 death.

   Cook went ashore on Tuesday 11 October 1774, and is said to have been
   impressed with the tall straight trees and flax-like plants. He took
   samples back to the United Kingdom and reported on their potential uses
   for the Royal Navy.

   Andrew Kippis as the biographer of this voyage puts it as follows: As
   the Resolution pursued her course from New Caledonia, land was
   discovered, which, on a nearer approach, was found to be an island, of
   good height, and five leagues in circuit. Captain Cook named it Norfolk
   Isle, in honour of the noble family of Howard (Fn.: It is situated in
   the latitude of 29° 2' 30" south, and in the longitude of 168° 16'
   east). It was uninhabited; and the first persons that ever set foot on
   it were unquestionably our English navigators. Various trees and plants
   were observed that are common at New Zealand; and in particular, the
   flax plant, which is rather more luxuriant here than in any other part
   of that country. The chief produce of the island is a kind of spruce
   pine, exceedingly straight and tall, which grows in great abundance.
   Such is the size of many of the trees that, breast high, they are as
   thick as two men can fathom. Among the vegetables of the place, the
   palm-cabbage afforded both a wholesome and palatable refreshment; and,
   indeed, proved the most agreeable repast that our people had for a
   considerable time enjoyed...

   At the time, the United Kingdom was heavily dependent on flax (for
   sails) and hemp (for ropes) from the shores of the Baltic Sea ports.
   Any threat to their supply endangered the United Kingdom's sea power.
   The UK also relied on timbers from New England for mainmasts, and these
   were not supplied after the American War of Independence. The
   alternative source of Norfolk Island for these supplies is argued by
   some historians, notably Geoffrey Blainey in The Tyranny of Distance,
   as being a major reason for the founding of the convict settlement of
   New South Wales by the First Fleet in 1788.

First penal settlement

   Before the First Fleet sailed to found a convict settlement in New
   South Wales, Governor Arthur Phillip's final instructions, received
   less than three weeks before sailing, included the requirement to
   colonize Norfolk Island to prevent it falling into the hands of France,
   whose naval leaders were also showing interest in the Pacific. When the
   fleet arrived at Port Jackson in January 1788, Phillip ordered
   Lieutenant Philip Gidley King to lead a party of fifteen convicts and
   seven free men to take control of the island and prepare for its
   commercial development. They arrived on 6 March 1788.

   It was soon found that the flax was difficult to prepare for
   manufacturing and no one had the necessary skills. An attempt was made
   to bring two Māori men to teach the skills of dressing and weaving
   flax, but this failed when it was discovered that weaving was
   considered women's work and the two men had little knowledge of it. The
   pine timber was found to be not resilient enough for masts and this
   industry was also abandoned.

   More convicts were sent, and the island was seen as a farm, supplying
   Sydney with grain and vegetables during its early years of
   near-starvation. However, crops often failed due to the salty wind,
   rats and caterpillars. The lack of a natural safe harbour hindered
   communication and the transport of supplies and produce.

   Manning Clark observed that "at first the convicts behaved well, but as
   more arrived from Sydney Cove, they renewed their wicked practices".
   These included an attempted overthrow of King in January 1789 by
   convicts described by Margaret Hazzard as "incorrigible rogues who took
   his 'goodwill' for weakness". While some convicts responded well to the
   opportunities offered to become respectable, most remained "idle and
   miserable wretches" according to Clark, despite the climate and their
   isolation from previous haunts of crime.

   The impending starvation at Sydney led to a great transplantation of
   convicts and marines to Norfolk Island in March 1790 on HMS Sirius.
   This attempt to relieve the pressure on Sydney turned to disaster when
   Sirius was wrecked and, although there was no loss of life, some stores
   were destroyed, and the ship's crew was marooned for ten months. This
   news was met in Sydney with “unspeakable consternation”. Norfolk Island
   was now further cut off from Sydney which, with the arrival of the
   Second Fleet with its cargo of sick and abused convicts, had more
   pressing problems to contend with.

   In spite of this the settlement grew slowly as more convicts were sent
   from Sydney. Many convicts chose to remain as settlers on the expiry of
   their sentence, and the population grew to over 1000 by 1792.

   Lieutenant governors of the first settlement:
     * 6 March 1788– 24 March 1790: Lieutenant Philip Gidley King
       (1758–1808)
     * 24 March 1790–Nov 1791: Major Robert Ross (c.1740–1794)
     * 4 November 1791–Oct 1796: Lieutenant Philip Gidley King
     * October 1796–Nov 1799: Captain John Townson (1760–1835)
     * November 1799–Jul 1800: Captain Thomas Rowley (c.1748–1806)
     * 26 June 1800– 9 September 1804: Major Joseph Foveaux (1765–1846)
     * 9 September 1804–January 1810: Lieutenant John Piper (1773–1851)
     * January 1810– 15 February 1813: Lieutenant Thomas Crane (caretaker)
     * 15 February 1813– 15 February 1814: Superintendent William
       Hutchinson

   Norfolk Island was governed by a succession of short-term commandants
   for the next 11 years, starting with King's replacement, Robert Ross
   1789-1790. When Joseph Foveaux arrived as Lieutenant Governor in 1800,
   he found the settlement in a most disorderly state of affairs, little
   maintenance having been carried out in the previous four years, and he
   set about building it up, particularly through public works and
   attempts to improve education.

   As early as 1794 King suggested its closure as a penal settlement as it
   was too remote and difficult for shipping, and too costly to maintain.
   By 1803 the Secretary of State, Lord Hobart, called for the removal of
   part of the Norfolk Island military establishment, settlers and
   convicts to Van Diemen's Land, due to its great expense and the
   difficulties of communication between Norfolk Island and Sydney. This
   was achieved more slowly than anticipated, due to reluctance of
   settlers to uproot themselves from the land they had struggled to tame,
   and compensation claims for loss of stock. It was also delayed by
   King's insistence on its value for providing refreshment to the
   whalers. The first group of 159 left in February 1805 and comprised
   mainly convicts and their families and military personnel, only four
   settlers departing. Between November 1807 and September 1808, five
   groups of 554 people departed. Only about 200 remained, forming a small
   settlement until the remnants were removed in 1813. A small party
   remained to slaughter stock and destroy all buildings so that there
   would be no inducement for anyone, especially from another European
   power, to visit that place.

   Between 15 February 1814 and 6 June 1825 the island lay abandoned.

Second penal settlement

   Commandants of the second settlement:
     * 6 June 1825–March 1826: Captain Richard Turton
     * March 1826–August 1827: Captain Vance Young Donaldson (1791–?)
     * August 1827–November 1828: Captain Thomas Edward Wright
     * November 1828–February 1829: Captain Robert Hunt
     * February 1829– 29 June 1829: Captain Joseph Wakefield
     * 29 June 1829–1834: Lieutenant-Colonel James Thomas Morisset
       (1782–1852)
     * 1834: Captain Foster Fyans (1790–1870) (Acting)
     * 1834–April 1839: Major Joseph Anderson (1790–1877)
     * April - July 1839: Major Thomas Bunbury (b. c1791)
     * July 1839 - March 1840: Major Thomas Ryan (b.c1790) (Acting)
     * 17 March 1840–1844: Captain Alexander Maconochie (1787–1860)
     * 8 February 1844– 5 August 1846: Major Joseph Childs
     * 6 August 1846– 18 January 1853: John Giles Price (1808–1857)
     * January 1853–September 1853: Captain Rupert Deering
     * September 1853– 5 May 1855: Captain H. Day
     * 5 May 1855– 8 June 1856: T.S. Stewart (Caretaker)

   In 1824 the British government instructed the Governor of New South
   Wales Thomas Brisbane to occupy Norfolk Island as a place to send “the
   worst description of convicts”. Its remoteness, seen previously as a
   disadvantage, was now viewed as an asset for the detention of the
   “twice-convicted” men, those who had committed further crimes since
   arriving in New South Wales. Brisbane assured his masters that “the
   felon who is sent there is forever excluded from all hope of return” He
   saw Norfolk Island as “the nec plus ultra of Convict degradation”.

   His successor, Governor Ralph Darling, was even more severe than
   Brisbane, wishing that “every man should be worked in irons that the
   example may deter others from the commission of crime” and “to hold out
   [Norfolk Island] as a place of the extremest punishment short of
   death”. Governor George Arthur, in Van Diemen's Land, likewise believed
   that “when prisoners are sent to Norfolk Island, they should on no
   account be permitted to return. Transportation thither should be
   considered as the ultimate limit and a punishment short only of death”.
   Reformation of the convicts was not seen as an objective of the Norfolk
   Island penal settlement.

   The evidence that has passed down through the years points to the
   creation of a "Hell in Paradise". A widespread and popular notion of
   the harshness of penal settlements, including Norfolk Island, has come
   from the novel For the Term of His Natural Life by Marcus Clarke, which
   appears to be based on the writings and recollections of witnesses and
   from the fictional writings of Price Warung.

   Following a convict mutiny in 1834, Father William Ullathorne, Vicar
   general of Sydney, visited Norfolk Island to comfort the mutineers due
   for execution. He found it “the most heartrending scene that I ever
   witnessed”. Having the duty of informing the prisoners as to who was
   reprieved and who was to die, he was shocked to record as “a literal
   fact that each man who heard his reprieve wept bitterly, and that each
   man who heard of his condemnation to death went down on his knees with
   dry eyes, and thanked God.”

   The 1846 report of magistrate Robert Pringle Stuart exposed the
   scarcity and poor quality of food, inadequacy of housing, horrors of
   torture and incessant flogging, insubordination of convicts, and
   corruption of overseers.

   Bishop Robert Willson visited Norfolk Island from Van Diemen's Land on
   three occasions. Following his first visit in 1846 he reported to the
   House of Lords who, for the first time, came to realise the enormity of
   atrocities perpetrated under the British flag and attempted to remedy
   the evils. Willson returned in 1849 and found that many of the reforms
   had been implemented. However, rumours of resumed atrocities brought
   him back in 1852, and this visit resulted in a damning report, listing
   atrocities and blaming the system, which invested one man at this
   remote place with absolute power over so many people.

   Only a handful of convicts left any written record and their
   descriptions (as quoted by Hazzard and Hughes) of living and working
   conditions, food and housing, and, in particular, the punishments given
   for seemingly trivial offences, are unremittingly horrifying,
   describing a settlement devoid of all human decency, under the iron
   rule of the tyrannical autocratic commandants.

   The actions of some of the commandants, such as Morisset and
   particularly Price appear to be excessively harsh. All but one were
   military officers, brought up in a system where discipline was
   inhumanely severe throughout the period of transportation. In addition,
   the commandants relied on a large number of military guards, civil
   overseers, ex-convict constables, and convict informers to provide them
   with intelligence and carry out their orders.

   Of the Commandants, only Alexander Maconochie appeared to reach the
   conclusion that brutality would breed defiance, as demonstrated by the
   mutinies of 1826, 1834 and 1846, and he attempted to apply his theories
   of penal reform, providing incentives as well as punishment. His
   methods were criticised as being too lenient and he was replaced, a
   move that returned the settlement to its harsh rule.

   The second penal settlement began to be wound down by the British
   Government after 1847 and the last convicts were removed to Tasmania in
   May 1855. It was abandoned because transportation to Van Diemen's Land
   had ceased in 1853 and was replaced by penal servitude in the United
   Kingdom.

Settlement by Pitcairn Islanders

   On 6 June 1856, another group of exiles arrived at Norfolk Island.
   These were the descendants of Tahitians and the HMAV Bounty mutineers,
   resettled from the Pitcairn Islands which had become too small for
   their growing population. The British government had permitted the
   transfer of the Pitcairners to Norfolk, which was thus established as a
   colony separate from New South Wales but under the administration of
   that colony's governor.

   The Pitcairn people occupied many of the buildings remaining from the
   penal settlements, and gradually established their traditional farming
   and whaling industries on the island. Although some families decided to
   return to Pitcairn in 1858 and 1863, the island's population continued
   to slowly grow as the island accepted settlers, often arriving with
   whaling fleets.

   In 1867, the headquarters of the Melanesian Mission of the Church of
   England were established on the island, and in 1882 a church of St.
   Barnabas was erected to the memory of the Mission's head Bishop John
   Coleridge Patteson, with windows designed by Burne-Jones and executed
   by William Morris. In 1920 the Mission was relocated from the island to
   the Solomon Islands to be closer to its target population.

20th century

   This stamp was issued in 1981 to commemorate the first landing of an
   aircraft at the island, Sir Francis Chichester's Gypsy Moth "Mme
   Elijah", at Cascade Bay on March 28, 1931
   Enlarge
   This stamp was issued in 1981 to commemorate the first landing of an
   aircraft at the island, Sir Francis Chichester's Gypsy Moth "Mme
   Elijah", at Cascade Bay on March 28, 1931

   After the creation of the Commonwealth of Australia in 1901, Norfolk
   Island was placed under the authority of the new Commonwealth
   government to be administered as an external territory.

   During World War II, the island was used as a key airbase and
   refuelling location between Australia and New Zealand. As the island
   fell within New Zealand's area of responsibility it was garrisoned by a
   New Zealand Army unit known as N Force. Norfolk Island did not,
   however, come under attack during the war.

   In 1979, Norfolk was granted self-government by Australia, under which
   the island elects a government which runs most of the island's affairs.
   As such, residents of Norfolk Island are not represented in the
   Commonwealth Parliament of Australia, making them the only group of
   residents of an Australian state or territory not represented there.

   As of 2006, a review is underway whereby the Australian Government is
   considering revising this model of government.

Politics

   Norfolk Island is the only non-mainland Australian territory to have
   achieved self-governance. The Norfolk Island Act, passed by the
   Parliament of Australia in 1979, is the Act under which the island is
   governed. The Australian Government maintains authority on the island
   through an Administrator (currently Grant Tambling) who is appointed by
   the Governor-General of Australia. A Legislative Assembly is elected by
   popular vote for a term of not more than three years, although
   legislation passed by the Australian Parliament can extend its laws to
   the territory at will, including the power to override any laws made by
   the Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly.

   The Assembly consists of nine seats, with electors casting nine equal
   votes, of which no more than four can be given to any individual
   candidate. It is a method of voting called a "weighted first past the
   post system". Four of the members of the Assembly form the Executive
   Council, which devises policy and acts as an advisory body to the
   Administrator. The current Chief Minister of Norfolk Island is David
   Buffett. All seats are held by independent candidates as Norfolk Island
   does not have political parties.

   The island's official capital is Kingston; however, Kingston functions
   mainly as a government centre and not as a settlement.

   The most important national holiday is Bounty Day, celebrated on 8
   June, in memory of the arrival of the Pitcairn Islanders in 1856.

   Local ordinances and acts apply on the island, where most laws are
   based on the Australian legal system. Australian common law applies
   when not covered by either Australian or Norfolk Island law. Suffrage
   is universal at age eighteen.

   As a territory of Australia, Norfolk Island does not have diplomatic
   representation abroad, or within the territory, and is also not a
   participant in any international organisations, other than sporting
   organisations.

   The flag is three vertical bands of green (hoist side), white, and
   green with a large green Norfolk Island pine tree centered in the
   slightly wider white band.

Constitutional status

   Controversy exists as to the exact status of Norfolk Island. Despite
   the island's status as a self-governing territory of Australia, some
   Islanders claim that it was actually granted independence at the time
   Queen Victoria granted permission to Pitcairn Islanders to re-settle on
   the island. These views have been repeatedly rejected by the Australian
   parliament's joint committee on territories, most recently in 2004, and
   were also rejected by the High Court of Australia in Berwick Limited v
   R R Gray Deputy Commissioner of Taxation.

   Disagreements over the island's relationship with Australia have been
   put in sharper relief by a 2006 review undertaken by the Australian
   government. Under the more radical of two proposed models proposed as a
   result of the review, the island's legislative assembly would be
   reduced to the status of a local council.

   The island is subject to separate immigration controls from the
   remainder of the nation.

   Australian citizens and residents from other parts of the nation do not
   have automatic right of residence on the island. Australian citizens
   must carry either a passport or a Document of Identity to travel to
   Norfolk Island. Citizens of all other nations must carry a passport to
   travel to Norfolk Island even if arriving from other parts of
   Australia. Non-Australians without a multiple entry visa to Australia
   (or authority to enter without a visa) will be refused entry if they
   try to return to mainland Australia from Norfolk Island.

   Residency on Norfolk Island requires sponsorship by an existing
   resident of Norfolk Island or a business operating on the island.
   Temporary residency may also be granted to skilled workers necessary
   for the island's services – examples are medical, government and
   teaching staff.

   Permanent residents of Norfolk Island may apply for Australian
   citizenship after meeting normal residence requirements and are
   eligible to take up residence in mainland Australia at any time through
   the use of a Permanent Resident of Norfolk Island visa. Children born
   on Norfolk Island are Australian citizens as specified by Australian
   nationality law.

   Medicare does not cover Norfolk Island. All visitors to Norfolk Island,
   including Australians, are recommended to purchase travel insurance.
   Serious medical conditions are not treated on the island; rather, the
   patient is flown back to mainland Australia, if necessary by the Royal
   Australian Air Force.

Crime

   Though usually peaceful, Norfolk Island has been the site of two
   murders in the 21st century so far . In 2002, Janelle Patton, an
   Australian living on the island, was found dead. Two years later, the
   Deputy Chief Minister of the island, Ivens "Toon" Buffett, was found
   shot dead, achieving the unlikely distinction of being the first
   Australian minister to be murdered in office. Other than these two
   events, crime rates are low on the island, although recent reports
   indicate that petty theft and dangerous driving are becoming more
   prevalent.

   The Patton murder remained a mystery, with many residents arguing that
   traditional loyalties would serve to prevent a local being charged. In
   February 2006, however, a New Zealand chef, Glenn McNeill, who had been
   working on the island at the time, was arrested and charged with
   Patton's murder. McNeill has claimed at hearings both in Australia and
   on Norfolk Island that he accidentally hit Patton with his car. The
   trial is currently continuing on the island.

Economy

   Tourism, the primary economic activity, has steadily increased over the
   years. As Norfolk Island prohibits the importation of fresh fruit and
   vegetables, a vast majority of produce is grown locally. Beef is both
   produced locally and imported.

   Norfolk Island claims an exclusive economic zone extending 200 nautical
   miles (370 km) and territorial sea claims to three nautical miles (6
   km) from the island. It provides the islanders with fish, its only
   major natural resource, though there is speculation that the zone may
   include oil and gas deposits.

   There are no major arable lands or permanent farmlands, though about
   25% of the island is a permanent pasture. There is no irrigated land.

   The island uses the Australian dollar as its currency.

Taxes

   Residents of Norfolk Island do not pay Australian federal taxes,
   creating a tax haven for locals and visitors alike. Since there is no
   income tax the island's legislative assembly raises money through an
   import duty.

Demographics

   The population of Norfolk Island was estimated in July 2003 to be
   1,853, with an annual population growth rate of 0.01%. In July 2003,
   20.2% of the population were 14 years and under, 63.9% were 15 to 64
   years and 15.9% were 65 years and over.

   Most Islanders are of Caucasian ancestry, being descendants of the
   Bounty mutineers as well as more recent arrivals from Australia and New
   Zealand. About half of the islanders can trace their roots back to
   Pitcairn Island.

   This common heritage has led to a limited number of surnames among the
   Islanders — a limit constraining enough that the island's telephone
   directory lists people by nickname (such as Cane Toad, Dar Bizziebee,
   Kik Kik, Lettuce Leaf, Mutty, Oot, Paw Paw, Snoop, Tarzan, and Wiggy).

   The majority of Islanders are Protestant Christians. In 1996, 37.4%
   identified as Anglican, 14.5% as Uniting Church, 11.5% as Roman
   Catholic and 3.1% as Seventh-day Adventist.

   Literacy is not recorded officially, but it can be assumed to be
   roughly at a par with Australia's literacy rate, as Islanders attend a
   school which uses a New South Wales curriculum, before traditionally
   moving to the mainland for further study.

   Islanders speak both English and a creole language known as Norfuk, a
   blend of 1700s-English and Tahitian. The Norfuk language is decreasing
   in popularity as more tourists travel to the island and more young
   people leave for work and study reasons; however, there are efforts to
   keep it alive via dictionaries and the renaming of some tourist
   attractions to their Norfuk equivalents. In April 2005, it was declared
   a co-official language of the island.

   Emigration is growing as many Islanders take advantage of the close
   ties between Norfolk and Australia and New Zealand. The sole school on
   the island provides education to Australian Year 12; therefore, any
   student seeking to complete tertiary study must travel overseas.
   Additionally, the small economy of the island causes many skilled
   workers to emigrate as well.

Transport and communications

   There are no railways, waterways, ports or harbours on the island.
   Loading jetties are located at Kingston and Cascade, but ships cannot
   get close to either of them. When a supply ship arrives, it is emptied
   by whaleboats towed by launches, five tonnes at a time. Which jetty is
   used depends on the prevailing weather on the day. The jetty on the
   leeward side of the island is often used. If the wind changes
   significantly during unloading/loading, the ship will move round to the
   other side. Visitors often gather to watch the activity when a supply
   ship arrives.

   There is one airport, Norfolk Island Airport.

   There are 80 km of roads on the island, "little more than country
   lanes"; local law gives cows the right of way.

   As of 2004, 2532 telephone main lines are in use, a mix of analog
   (2500) and digital (32) circuits. Norfolk Island's country code is 672.
   Undersea coaxial cables link the island with Australia, New Zealand and
   Canada. Satellite service is planned.

   There is one TV station featuring local programming Norfolk TV, plus
   transmitters for ABC TV and Southern Cross Television.

   The Internet country code top-level domain ( ccTLD) is .nf.

Culture

   While there was no "indigenous" culture on the Island at the time of
   settlement, the Tahitian influence of the Pitcairn settlers has
   resulted in some aspects of Polynesian culture being adapted to that of
   Norfolk, including the hula dance. Local cuisine also shows influences
   from the same region.

   Islanders are traditionally "outdoorsy" people, with fishing and other
   acquatic pursuits being common pastimes, an aspect which has become
   more noticeable as the island becomes more accessible to tourism. Most
   island families have at least one member involved in primary production
   in some form.

   As all the Pitcairn settlers were related to each other, Islanders have
   historically been informal both to each other and to visitors. The most
   noticeable aspect of this is the "Norfolk Wave", with drivers waving to
   each other (ranging from a wave using the entire arm through to a
   raised index finger from the steering wheel) as they pass.

   Religious observance remains an important part of life for most
   Islanders, particularly the older generations. Businesses tend to be
   closed on Mondays, for example.

   One of the island's residents is the novelist Colleen McCullough, whose
   works include The Thorn Birds and the Masters of Rome series as well as
   Morgan's Run, set, in large part, on Norfolk Island.

   Helen Reddy also moved to the island for a period but was denied a long
   term entry permit and has since moved on.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norfolk_Island"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
