   #copyright

Norwich

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

                                                           City of Norwich


                                                                   Norwich

                                                                   Norwich
                                                      Shown within Norfolk
                                                                 Geography
                                                       Status: City (1195)
                                        Government Region: East of England
                                            Administrative County: Norfolk
                                                                     Area:
                                                      - Total Ranked 322nd
                                                                39.02 km²
                                                        Admin. HQ: Norwich
                                                Grid reference: TG 232 085
                                                            ONS code: 33UG
                                                              Demographics
                                                               Population:
                                                       - Total (2005 est.)
                                                    - Density Ranked 149th
                                                                   127,600
                                                              3,270 / km²
                                                    Ethnicity: 96.8% White
                                                                  Heraldry
                                              Arms of Norwich City Council
                                               Arms of the City of Norwich
     Gules a Castle triple-towered and domed Argent in base a Lion passant
                                                              guardant Or.
                                                                  Politics
                                              Leadership: Leader & Cabinet
                                           Executive: Labour (council NOC)
                                           MPs: Charles Clarke, Ian Gibson
                                                 Post Office and Telephone
                                                              Postcode: NR
                                                      Dialling Code: 01603

   Norwich is a city in East Anglia, in Eastern England, and the regional
   administrative centre and county town of Norfolk.

   The suburban area of the city expands beyond its borough boundary, with
   large populated areas on most sides, particularly Thorpe St. Andrew on
   the eastern side. The Parliamentary seats cross over into adjacent
   local government districts. The population for the Norwich Urban
   sub-area was 174,047 in 2001. It is the 27th largest settlement in
   England using this measure. However, the population for the whole
   built-up area was 194,839 in 2001 (census figures), up 5.1% from the
   1991 figure of 185,421. It is the 32nd-largest urban area in England.

History

Roman

   The Romans had their regional capital at Venta Icenorum on the river to
   the south which is now at modern day Caistor St Edmund.

Early English/Norman Conquest

   There are two suggested models of development for Norwich. It is
   possible that three separate early Anglo-Saxon settlements, one on the
   north of the river and two either side on the south, joined together as
   they grew or that one Anglo-Saxon settlement, on the north of the
   river, emerged mid 7th century after the abandonment of the previous
   three. The ancient city was a thriving centre for trade and commerce in
   East Anglia in 1004 AD when it was raided and burnt by Swein Forkbeard
   the Viking. Mersian coins and sherds of pottery from the Rhineland
   dating to the 8th century suggest that long distance trade was
   happening long before this. Between 924-939 AD Norwich became fully
   established as a town due to the fact that it had its own mint. The
   word Norvic appears on coins across Europe minted during this period,
   the reign of King Athelstan. The Vikings were a strong cultural
   influence in Norwich for 40-50 years at the end of the 9th century,
   setting up an Anglo-Scandinavian district towards the south end of
   present day King Street.

   At the time of the Norman Conquest the city was one of the largest in
   England. The Domesday Book states that it had approximately twenty-five
   churches and a population of around 5-10,000. It also records the site
   of an Anglo-Saxon church in Tombland, the site of the Anglo-Saxon
   market place and the later Norman cathedral. Norwich continued to be a
   major centre for trade, the River Wensum being a convenient export
   route to the sea. Quern stones, and other artifacts, from Scandinavia
   and the Rhineland have been found during excavations in Norwich city
   centre which date from the 11th century onwards.

   The main area of the city south of the Wensum was destroyed by the
   construction of the Norman castle (see Norwich Castle) during the 1070s
   creation of a "New" or "French" borough. During the erection of the
   castle a new town was built up around it including the market place
   that is still present today.

   In 1096 Bishop Losinga, then Bishop of Thetford, began construction of
   the cathedral. Limestone was imported from Caen. To get it up to the
   cathedral site a canal was cut from the river all the way up to the
   east wall. He then moved his See there to what became the cathedral
   church for the Diocese of Norwich. The bishop of Norwich still signs
   himself Norvic.

Middle Ages

   By the middle of the 14th century the City Walls, about two and a half
   miles (4 km) long had been completed. These, along with the river,
   enclosed a large area, larger than that of the City of London. In the
   early part of the fifteenth century, Julian of Norwich wrote her famous
   work.

   In 1144, the Jews of Norwich were falsely accused of ritual murder
   after a boy ( William of Norwich) was found dead with stab wounds. This
   was the first incidence of blood libel in England. The story was turned
   into a cult. William acquiring the status of martyr and was
   subsequently canonized as a saint - this attracted crowds of pilgrims,
   bringing wealth to the local church. On February 6, 1190, all the Jews
   of Norwich were massacred except for a few who found refuge in the
   castle.

   The wealth generated by the wool trade throughout the Middle Ages
   resulted in the construction of many fine churches. Norwich still has
   one of the highest number of medieval churches in Western Europe.
   Norwich Market had trading links from Scandinavia to Spain. Around this
   time, the city was made a county corporate.

   The great immigration of 1567 brought a substantial Walloon community
   of weavers to Norwich. Norwich has been the home of various dissident
   minorities, notably the French Huguenot and the Belgian Walloon
   communities in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. These
   immigrants were known locally as 'strangers' (there being a hall in the
   city called 'Strangers' Hall' for temporary residence, now a museum)
   and it seems that generally they were accepted as part of the community
   without animosity. Primarily through trading connections with mainland
   Europe, ideas of religious reform and radical politics were introduced
   to Norwich.

English Civil Wars to Victorian Era

   The eastern counties were profoundly Parliamentarian in nature and
   Norwich followed suit, at the cost of some discomfit to the Lord Mayor,
   a Royalist, and the Bishop Joseph Hall a moderate but targeted because
   of his position.

   The Norwich Canary was first introduced into England by Flemish
   refugees fleeing from Spanish persecution in the 1500s. They brought
   with them not only advanced working skills in textiles but also their
   pet canaries, which they began to breed. The canary is the emblem of
   the city's football team, Norwich City F.C., nicknamed "The Canaries".

   Until the 19th Century, Norwich remained a major provincial capital
   and, alongside Bristol, was rated closely after London in terms of
   importance and wealth.

   Norwich's geographical isolation was such that until 1845 when a
   railway connection was established, it was often quicker to travel to
   Amsterdam by boat than to London. The railway was brought to Norwich by
   Morton Peto who also built the line onto Great Yarmouth.

   From 1808 to 1814 Norwich hosted a station in the shutter telegraph
   chain which connected the Admiralty in London to its naval ships in the
   port of Great Yarmouth.

Present day

Culture

   The University of East Anglia on the outskirts of Norwich was one of
   the New Universities founded in 1963, following the Robbins Report. UEA
   adopted the city's motto of independence Do different and is especially
   well-known for its creative-writing programme; established by Malcolm
   Bradbury and Angus Wilson, its graduates include Kazuo Ishiguro and Ian
   McEwan. The university campus houses the Sainsbury Centre for Visual
   Arts. The city also has an art college, the Norwich School of Art &
   Design, located in the centre. Additionally, the Norfolk and Norwich
   University Hospital on the city's periphery at Colney was opened in
   2001.
   Norwich City skyline
   Enlarge
   Norwich City skyline

   Norwich Theatre Royal has been on its site for nearly 250 years. The
   1300-seat theatre hosts a mix of national touring productions including
   musicals, dance, drama, family shows, stand-up comedians, opera and
   pop.

   Each year the Norfolk and Norwich Festival celebrates the arts, drawing
   many visitors into the city from all over the eastern England.

   The Forum, designed by Michael Hopkins and Partners and opened in 2002
   is a building designed to house the Millennium Library, a replacement
   for the Norwich Central Library building which burned down in 1994, and
   the regional headquarters and television centre for BBC East. The
   building provides a venue for exhibitions, concerts and events,
   although the city still lacks a dedicated concert venue.
   The Forum, housing (among other things) the Millennium Library and the
   BBC's Eastern England News Rooms
   Enlarge
   The Forum, housing (among other things) the Millennium Library and the
   BBC's Eastern England News Rooms

   The Millennium Library contains the 2nd Air Division Memorial Library,
   a collection of material about American culture and the American
   relationship with East Anglia, especially the role of the United States
   Air Force on UK air bases throughout the Second World War and Cold War.
   Much of the collection was lost in the 1994 fire, but the collection
   has been restored by contributions from many veterans of the war, both
   European and American.

   Recent attempts to shed the backwater image of Norwich and market it as
   a popular tourist destination, as well as a centre for science,
   commerce, culture and the arts, have included the refurbishment of the
   Norwich Castle Museum and the opening of the Forum. The proposed new
   slogan for Norwich, England's Other City, has been the subject of much
   discussion and controversy - and it remains to be seen whether it will
   be finally adopted. A number of signs at the entrance to the city still
   display the traditional phrase - "Norwich - a fine city."

Business and shopping

   Norwich City Hall
   Enlarge
   Norwich City Hall
   Norwich Market (before renovation)
   Enlarge
   Norwich Market (before renovation)

   The city's economy, originally chiefly industrial with shoemaking a
   large sector, has changed throughout the eighties and nineties to a
   service-based economy. Norwich Union, an Aviva company, still dominates
   these, but has been joined by other insurance and financial services
   companies.

   Norwich Market is an ancient market place, established by the Normans
   between 1071 and 1074, and is today the largest six days a week open
   air market in England. The market has recently undergone redevelopment
   and modernising.

   New developments on the former Boulton and Paul site include the
   Riverside entertainment complex with nightclubs and other venues
   featuring the usual national leisure brands. Nearby, the football
   stadium is being upgraded with more residential property development
   alongside the river Wensum.

   Castle Mall, a shopping mall designed by local practice Lambert, Scott
   & Innes and opened in 1993, presents an ingenious solution to the
   problem of sensitively creating new retail space in a historic
   city-centre environment - the building is largely buried underground
   and in the side of a hill.

   The new Chapelfield shopping mall has been built on the site where the
   Caleys (later Rowntree Mackintosh and Nestlé) chocolate factory once
   stood. This opened in late September 2005, and is described as 'a major
   new shopping experience', featuring a new three-floor flagship House of
   Fraser department store. The new shopping mall, which was the largest
   to open in Britain in 2005, has been criticised as unnecessary and
   damaging to local businesses; its presence has prompted smaller
   retailers to band together to promote the virtues of independent shops.

   In August 2006 it was reported by the Javelin Group that Norwich was
   one of the top five retail destinations in the UK, and in October 2006
   the city centre was voted the best in the UK, in a shopping
   satisfaction survey run by Goldfish Credit Card.

   Archant, formerly known as Eastern Counties Newspapers (ECN) is a
   national publishing group that has grown out of the city's local
   newspaper, the Norwich Evening News and the regional Eastern Daily
   Press (EDP).

   Norwich has long been associated with the manufacture of mustard.
   Colman's was founded in 1814 and continues to operate from its factory
   at Carrow.

Entertainment

   Satirical comedian Steve Coogan located his fictional, unbearably vain,
   cheesy broadcaster ' Alan Partridge' in Norfolk, specifically hosting
   the pre-breakfast show on the fictional independent station 'Radio
   Norwich', which since then has been created, although not surprisingly
   "Up With The Partridge" is not broadcast. It exploited the county's
   reputation as being somewhat detached from modern trends, past its
   prime, and rather peripheral to national life.

   Other comic entertainers who have drawn comedy from that stereotype
   include Allan Smethurst ' The Singing Postman' and The Kipper Family
   lately represented by 'son' Sid Kipper, though these are associated
   with Norfolk in general and not just the City. These have been joined
   by The Nimmo Twins.

   Independent radio stations include Radio Broadland (formerly Broadland
   102), Classic Gold Amber and 99.9 Radio Norwich. BBC Radio Norfolk and
   the University of East Anglia's Livewire 1350 also broadcast to the
   city.

   A new independent radio station, Radio Norwich, was launched at the end
   of June 2006, broadcasting on 99.9 FM. There is also a thriving
   Community Radio station which is soon to begin its permanent tenure on
   the Norwich airwaves called Future Radio.

   Norwich has a thriving music scene based around local venues such as
   the Norwich Arts Centre and the Marquee. The city is host to many
   artists that have achieved national and international recognition such
   as Bearsuit, Cord, Tim Bowness, Sennen, Magoo, KaitO and The Sadtowns.
   There are also some established record labels in Norwich such as Hungry
   Audio, Burning Shed, Wilde Club Records and Mummy Where's The Milkman.

Sport

   The principal local football team is Norwich City FC, also known as the
   Canaries (majority-owned by celebrity chef Delia Smith); their ground
   is at Carrow Road. They have a strong East Anglian rivalry with Ipswich
   Town FC.

   Norwich also has a rugby club, the Norwich Lions.

Perception

   Norwich is occasionally portrayed by the media as a city out-of-step
   with national trends (see Alan Partridge); This is primarily due to its
   geographic isolation which has contributed greatly to its "unspoilt"
   and insular character.

   Despite this perception, Norwich has a long history of political
   radicalism and is by no means a conservative city. With 9 seats,
   Norwich City Council has the largest number of Green Party councillors
   anywhere in the country. The largest number of seats, however, is held
   by the Labour Party with 16; the Liberal Democrats are in second place
   with 12. The Conservative Party is currently in fourth place with only
   2 councillors.

   In November 2006 the city was voted the greenest in the UK.

   According to the 2001 census, 27.8% of respondents in Norwich stated
   that they were of "no religion", the highest percentage in England.

   There has always been a general tolerance of "incomers" by the "native"
   population of Norwich and Norfolk, though becoming a "local" is still
   reckoned to take decades. There are good rail links from Norwich
   railway station to Peterborough and London, and direct services to
   Cambridge were added in 2004.

   A large proportion of the population of Norwich are users of the
   Internet. A recent article has suggested that, compared with other UK
   cities, it is top of the league for the percentage of population who
   use the popular Internet auction site eBay. The city has also unveiled
   the biggest free Wi-Fi network in the UK, which opened in July 2006.

Geography

Infrastructure

Roads

   Norwich railway station
   Enlarge
   Norwich railway station

   Norwich is connected to Peterborough via King's Lynn by the A47, the
   port of Ipswich by the A140, and Cambridge (and the motorway M11 to
   London) by the A11. Norwich is currently the largest population centre
   in the UK not to be connected to any other centre by an unbroken dual
   carriageway.

Rail

   Rail links to the rest of the country are via London Liverpool Street
   Station and Peterborough. Local lines also run to destinations
   including Great Yarmouth, Lowestoft and Sheringham and Cambridge.

   Norwich formerly had three stations running to a number of other local
   destinations, but now the rail terminus is at Thorpe Station.

Air

   Norwich International Airport is a feeder to KLM's Schiphol hub. FlyBe,
   Air SouthWest, Eastern Airways, and Bristow Helicopters all serve
   Norwich, in addition to a strong holiday charter flight business. The
   airport was originally the RAF airfield at Horsham St Faith. This was
   once the home of Air UK, which grew out of Air Anglia and was then
   absorbed by the Dutch airline KLM.

Water

   The River Yare is navigable from the sea at Great Yarmouth all the way
   to Trowse, south of the city. From there the River Wensum is navigable
   into Norwich.

Bridges

     * Novi Sad Friendship Bridge

Tourism

   Norwich Cathedral.
   Enlarge
   Norwich Cathedral.
   Elm Hill.
   Enlarge
   Elm Hill.

   Norwich is a popular destination for a city break; major attractions
   include Norwich Cathedral, the cobbled streets and museums of old
   Norwich, a Norman Castle and the ultra modern Forum. Norwich is also
   one of the Uk's top ten shopping destinations, with a mix of high
   street names, individual shops and one of the largest outdoor markets
   in England.

Travellers' comments

   In 1507 the poet John Skelton ( 1460- 1529) wrote of two destructive
   fires in his Lament for the City of Norwich.

          All life is brief, and frail all man's estate. City, farewell: I
          mourn thy cruel fate.

   Thomas Fuller in his The Worthies of England described the City in 1662
   as -

          Either a city in an orchard or an orchard in a city, so equally
          are houses and trees blended in it, so that the pleasure of the
          country and the populousness of the city meet here together. Yet
          in this mixture, the inhabitants participate nothing of the
          rusticalness of the one, but altogether the urbanity and
          civility of the other.

   Celia Fiennes ( 1662- 1741) visited Norwich in 1698 and described it as

          a city walled full round of towers, except on the river side
          which serves as a wall; they seem the best in repair of any
          walled city I know.

   She also records that held in the City three times a year were-

          great fairs...to which resort a vast concourse of people and
          wares a full trade.

   Norwich being a rich, thriving industrious place full of weaving,
   knitting and dyeing.

   Daniel Defoe in his Tour of the whole Island of Great Britain (1724)
   wrote of the City-

          the inhabitants being all busy at their manufactures, dwell in
          their garrets at their looms, in their combing-shops, so they
          all them, twisting-mills, and other work-houses; almost all the
          works they are employed in being done within doors.

   John Evelyn ( 1620- 1706) Royalist, Traveller and Diarist wrote to Sir
   Thomas Browne-

          I hear Norwich is a place very much addicted to the flowery
          part.

   He visited the City as a courtier to King Charles II in 1671 and
   described it thus -

          The suburbs are large, the prospect sweet, and other amenities,
          not omitting the flower-garden, which all the Inhabitants excel
          in of this City, the fabric of stuffs, which affords the
          Merchants, and brings a vast trade to this populous Town.

   George Borrow in his semi-autobiographical novel Lavengro (1851) wrote
   of Norwich as-

          A fine old city, perhaps the most curious specimen at present
          extant of the genuine old English Town. ..Thre it spreads from
          north to south, with its venerable houses, its numerous gardens,
          its thrice twelve churches, its mighty mound....There is an old
          grey castle on top of that mighty mound: and yonder rising three
          hundred feet above the soil, from amongst those noble forest
          trees, behold that old Norman master-work, that cloud-enriched
          cathedral spire ...Now who can wonder that the children of that
          fine old city are proud, and offer up prayers for her
          prosperity?

   Borrow wrote far less favourably of the City in his translation of
   Faust-

          They found the people of the place modelled after so unsightly a
          pattern, with such ugly figures and flat features that the devil
          owned he had never seen them equalled, except by the inhabitants
          of an English town, called Norwich, when dressed in their
          Sunday's best.

   In 1812, Andrew Robertson wrote to the painter Constable-

          I arrived here a week ago and find it a place where the arts are
          very much cultivated....some branches of knowledge, chemistry,
          botany, etc. are carried to a great length. General literature
          seems to be pursued with an ardour which is astonishing when we
          consider that it does not contain a university, as is merely a
          manufacturing town.

Famous names associated with the city

   Throughout its history, Norwich has been associated with radical
   politics, nonconformist religion, political dissent and liberalism.
   Between 1790 and 1840, many of the famous names associated with the
   City flourished. These include:
     * Elizabeth Bentley.{ 1763- 1839}.Authoress wrote " Tales for
       Children in Verse".Lived at 45 St St.Stephen's Square.
     * George Borrow ( 1803- 1881), writer and traveller. In his youth
       Borrow was resident at Willow Lane. He attended the Norwich King
       Edward school. Borrow recollects his youth in the city and
       conversations with the philologist and translator of German
       Romantic literature, William Taylor in his semi-autobiographical
       novel Lavengro.
     * Sir Thomas Browne ( 1605- 1682). medical doctor, polymath scholar,
       encyclopedist and philosopher with interests in Biblical
       scholarship and the esoteric. The stylistic purity and stupendous
       learning displayed in Browne's varied prose in the spheres of
       religion, science and art are minor classics of World literature.
     * Edith Cavell ( 1865- 1915) was born in Swardeston, 4 miles south of
       Norwich. She was a World War I nurse who was executed by firing
       squad by the Germans for helping allied prisoners escape in
       violation of military law. She is buried on Life's Green, on the
       east side of Norwich Cathedral.
     * John Crome and Joseph Stannard, along with John Sell Cotman,
       established the first art movement outside of London. The Norwich
       school of painters were influenced by the achievements of Dutch
       landscape painting and the beauty of the rural hinterland
       surrounding Norwich.
     * William Crotch ( 1775- 1847). Composer, artist and teacher.
       Norwich's Mozart. He gave daily public organ recitals aged two and
       a half. Crotch played God Save the King before the King aged three.
       He had performed at every major town in England and Scotland by the
       age of seven. Crotch became Organist of Christ Church, Oxford and
       for fifty years he was Oxford's Professor of Music. Unlike Mozart,
       however, his precocious musical talents failed to mature to genius.
     * Pablo Fanque ( 1796 - 1871). The first Black Circus Proprietor in
       Britain was born in the city.
     * Elizabeth Fry ( 1780- 1845). The prison reformer and leading Quaker
       was born in Gurney Court in Magdalen Street and was one of several
       philanthropists associated with the city. Her portrait is upon the
       Series E (2005) Bank of England £5 note.
     * Joseph John Gurney ( 1788- 1847) was a banker and philanthropist
       who worked with his sister Elizabeth Fry (see above) in prison
       reform. He was also active in the movement to abolish the slave
       trade and a member of the temperance movement.
     * Robert William Bilton Hornby ( 1821- 1884) was a noted local
       antiquarian, priest and lord of the manor from the City of York. He
       was ordained a deacon at Norwich in 1844.
     * Julian of Norwich. Medieval Christian mystic and contemporary of
       Chaucer. Julian is the author of The revelations of Divine Love the
       first book written by a woman in the English language. Julian's
       writings are well-represented by the scholarly website
       www.umilta.net.
     * Robert Kett. Norwich's very own Robin Hood or Wat Tyler. Kett was a
       Norfolk landowner from Wymondham who lead the peasant's revolt in
       1549 in the name of the common man against the corrupt Norfolk
       landowners. This eventually lead to the Battle of Dussindale
       against the King's forces on the 27th August 1549 in which 3000 of
       Kett's men were killed. He was hanged for Treason at Norwich Castle
       on the 7th December 1549.
     * James Martineau ( 1805 - 1900) Philosopher and brother to Harriet.
     * Harriet Martineau ( 1802- 1876). The daughter of a Norwich
       manufacturer of Huguenot descent, she suffered from ill-health and
       deafness throughout her life. A devout Unitarian, her writings
       include Illustrations of political economy (1832-1834). Harriet
       Martineau supported the abolitionist campaign in the United States
       writing Society in America (1837). She translated writings by
       Auguste Comte. Her first novel was entitled Deerbrook ( 1839). A
       radical in religion she published the anti-theological Laws of
       Man's Social Nature ( 1851) and Biographical sketches ( 1869).
     * Admiral Horatio Nelson attended the Norwich School from 1767 to
       1768. He was born in nearby Burnham Thorpe.
     * Amelia Opie ( 1769- 1853), Norwich author and Quaker. In 1825 she
       drastically changed her life as a socialite, party-goer, and
       attendant at literary soirees, to become a Quaker.
     * Sir James Edward Smith botanist, natural historian and one-time
       owner of the Linnean collection of Carolus Linnaeus
     * William Smith ( 1756 – 1835), Whig politician, dissenter and
       abolitionist, M.P. for Norwich from 1807.

Contemporary names associated with Norwich

     * Bill Bryson, American writer and humorist, lives near Wymondham,
       near Norwich.
     * Cathy Dennis, famous Singer/ Songwriter who was born in Norwich in
       1969.
     * Ralph Firman, former Formula 1 Driver was born in Norwich in 1975.
       He and his family live in nearby Attleborough, and he was educated
       at Gresham's School. Currently racing in the A1 Grand Prix series
       for Ireland, for which he qualifies through his Mother's Irish
       nationality.
     * Stephen Fry, comedian, author, actor and filmmaker, studied at
       Norwich City College, and is a Norwich City F.C. fan.
     * Trisha Goddard, talk show host lives in Norwich.
     * Andy Green OBE, a Wing Commander in the Royal Air Force, is the
       current holder of the world land speed record, having piloted the
       ThrustSSC to the first ever supersonic speed on land in the Black
       Rock Desert, USA on 25 September 1997.
     * Paul Jones, blues singer and BBC Radio 2 presenter.
     * Becky Mantin, ITV Weather presenter and This Morning reporter.
     * Bernard Matthews, founder of the eponymous meat company.
     * Sir John Mills, born in North Elmham in Norfolk. Mills was educated
       at the Norwich High School for Boys. He also had Football (Soccer)
       trials with Norwich City F.C. in the 1920s before moving into
       acting.
     * Beth Orton, Award-winning singer/songwriter, was born in Dereham
       and spent much of her childhood in Norwich.
     * Philip Pullman, British writer was born in Norwich on 19 October
       1946. Best-selling author of the His Dark Materials trilogy of
       fantasy novels and a number of other books.
     * Delia Smith, majority shareholder of Norwich City Football Club
       (note: she was born in Surrey and lives in Suffolk). The television
       cook who taught us all how to boil eggs to perfection, and make
       toast that isn't "sweaty" (i.e. place it in a toast rack - don't
       lie it down), has been a favourite of the city ever since she
       arrived, helping save the club from going into administration.
     * Chris Sutton, Football player (striker); joint top scorer for the
       Premier League in 1997/8; formerly the record English transfer (at
       £5 million from Norwich to Blackburn in 1994).
     * Tim Westwood, BBC Radio 1 Rap DJ and presenter of popular MTV show
       "Pimp My Ride (UK)". Grew up in and around Norwich (his father was
       the bishop of Peterborough, in the neighbouring county of
       Cambridgeshire) and went to Norwich School.

Architecture

   Norwich is considered to have a wealth of historical architecture. The
   medieval period is represented by the 11th-century Norwich Cathedral,
   12th-century castle (now a museum) and a large number of parish
   churches. During the Middle Ages, 57 churches stood within the city
   wall; 31 still exist today. This gave rise to the common (in the city)
   saying that it had a church for every week of the year, and a pub for
   every day. Most of the medieval building is in the city centre. From
   the 18th century the pre-eminent local name is Thomas Ivory, who built
   the Assembly Rooms (1776), the Octagon Chapel (1756), St Helen's House
   (1752) in the grounds of the Great Hospital, and innovative speculative
   housing in Surrey Street (c. 1761). Ivory should not be confused with
   the Irish architect of the same name and similar period.

   The 19th century saw an explosion in Norwich's size and much of its
   housing stock, as well as commercial building in the city centre, dates
   from this period. The local architect of the Victorian and Edwardian
   periods who has continued to command most critical respect was George
   Skipper (1856-1948). Examples of his work include the headquarters of
   Norwich Union on Surrey Street; the Art Nouveau Royal Arcade; and the
   Hotel de Paris in the nearby seaside town of Cromer. The neo-Gothic
   Roman Catholic cathedral on Earlham Road, begun in 1882, is by George
   Gilbert Scott Junior and his brother, John Oldrid Scott.

   The city continued to grow through the 20th century and much housing,
   particularly in areas further out from the city centre, dates from that
   century. The first notable building post-Skipper was the city hall by
   CH James and SR Pierce, opened in 1938. Bombing during the Second World
   War, while resulting in relatively little loss of life, caused
   significant damage to housing stock in the city centre. Much of the
   replacement postwar stock was designed by the local authority
   architect, David Percival. However, the major postwar development in
   Norwich from an architectural point of view was the opening of the
   University of East Anglia in 1964. Originally designed by Denys Lasdun
   (his design was never completely executed), it has been added to over
   subsequent decades by major names such as Norman Foster and Rick
   Mather.

Twinned cities

   The city is twinned with the following cities:
     * France Rouen, France
     * Germany Koblenz, Germany
     * Serbia Novi Sad, Serbia
     * Nicaragua El Viejo, Nicaragua

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norwich"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
