   #copyright

Nottingham

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

                       City of Nottingham
                  Image:EnglandNottingham.png
                           Geography
   Status:            Unitary, City (1897)
   Region:            East Midlands
   Ceremonial County: Nottinghamshire
   Historic county:   Nottinghamshire
   Area:
   - Total            Ranked 274th
                      74.61 km²
   Admin. HQ:         Nottingham
   Grid ref.:         SK 57 39
   ONS code:          00FY
                          Demographics
   Population:
   - Total (2005 est.)
   - Density          Ranked 27th
                      278,700
                      3,735 / km²
   Ethnicity:         84.9% White
                      6.5% S. Asian
                      4.3% Afro-Caribbean
                            Politics
                Arms of Nottingham City Council
   Nottingham City Council
   nottinghamcity.gov.uk
   Leadership:        Leader & Cabinet
   Executive:         Labour
   MPs:               Graham Allen, John Heppell, Alan Simpson

   Nottingham is a city (and county town of Nottinghamshire) in the East
   Midlands of England. The centre of Nottingham lies on the River Leen
   and its southern boundary follows the course of the River Trent, which
   flows from Stoke to the Humber. According to the 2001 census,
   Nottingham has an estimated city population of 275,100 which increased
   to an estimated 278,700 in 2005, while the Nottingham Urban Area
   conurbation (which includes surrounding suburbs outside the city
   boundary, and neighbouring towns) has a population of 666,358 ( ).
   Nottingham is a member of the English Core Cities Group.

   The heart of Nottingham City Centre is the Old Market Square, which is
   undergoing a major redevelopment during 2006. Most of the main shopping
   streets surround the square. The Council House, whose
   disproportionately tall dome can be seen for miles around, is at the
   top of the square. The inside of the Council House is the Exchange
   Arcade, a shopping centre. A bohemian quarter of the city known as
   Hockley has arisen in recent years, situated close to the Lace Market
   area. Nottingham receives a lot of tourism, mostly because of the
   legend of Robin Hood, visiting Sherwood forest and Nottingham Castle.

History

   The first evidence of settlement dates from pre-Roman times, and it is
   clear that the Romans also lived in the area.

   An early name for Nottingham was "Tigguo Cobauc" which means "a place
   of cavy dwellings." Founded by Anglo-Saxon invaders after 600 AD, parts
   of the settlement have included man-made caves, dug into soft
   sandstone. The Saxons were led by a chieftain named Snot . Snot brought
   together his people in an area where the historic Lace Market in the
   City can now be found. The place was called "Snotingaham" —literally,
   "the home of Snot's people" (Inga = the people of; Ham = home). As with
   many place names throughout England, the word has since been modified,
   to "Nottingham".

   Nottingham was later captured by the Danes (Vikings) and in the 9th
   century became one of the five boroughs (fortified towns) of the
   Danelaw.

   In the 11th century, Nottingham Castle was constructed on a sandstone
   outcrop by the River Trent. The Anglo-Saxon settlement on the hill now
   occupied by the Lace Market around St. Mary's Church developed into the
   English Borough of Nottingham and housed its Town Hall and Courts. A
   settlement also developed around the castle on the hill opposite and
   was the French borough supporting the Normans in the Castle.
   Eventually, the space between was built on as the town grew and the
   Market Square became the focus of Nottingham several centuries later.

   The town became a county corporate in 1449, giving it effective
   self-government, in the words of the charter, "for eternity".
   Robin Hood memorial statue in Nottingham.
   Enlarge
   Robin Hood memorial statue in Nottingham.

   The legend of Robin Hood first arose in the Middle Ages. Robin Hood is
   said to have lived in Sherwood Forest, to the north of the town, with
   the Sheriff of Nottingham as his greatest enemy. The current Sheriff of
   Nottingham, Matthew Keyworth, is a largely ceremonious figure with no
   real jurisdiction. While the legends are almost certainly untrue,
   particularly in their details, they have had a major impact on
   Nottingham, with Robin Hood imagery a popular choice for local
   businesses and many modern tourist attractions exploiting the legend.
   The Robin Hood Statue in Nottingham is within walking distance from the
   Old Market Square.

   No fewer than three pubs in Nottingham claim the title of England's
   Oldest Pub. The contenders for the crown are Ye Olde Trip To Jerusalem
   near the castle, The Bell on the Old Market Square, and The Salutation
   on Maid Marian Way. Ye Olde Trip To Jerusalem is supposedly named for
   its role as a major meeting point for those going on the Crusades in
   the Middle Ages. However, its claim may be due partly to the
   questionable date of 1189 painted on the side of the inn. A recent
   television documentary tested the three claimants and found that, while
   each has its own evidence, none can claim exclusivity. The Trip, while
   the oldest building and oldest location, was for most of its early life
   a brewery and not a public house. The Salutation sits on the oldest
   recognised public house site, but the current building is comparatively
   recent. The Bell, although not in such an antiquated location, does
   boast the oldest public house building. There is also conflicting
   information available: dendrochronology dating evidence from roof
   timbers in the Salutation give a date for the building of c. 1420 with
   similar dates for the Bell. Ultimately, the roots of the multiple
   claims can be traced to various subtleties of definition in terms such
   as "public house" and "inn".

   Nottingham was one of the boroughs reformed by the Municipal
   Corporations Act 1835, and at that time consisted of the parishes of
   Nottingham St Mary, Nottingham St Nicholas and Nottingham St Peter. It
   was expanded in 1877 by adding the parishes of Basford, Brewhouse Yard,
   Bulwell, Radford, Sneinton, Standard Hill and parts of the parishes of
   West Bridgford, Carlton, Wilford ( North Wilford). In 1889 Nottingham
   became a county borough under the Local Government Act 1888. Nottingham
   was extended in 1933 by adding Bilborough and Wollaton, parts of the
   parishes of Bestwood Park and Colwick, and a recently developed part of
   the Beeston urban district. A further boundary extension was granted in
   1951 when Clifton and Wilford (south of the River Trent) were
   incorporated into the city.

Caves of Nottingham

   Caves of Nottingham under Castle
   Enlarge
   Caves of Nottingham under Castle

   The Nottingham cave network was substantially expanded and became home
   to a large proportion of the poorer populace, particularly those
   involved in the tanning industry. The caves were gradually abandoned in
   the 19th and early part of the 20th century, but came into use again as
   air raid shelters during World War II. A section of the cave network
   under the Broadmarsh shopping centre is now open as a tourist
   attraction, and some parts are still used as pub cellars.

   Another section of the caves, under the castle, is still in regular use
   as the indoor rifle range of Nottingham Rifle Club. In addition, Ye
   Olde Trip to Jerusalem Inn, a pub that claims to be the oldest in
   Britain (see above), is partly built into the cave system below the
   castle. Although the pub's building only dates from the 16th or 17th
   century, the caves themselves may date to the 11th century and could
   have been the site of the brewhouse for the castle.

St. Anne's Well, or Robin Hood's Well

   St. Anne's Well/Robin Hood's Well is a historic well linked to the
   legend of Robin Hood which is located around two miles north-east of
   Nottingham. Public knowledge of this well dates back to at least 1287.
   It was originally called the "Owswell", but by 1500 it was usually
   called, "Robin Hood's Well", due to a reputed brawl that occurred on
   the site involving Robin Hood and his men. By 1800, the water from the
   well was said to have healing powers:

          The water is very old. It will kill a toad. It is used by those
          who are afflicted with rheumatic pains.

   During the 1800s the area was the site of a rowdy public house (until
   numerous complaints forced its closure) before becoming a tea room.
   When part of a railway line was extended over the site in 1887, all of
   the buildings occupying the site were demolished. In 1987, the well was
   discovered in the car park of a public house in Wells Road. Action is
   now being undertaken by some in an attempt to restore this historically
   important site.

   There is a drawing by local artist Thomas Cooper Moore (1827 - 1901) of
   St. Anne's Well and its associated buildings circa 1856.

Architectural & Historical Contexts

   Nottingham is relatively unusual among big manufacturing cities in
   Britain in having a medieval and pre-industrial past of equal
   importance to its more recent one. Unfortunately, this is not readily
   apparent from the city’s buildings. Nottingham Castle, founded by
   William the Conqueror, famed through the Middle Ages as one of the
   country’s finest strongholds, and where Charles I raised the Royal
   Standard in 1642 no longer exists, and has been replaced by a classical
   ducal palace. Of the medieval castle only the (restored) gatehouse, and
   the ruined remains of some walls/foundations, survive. Further to the
   east, Old Market Square, focal point of the city, and reputedly the
   largest open square of any English city is being redeveloped.

   The city descends from north to south, and eventually to the River
   Trent, though the river itself is not a central feature. The western
   third of the city houses the castle and several new tall buildings
   along with some harmonious streets around the Playhouse mainly occupied
   by professional firms, and the unimposing Nottingham Cathedral (Roman
   Catholic). The central third leads down from the Nottingham Trent
   University building past the Theatre Royal to Old Market Square, which
   has the Council House to the east. This was built in the 1920s to
   display civic pride, ostentatiously utilising Baroque columns and
   statues of two lions; the Exchange Arcade underneath, containing
   boutique shops, is a small but pleasant covered area. Streets lead
   south to the Broad Marsh Shopping Centre, a bus terminus. The
   Canalside, further south of this, and adjacent to the railway station
   and several new but sympathetically designed modern offices, is an
   inviting redevelopment with bars and restaurants. The eastern third of
   the city contains the Victoria Shopping Centre and the Victoria centre
   flats (1972), at 75m high, the highest building in the city.
   Interesting areas of this part of the city are Hockley Village (see
   below) and the Lace Market, where the old red-brick warehouses have
   been utilised for other purposes, creating an attractive aspect to this
   part of the city. The Parish Church of St Mary the Virgin is in this
   area: it and the adjacent Shire Hall are two of the more interesting
   buildings from the city’s pre-industrial past.

   Probably the most interesting and attractive building (though not
   really within the city centre but within city limits) is Wollaton Hall,
   about 4km to the west of the centre, just north of Nottingham
   University campus.

Geography

   Nottingham is located at 52°58′00″N, 01°10′00″W (52.9667,-1.1667) ^1.

   The City of Nottingham boundaries are tightly drawn and exclude several
   suburbs and towns that are usually considered part of Greater
   Nottingham, including Arnold, Carlton, West Bridgford, Beeston and
   Stapleford. Outlying towns and villages include Hucknall, Eastwood,
   Tollerton, Ruddington, Ilkeston and Long Eaton of which the last two
   are in Derbyshire. The geographical area of Greater Nottingham includes
   several local authorities: Gedling, Broxtowe, Rushcliffe, Ashfield,
   Erewash and Amber Valley.

Education

   The University of Nottingham and Highfields Park
   Enlarge
   The University of Nottingham and Highfields Park

   Nottingham is home to two universities: the University of Nottingham
   and Nottingham Trent University including over 40,000 full-time
   students. The University of Nottingham's teaching hospital, Queen's
   Medical Centre, is the largest hospital in the UK. Nottingham Trent
   University is one of the country's new generation of trade schools.

   Other notable educational institutions include the further education
   college New College Nottingham, Confetti Institute of Creative
   Technologies, Nottingham High School, Bilborough College, Nottingham
   High School for Girls, Chilwell School - a specialist in maths, media
   arts and computing, The Nottingham Bluecoat School and Technology
   College, South Nottingham College and Djanogly City Academy and
   Greenwood Dale Technology College. Nottingham is home and headquarters
   of the National College for School Leadership.

   The Nottingham School of Fashion is a fashion school respected around
   the country and produced the designer Paul Smith.

Industry

   Nottingham is home to the headquarters of many well known companies.
   One of the best known is Boots the Chemists, founded in the city by
   John Boot in 1849 and substantially expanded by his son Jesse Boot
   (Lord Trent).

   Other large current employers include the credit reference agency
   Experian, the energy company Powergen, the tobacco company John Player
   & Sons betting company Gala Group, Siemens, Speedo, high street
   opticians Vision Express, games and publishing company Games Workshop
   and the American Credit card company Capital One, whose European
   offices are situated by the side of Nottingham station. Nottingham is
   also the home of the Inland Revenue and the DSA.

   Although Boots itself is no longer a direct player in the
   pharmaceutical industry, a combination of former Boots researchers and
   university spin-off companies have spawned a thriving
   pharmaceutical/science/biotechnology sector. BioCity, the UK’s biggest
   bioscience innovation and incubation centre, sits in the heart of the
   city and houses around thirty science-based companies. Other notable
   companies in the sector include ClinPhone and Pharmaceutical Profiles.
   The city has recently been made one of the UK's six Science Cities.

   Until recently bicycle manufacturing was a major industry, the city
   being the birthplace of Raleigh Cycles in 1886 and later joined by
   Sturmey-Archer, the creator of 3-speed hub gears. However, Raleigh's
   factory on Triumph Road, famous as the location for the filming of
   Saturday Night and Sunday Morning, was demolished in Summer 2003 to
   make way for the University of Nottingham's expansion of Jubilee
   Campus.

   Nottingham is also joint headquarters of Paul Smith, the high fashion
   house.

   The schools and aerial photographers, H Tempest Ltd were Nottingham
   based for many years, until relocating to St Ives (Cornwall) around
   1960. A skeleton office remained for many years in the original
   building next to Mundella School.

   Many of the UKs railway ticket machines and platform departure boards
   run software written by Atos Origin in their offices in Nottingham.
   Other major industries in the city include engineering, textiles,
   knitwear and electronics. Nottingham is gradually increasing the number
   of software developers in the city, Free Radical, Serif, Reuters are
   all based in the city.

   Nottingham is progressively changing from an industrial city to one
   based largely in the service sector. Tourism—particularly from the
   United States and the Far East—is becoming an increasingly significant
   part of the local economy.

Economy

   This is a chart of trend of regional gross value added of Nottingham at
   current basic prices published (pp.240-253) by Office for National
   Statistics with figures in millions of British Pounds Sterling.
   Year Regional Gross Value Added Agriculture Industry Services
   1995 4,149                      2           1,292    2,855
   2000 5,048                      1           912      4,135
   2003 5,796                      -           967      4,828

Shopping

   Nottingham is positioned 3rd in the shopping league in England, behind
   Birmingham and London but ahead of Manchester and Leeds. The approved
   £400 million Broadmarsh Shopping Centre redevelopment could change this
   all, moving Nottingham back to its 2nd spot in the retail area.

   There are two main shopping centres in Nottingham: Victoria Centre and
   Broadmarsh with smaller centres being the The Exchange Arcade and the
   Flying Horse Walk (the latter once a famous hotel). The Bridlesmith
   Gate area has extensive designer shops, and is also the home of the
   original Paul Smith boutique. There are also various side streets and
   alleys that hide some interesting and often overlooked buildings and
   shops such as Poultry Walk, West end Arcade, Hurts Yard and others,
   with many specialist shops.
   Debenhams, Old Market Square
   Enlarge
   Debenhams, Old Market Square

   Many department stores also operate in Nottingham. It includes names
   such as House of Fraser, John Lewis, Debenhams, and Marks & Spencer.
   John Lewis was until recently called Jessops, even though owned by John
   Lewis since 1933. It changed its name in 2002 after a refurbishment.
   Hockley Village caters to alternative tastes with shops like Ice Nine
   and Void, famous across the city. The Broadmarsh Shopping Centre is set
   to be redeveloped to a greater standard in the near future.

Transport

   Nottingham is close to the M1 motorway and is also well-served by train
   services operated by Midland Mainline from Nottingham station to
   London.

   Nottingham East Midlands Airport, served by low-cost international
   airlines, makes the city easily accessible from other parts of the
   world providing daily services to many principal European destinations
   such as Paris, Frankfurt, Berlin, and Amsterdam, internal flights to
   Edinburgh and Belfast and limited services to trans-continental
   destinations such as Barbados, Mexico, Sanford and Florida. Nearby
   Robin Hood Airport Doncaster Sheffield also provides domestic European
   and Trans-Atlantic services. Birmingham International airport is about
   one hour's drive away, providing flights to most principal European
   cities, New York, Boston, Toronto, Montreal, Dubai and the Indian
   Sub-Continent.

   Nottingham is bucking the national trend, as in the city bus use is
   growing while employment rates are rising . This is a result of the
   city council, as well as the two principal operators, Nottingham City
   Transport (NCT) and Trent Barton, making multi-million-pound
   investments in some of the newest fleets in the country. NCT was also
   the first transport operator in the UK to use RFID technology for its
   EasyRider bus passes, introduced in 2000. The two operators are also
   frequent winners of the National Bus Operator of the Year award.
   Robin Hood Line Train in Nottingham
   Enlarge
   Robin Hood Line Train in Nottingham

   The re-opening of the Robin Hood Line to passengers rather than just
   freight, between 1993 and 1998 linked Nottingham with its close
   neighbours of Hucknall, Kirkby-in-Ashfield, Sutton-in-Ashfield and
   Mansfield. Other lines connect the city to Beeston, Burton Joyce,
   Netherfield and Carlton. Nottingham has direct services to Birmingham,
   Manchester, Sheffield, Liverpool and Norwich.

   Nottingham Express Transit a light rail system opened in 2004, running
   from Hucknall in the north to the city's railway station. An additional
   spur to/from Phoenix Park serves as a Park and Ride Station close to
   the M1 motorway (Junction 26). Phase 2 development of the system will
   add 2 new lines will to the southern and western suburbs to create a 3
   line network.

Crime

   The City of Nottingham is widely reported to be one of the most crime
   hit areas of England, and many crimes show statistics that are several
   times higher than the English average. A nationwide survey in 2006 said
   that Nottingham topped the crime rankings for police statistics on
   murders, burglaries, and vehicle crime, and "had almost five times the
   level of crime as the safest town in the rankings". The survey was
   initially condemned as inaccurate by Nottingham City Council and
   Nottinghamshire police force due largely to the use of out of date
   (2001) population figures, although a revised survey based on 2004
   population estimates backed up the original rankings. While the crime
   figures in the city are high, initiatives introduced to tackle the
   levels of crime appear to be having an effect, with a 2006 Home Office
   survey showing that the overall level of crime in the city is down by
   12% since 2003.

Culture

   A view of the Nottingham skyline
   Enlarge
   A view of the Nottingham skyline

   Nottingham has two main theatres, the Nottingham Playhouse and the
   Theatre Royal (which also houses the Royal Concert Hall) and a third
   worthy of attention at University of Nottingham's Lakeside Art Centre.
   There are also several art galleries which often receive national
   attention, particularly the Nottingham Castle Museum, the Angel Row
   gallery (attached to the main library) alongside the university
   Djanogly Gallery and Wollaton Park's Yard Gallery. Both of the city's
   universities also put on a wide range of theatre, music and art events
   open to the public throughout the year.
   Nottingham Playhouse and Anish Kapoor's Sky Mirror
   Enlarge
   Nottingham Playhouse and Anish Kapoor's Sky Mirror

   The city has several multiplex cinemas alongside two arts cinemas. The
   independent cinemas are the Screen Room, which claims to be the world’s
   smallest cinema (at just 21 seats) and the Broadway Cinema, which comes
   highly recommended by Quentin Tarantino who held the British premiere
   of Reservoir Dogs here.

   There is a classical music scene with long established groups such as
   the city's Symphony Orchestra, Philharmonic Orchestra, Harmonic
   Society, Bach Choir, Early Music Group Musica Donum Dei and the
   Symphonic Wind Orchestra giving regular performances in the city.

   The annual Goose Fair in October is always popular being one of the
   largest fairs in the country. More generally the city is regarded as
   having a diverse nightlife with many clubs and bars in the centre of
   town that are popular amongst both the local and student communities.

   Nottingham won the Britain in Bloom competition, in the Large City
   category, in 1997, 2001 and 2003. It also won the Entente Florale Gold
   Award in 1998.

   Nottingham is known for its large teenage alternative scene ( Rock,
   punk, emo etc.), the heartland of which is Old Market Square which is
   currently being redeveloped, to their dismay. Another major hotspot is
   Rock City. The Sumac Centre based in Forest Fields has for many years
   supported local upcoming musicians, artists and film makers. It also
   supports a variety of campaign groups.

Tourism

   Popular tourist attractions in Nottingham include Nottingham Castle,
   City of Caves, The Galleries of Justice, and The Tales of Robin Hood on
   Maid Marian Way, as well as the City's ancient pubs. There are a number
   of parks and gardens around Nottingham that are popular among tourists
   and residents. These include Wollaton Park (over 500 acres) near to the
   University Highland Park on the Nottingham University campus, Colwick
   Park, which includes the racecourse, and the Nottingham Arboretum,
   Forest Recreation Ground and Victoria Park which are both in or close
   to the city centre. Sherwood Forest, Rufford Country Park, Creswell
   Crags and Clumber Park are further away from the city itself. A new
   park is being developed in the city at the Eastside City development.

Entertainment

   The 2,500-capacity Nottingham Royal Concert Hall and 9,500-capacity
   Nottingham Arena attract the biggest names in pop, rock and R&B. For
   less mainstream acts and a generally more intimate atmosphere,
   Nottingham boasts a selection of great smaller venues including
   Junktion 7, The Old Angel, the award-winning dedicated rock music venue
   Rock City and Rock City's cozy sister venues The Rescue Rooms, The
   Social and Stealth, amongst others. In total these venues, their packed
   listings and close proximity arguably make Nottingham the capital of
   live music in the UK.
   The National Ice Centre and Nottingham Arena
   Enlarge
   The National Ice Centre and Nottingham Arena

   Nottingham has a great reputation for a lively pub and club scene.

   In the 1980s, Nottingham was barely mentioned in the Good Food Guide;
   but now there are several restaurant entries and a range of cuisine
   reflecting the ethnic diversity of the city. The Nottingham Restaurant
   Awards play a leading role in promoting the industry.
   New Buildings on the South Side of the Lace Market area.
   Enlarge
   New Buildings on the South Side of the Lace Market area.

   The large number of students in the city bolsters the nighttime
   entertainment scene. There are several well established areas of the
   city centre for entertainment such as Lace Market, Hockley, The
   Waterfront and The Corner House.

Sport

   Nottingham is home to two football teams: Nottingham Forest (currently
   in the Football League One) (who under their most famous manager, the
   late Brian Clough, won the European Cup twice in succession) and Notts
   County (who play in Football League Two). The latter are the oldest
   Football League team in the UK, and indeed the world, having been
   founded in 1862 (a year before the establishment of the Football
   Association).

   Trent Bridge cricket ground, located across the river in West
   Bridgford, Rushcliffe, is the home of Nottinghamshire County Cricket
   Club, who were winners of the 2005 County Championship and runners-up
   in the 2006 Twenty20 cup competition. Trent Bridge is a major venue for
   international Test matches, and also hosts other important cricketing
   events such as the Twenty20 cup Finals and regular One-Day
   International games. The ground, which has won architectural awards for
   the design of some of its newer stands, also houses a cricket academy,
   a hotel, and a gym, and also uniquely features not one, but two public
   houses built within the ground itself.

   All three famous sports venues are within sight of each other even
   though the River Trent separates Trent Bridge and Forest's stadium
   (known as the City Ground and next to the cricket ground) from Notts
   County's ground, Meadow Lane . As a curiousity Meadow Lane is actually
   in the City of Nottingham and the City Ground is in the County of
   Nottingham the river forming the boundary. Forest should not be
   confused with The Forest which is an (open) green space where Goose
   Fair (see above) is held; however, the team take their name from this
   open space, having been founded there in 1865. This makes Forest the
   third oldest team in the league.

   The National Ice Centre, a large ice skating rink; the city's links to
   ice skating can be traced back to arguably its most famous children of
   recent times, Olympic ice dancing champions Jayne Torvill and
   Christopher Dean who collected a unanimous 6.0 score at the 1984 Winter
   Olympics at Sarajevo. The NIC is used as a training and competition
   venue for speed skating, sledge hockey and figure skating and receives
   an annual grant from bodies such as Sport England to maintain and fund
   these sports.

   The NIC is the home of the Nottingham Panthers ice hockey club, founded
   in 1946 and currently one of the biggest and best supported clubs in
   the United Kingdom. There is a thriving junior ice hockey programme
   which is also based at the centre. Since 2001, Nottingham has been the
   host city of the annual ice hockey Play-Off Championship Finals
   weekend, which attracts fans from many different parts of the country.

   The city's rugby union side, Nottingham R.F.C. are currently based in
   Beeston but are currently preparing a new venue in West Bridgford.

   There is a large tennis centre, where the annual Samsung Open is held
   in the weeks immediately prior to Wimbledon and has been used as
   warm-up practice by various tennis stars.

   The National Water Sports Centre is based at Holme Pierrepont, with a
   2000m regatta lake for rowing, canoeing and sailing, and a white water
   slalom course fed from the river. A number of other sailing, rowing and
   canoeing clubs are also based along the River Trent, as is the
   boatbuilder Raymond Sims.

   Every Year since 1981 Nottingham has played host to the 'Robin Hood
   Marathon' taking in many of the city's historic and scenic sights. The
   race is ran alongside a Half Marathon and a Fun Run among other events
   and is widely considered to be the second best Marathon in the UK.

Religion

   In Nottingham one can find places of worship for all the major world
   religions, including Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Sikhism and Taoism.
   The Synagogue on Shakespeare Street is particularly well appointed.

   Nottingham is generally regarded as a cathedral city, with Roman
   Catholic Cathedral of St. Barnabas on Derby Road. Designed by the
   architect Augustus Welby Northmore Pugin, was consecrated in 1844 it is
   the cathedral church for the Roman Catholic Diocese of Nottingham which
   covers Derbyshire, Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire and Lincolnshire.

   Nottingham's Anglicans are in the Diocese of Southwell and Nottingham,
   based at Southwell Minster in Southwell. Nottingham has three historic
   parish churches all of which date back to medieval times. St. Mary the
   Virgin, in the Lace Market is the oldest foundation (dating from the
   eighth or ninth centuries) but the building is at least the third on
   the site dating from 1377 to 1485. St. Mary's is considered the mother
   church of the City and Civic Services are held here, including the
   welcome to the new Lord Mayor of Nottingham each year. St. Peter's in
   the heart of the city is the oldest building in continuous use in
   Nottingham with traces of building starting in 1180. St. Nicholas' was
   rebuilt after destruction in the Civil War.

   Non-conformism was strong from the seventeenth century onwards and a
   variety of chapels and meeting rooms proliferated throughout the town.
   Sadly many of these grand buildings have been demolished, including
   Halifax Place Chapel, but some have been re-used, notably the Unitarian
   Chapel on High Pavement which is now a public house.

   William Booth, the founder of the Salvation Army, was born in
   Nottingham in 1829.

Dwellings within and around Nottingham

                                   Districts within Nottinghamshire
                            Image:Nottinghamshire Ceremonial Numbered.png
                            1                                   Rushcliffe
                            2                                     Broxtowe
                            3                                     Ashfield
                            4                                      Gedling
                            5                          Newark and Sherwood
                            6                                    Mansfield
                            7                                    Bassetlaw
                            8                                   Nottingham

Within the City of Nottingham

     * Alexandra Park
     * The Arboretum
     * Aspley
     * Bakersfield
     * Bilborough
     * Bulwell
     * Basford
     * Bestwood Park
     * Clifton
     * Colwick
     * Dunkirk
     * Forest Fields
     * Hockley
     * Hyson Green
     * Lace Market
     * Lenton
     * Lenton Abbey

                       * Lenton
                       * Lenton Abbey
                       * Mapperley
                       * Mapperley Park
                       * Mapperley Plains
                       * The Meadows
                       * Nottingham City Centre
                       * The Park
                       * Radford
                       * Rise Park
                       * Sherwood
                       * Sneinton
                       * St Anns
                       * Strelley
                       * Top Valley
                       * Wilford
                       * Wollaton

Around the City of Nottingham

     * Arnold
     * Beeston
     * Bulcote
     * Burton Joyce
     * Carlton
     * Chilwell
     * Eastwood
     * Edwalton
     * Gedling
     * Holme Pierrepont
     * Hucknall
     * Ilkeston (Derbyshire)

                              * Kimberley
                              * Kirkby-in-Ashfield
                              * Long Eaton (Derbyshire)
                              * Netherfield
                              * Nuthall
                              * Redhill
                              * Ruddington
                              * Sandiacre (Derbyshire)
                              * Stapleford
                              * Toton
                              * Trowell
                              * West Bridgford
                              * Woodthorpe

Twin Cities

     * Belgium - Ghent, Belgium
     * Zimbabwe - Harare, Zimbabwe
     * Germany - Karlsruhe, Germany
     * Slovenia - Ljubljana, Slovenia
     * Belarus - Minsk, Belarus
     * People's Republic of China - Ningbo, China

Famous People from Nottingham

   D. H. Lawrence, world famed author (1906)
   Enlarge
   D. H. Lawrence, world famed author (1906)

   Famous people born in or near Nottingham include (sorted by DOB):
     * ( c1550) William Lee, inventor of the stocking frame
     * (1763) George Africanus Famous Nottingham entrepreneur
     * (1793) George Green (of Green's Mill), mathematician and physicist,
       famed for Green's theorem
     * (1829) William Booth, founder of The Salvation Army
     * (1850) Jesse Boot, who nationalised Boots the Chemists, which was
       founded by his father, (1815) John Boot
     * (1935) Stella Rimington, the first female head of MI5, educated at
       Nottingham High School for Girls
     * (1946) Harold Shipman, the serial killer
     * (1947) Paul Smith, fashion designer

   Authors and poets
     * (1785) Henry Kirke White poet
     * (1788) The poet Lord Byron resided at Newstead Abbey and is buried
       at nearby Hucknall along with his mathematical daughter (1815) Ada
       Lovelace
     * (1885) D. H. Lawrence, internationally famous author, born in
       Eastwood and educated at Nottingham High School
     * (1928) Alan Sillitoe, an Angry Young Author
     * (1957) Robert Harris (novelist), author of Fatherland [1992],
       Enigma [1995], Archangel [1998], Pompeii [2003] and Imperium [2006]

   Musicians
     * (1940) John Crocker clarinet and saxophone with Chris Barber's Jazz
       Band until 2003
     * (1944) Alvin Lee guitarist for Ten Years After
     * (1948) Ian Paice drummer for Deep Purple
     * (1959) Corinne Drewery lead singer of Nottingham group Swing Out
       Sister
     * (1964) Sandy Burnett record producer
     * (19??) Digby "Dig" Pearson, British musician and founder of Earache
       Records, was born and raised in Nottingham, which is still the base
       of operations for the label in the UK
     * Also, four famed musical groups formed in or near Nottingham are
       the aforementioned Ten Years After, Paper Lace, Tindersticks,
       Stereo MCs and Six By Seven.
     * The Industrial punk-metal band Pitchshifter formed in Nottingham.
     * The punk-rock band Consumed formed in Nottingham.

   Actors
     * (1919) Donald Pleasence
     * (1947) Richard Beckinsale
     * (1949) Su Pollard
     * (19??) Janine Duvitski
     * (1977) Samantha Morton
     * (1983) HRH Prince William's Official Lookalike - Matthew Turpin
       (Has starred in numerous t.v shows and films including ' What a
       Girl Wants (film)' alongside Colin Firth

   Presenters
     * (1955) Dale Winton
     * Dennis McCarthy

   Sports people
     * (1957) Jayne Torvill and (1958) Christopher Dean, Olympic ice
       skating gold medalists
     * (1963) Steve Hodge former Nottingham Forest, Tottenham, Leeds
       United, Aston Villa, QPR, Leyton Orient and England footballer
     * (1971) Andy Cole, a key member of Manchester United's multi
       trophy-winning side of the late 1990s
     * (19??, 19??) Anthony Hamilton and Michael Holt, professional
       snooker players, the former of which was formerly ranked in the
       world's top 16.
     * (1973) Chris Sutton, former Chelsea F.C., Blackburn Rovers, and
       Celtic footballer
     * (1977) Carl Froch, professional boxer.
     * (1983) Jermaine Pennant, a former Notts County player and now a
       Liverpool F.C. first team player
     * (1983) Jermaine Jenas midfielder for Tottenham Hotspur

   Politicians
     * (1940) Kenneth Clarke, Nottingham High School Educated ex-
       Chancellor of the Exchequer (1993-1997)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nottingham"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
