   #copyright

Nutmeg

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Food and agriculture

                  iNutmeg
   Myristica fragrans
   Myristica fragrans
         Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Plantae
   Division: Magnoliophyta
   Class:    Magnoliopsida
   Order:    Magnoliales
   Family:   Myristicaceae
   Genus:    Myristica
             Gronov.

                                   Species

   About 100 species, including:
     * Myristica argentea
     * Myristica fragrans
     * Myristica malabarica

   The nutmegs Myristica are a genus of evergreen trees indigenous to
   tropical southeast Asia and Australasia. They are important for two
   spices derived from the fruit, nutmeg and mace.
   Mace within nutmeg fruit
   Mace within nutmeg fruit

   Nutmeg is the actual seed of the tree, roughly egg-shaped and about
   20-30 mm long and 15-18 mm wide, and weighing between 5 and 10 grams
   dried, while mace is the dried "lacy" reddish covering or arillus of
   the seed.

   Several other commercial products are also produced from the trees,
   including essential oils, extracted oleoresins, and nutmeg butter (see
   below).

   The pericarp (fruit/pod) is used in Grenada to make a jam called Morne
   Delice. In Indonesia, the fruit is sliced finely, cooked and
   crystallised to make a fragrant candy called manisan pala ("nutmeg
   sweets").

   The most important species commercially is the Common or Fragrant
   Nutmeg Myristica fragrans, native to the Banda Islands of Indonesia; it
   is also grown in the Caribbean, especially in Grenada. Other species
   include Papuan Nutmeg M. argentea from New Guinea, and Bombay Nutmeg M.
   malabarica from India; both are used as adulterants of M. fragrans
   products.

Culinary uses

   Nutmeg and mace have similar taste qualities, nutmeg having a slightly
   sweeter and mace a more delicate flavor. Mace is often preferred in
   light-coloured dishes for the bright orange, saffron-like colour it
   imparts. It is nice in cheese sauces and is best grated fresh (see
   nutmeg grater).

   In Indian cuisine, nutmeg is used almost exclusively in sweets. It is
   known as jaiphal in most parts of India. It is also used in small
   quantities in garam masala.

   In other European cuisine, nutmeg and mace are used especially in
   potato dishes and in processed meat products; they are also used in
   soups, sauces and baked goods.

   Japanese varieties of curry powder include nutmeg as an ingredient.

   Nutmeg is a traditional ingredient in mulled cider, mulled wine, and
   eggnog.

Essential oils

   Nutmeg seeds
   Enlarge
   Nutmeg seeds

   The essential oil is obtained by the steam distillation of ground
   nutmeg and is used heavily in the perfumery and pharmaceutical
   industries. The oil is colorless or light yellow and smells and tastes
   of nutmeg. It contains numerous components of interest to the
   oleochemical industry, and is used as a natural food flavouring in
   baked goods, syrups (e.g. Coca Cola), beverages, sweets etc. It
   replaces ground nutmeg as it leaves no particles in the food. The
   essential oil is also used in the cosmetic and pharmaceutical
   industries for instance in tooth paste and as major ingredient in some
   cough syrups. In traditional medicine nutmeg and nutmeg oil were used
   for illnesses related to the nervous and digestive systems. Myristicin
   and elemicin are believed to be the chemical constituents responsible
   for the subtle hallucinogenic properties of nutmeg oil. Other known
   chemical ingredients of the oil are α-pinene, sabinene, γ-terpinene and
   safrole.

   Externally, the oil is used for rheumatic pain and, like clove oil, can
   be applied as an emergency treatment to dull toothache. Put 1-2 drops
   on a cotton swab, and apply to the gums around an aching tooth until
   dental treatment can be obtained. In France, it is given in drop doses
   in honey for digestive upsets and used for bad breath. Use 3-5 drops on
   a sugar lump or in a teaspoon of honey for nausea, gastroenteritis,
   chronic diarrhea, and indigestion.

   Alternatively a massage oil can be created by diluting 10 drops in 10
   ml almond oil. This can be used for muscular pains associated with
   rheumatism or overexertion. It can also be combined with thyme or
   rosemary essential oils. To prepare for childbirth, massaging the
   abdomen daily in the three weeks before the baby is due with a mixture
   of 5 drops nutmeg oil and no more than 5 drops sage oil in 25 ml almond
   oil has been suggested.

Nutmeg butter

   Nutmeg butter is obtained from the nut by expression. It is semi solid
   and reddish brown in colour and tastes and smells of nutmeg.
   Approximately 75% (by weight) of nutmeg butter is trimyristin which can
   be turned into myristic acid, a 14-carbon fatty acid which can be used
   as replacement for cocoa butter, can be mixed with other fats like
   cottonseed oil or palm oil, and has applications as an industrial
   lubricant.

History

   There is some evidence that Roman priests may have burned nutmeg as a
   form of incense, although this is disputed. It is known to have been
   used as a prized and costly spice in the Middle Ages. Saint Theodore
   the Studite was famous for allowing his monks to sprinkle nutmeg on
   their pease pudding when required to eat it. In Elizabethan times it
   was believed that nutmeg could ward off the plague, so nutmeg was very
   popular. Nutmeg was traded by Arabs during the Middle Ages in the
   profitable Indian Ocean trade.

   In the late 15th century, Portugal theoretically took over the Indian
   Ocean trade, including nutmeg, under the Treaty of Tordesillas with
   Spain and a separate treaty with the sultan of Ternate. But their
   control of this trade was always only partial and they remained largely
   participants, rather than overlords. The authority Ternate held over
   the nutmeg-growing centre of the Banda Islands was quite limited, and
   the Portuguese failed to gain a serious foothold in the islands
   themselves. The trade in nutmeg later became dominated by the Dutch in
   the 17th century, who managed to establish control over the Banda
   Islands after an extended military campaign that culminated in the
   massacre or expulsion of most of the islands' inhabitants in 1621.
   Thereafter, the Banda Islands were run as a series of plantation
   estates, with the Dutch mounting annual expeditions in local
   war-vessels to extirpate nutmeg trees planted elsewhere.

   As a result of the British interregnum during the Napoleonic Wars, the
   English took temporary control of the Banda Islands from the Dutch and
   transplanted nutmeg trees to their own colonial holdings elsewhere,
   notably Zanzibar and Grenada.

   Connecticut gets its nickname ("the Nutmeg State", " Nutmegger") from
   the legend that some unscrupulous Connecticut traders would whittle
   "nutmeg" out of wood, creating a "wooden nutmeg" (a term which came to
   mean any fraud) .

World production

   World production of nutmeg is estimated to average between 10,000 and
   12,000 tonnes per year with annual world demand estimated at 9,000
   tonnes; production of mace is estimated at 1,500 to 2,000 tonnes.
   Indonesia and Grenada dominate production and exports of both products
   with a world market share of 75% and 20% respectively. Other producers
   include India, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, Sri Lanka and Caribbean
   islands such as St. Vincent. The principal import markets are the
   European Community, the United States, Japan and India. Singapore and
   the Netherlands are major re-exporters.

   A possible future use for nutmeg is as a natural control for insects
   that infest stored cereal grains.

   At one time, nutmeg was one of the most valuable spices. It has been
   said that in England, several hundred years ago, a few nutmeg nuts
   could be sold for enough money to enable financial independence for
   life.

   The first harvest of nutmeg trees takes place 7-9 years after planting
   and the trees reach their full potential after 20 years.

Risks and toxicity

   In low doses, nutmeg produces no noticeable physiological or
   neurological response. Large doses of 7.5 g or more are dangerous,
   potentially inducing convulsions, palpitations, nausea, eventual
   dehydration, and generalized body pain. In amounts of 1.0 g or more it
   is a mild to medium hallucinogen, producing visual distortions and a
   mild euphoria. It is a common misconception that nutmeg contains
   monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOI's). This is untrue; nutmeg should
   not be taken in combination with MAOI's but it does not contain them .
   A test was carried out on the substance which showed that, when
   ingested in large amounts, nutmeg takes on a similar chemical make-up
   to MDMA (ecstasy). However, use of nutmeg as a recreational drug is
   unpopular, because of its strong taste and sand-like texture. Also
   there are potential painful physical side effects, the risk of Nutmeg
   Psychosis (see below) and the inconveniently long span for which the
   effects of a single dose can persist. A user will not experience a peak
   until approximately six hours after ingestion, and effects can linger
   for up to three days afterwards. Any unpleasant side-effects would
   persist throughout this period.

   A risk in any large-quantity ingestion of nutmeg is the sudden onset of
   Nutmeg Psychosis, an acute psychiatric disorder marked by
   hallucinations, excitement, thought disorder, a sense of impending
   death and agitation. Some cases have resulted in hospitalization and
   reportedly few who have experienced the effects of nutmeg poisoning
   recommend it or repeat the experience.

   Even in smaller doses, nutmeg can still be toxic. Ingestion of as
   little as 3 g may cause dry mouth, fast pulse, fever, flushing and
   posibly death. It has amphetamine-like effects and may cause the desire
   to ingest of large volumes of water. There is no specific antidote; the
   adverse effects wear off after 24 hours (or more) of rest.

   Nutmeg is extremely toxic when injected intravenously. Nutmeg can also
   cause liver damage if used regularly in large quantities. Nutmeg has in
   the past been used as an abortifacient. Nutmeg may also be fatal if
   used regularly in large quantities, but this is not a problem while
   cooking, since small amounts are used.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nutmeg"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
