   #copyright

Obi-Wan Kenobi

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Films

   Star Wars character
   Obi-Wan "Ben" Kenobi
     __________________________________________________________________

   Position Jedi Master, Jedi Council Member, General of the Republic
   Homeworld Unknown
   Species Human
   Gender Male
   Height 1.75 m
   Affiliation Jedi Order, Galactic Republic, Rebel Alliance
   Portrayed by Ewan McGregor (Episodes I-III)
   Sir Alec Guinness (Episodes IV-VI)

   Obi-Wan "Ben" Kenobi ( 57 – 0 BBY) is a fictional character in the Star
   Wars universe. He is one of the most prominent characters in the Star
   Wars saga; along with Anakin Skywalker, R2-D2, and C-3PO, he is one of
   the few major characters to have appearances (in some form or another)
   in each of the six Star Wars films. He was portrayed in Episodes I-III
   by Ewan McGregor, and in Episodes IV-VI by Sir Alec Guinness. He is
   voiced by Bernard Behrens in the NPR radio adaptation of Star Wars, and
   by James Arnold Taylor in the Clone Wars micro series and in the video
   game Revenge of the Sith.

   Kenobi first appears in A New Hope, seemingly a reclusive hermit. He is
   revealed as a Jedi Knight, who then tutors Luke Skywalker in the Jedi
   arts. In episodes I-III he appears as a young Jedi, progressing from
   apprentice to master and tutoring the young Anakin Skywalker, Luke's
   father. Additional fiction in the Expanded Universe fills in more
   details of his life.

   Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.

Personality

   In his youth (circa The Phantom Menace), the loyal and dedicated
   Obi-Wan Kenobi possessed a dry sense of humor and sarcastic wit, and a
   natural defiance. As a Jedi Knight, Kenobi seemed wise beyond his
   years, if a touch cynical, with a declared distrust of politicians. His
   humble and soft-spoken demeanor belied his warrior prowess. A skilled
   pilot (who, ironically, didn't like to fly), Kenobi could make peace
   with words, giving him the nickname "The Negotiator" during the Clone
   Wars.

   In the original trilogy, he appeared as a kindly and eccentric old
   hermit of the Jundland Wastes, and wizard to those not familiar with
   the ways of the Jedi. During the Star Wars prequel trilogy, Kenobi
   matures from a 'by the book', headstrong and almost cold Jedi
   apprentice (or Padawan) in The Phantom Menace into a more sociable, but
   more cautious mentor in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.

Appearances

The Phantom Menace

   At the beginning of The Phantom Menace, Kenobi is a 25-year old Padawan
   to Qui-Gon Jinn ( Liam Neeson). He accompanies Qui-Gon to Naboo, a
   planet ruled by Queen Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman). After making an
   unscheduled landing on Tatooine, his master stumbles upon Anakin
   Skywalker ( Jake Lloyd), a young slave who shows tremendous potential
   with the Force. Believing the boy to be the prophesied " Chosen One"
   who would bring balance to the Force by destroying the Sith, Master
   Jinn wants the boy to be trained as a Jedi. Kenobi is also amazed in
   Anakin's unprecedented midi-chlorian count and strong Force potential,
   but initially thinks he should not be trained, believing the boy is
   already too old and had acquired too many emotional attachments to
   become a Jedi. Qui-Gon responds by saying that he will take on Anakin
   as a Padawan and informs the Jedi Council that Kenobi, his current
   Padawan, is ready to be a full Jedi Knight. However, the Council agrees
   with Kenobi, and forbids training for Anakin, in whom they see a great
   deal of fear and anger.

   During the Battle of Naboo, Queen Amidala and her entourage of guards
   split up from her Jedi bodyguards when the Sith Lord Darth Maul ( Ray
   Park) arrives to eliminate the Queen. Wielding a double-bladed
   lightsaber, Maul simultaneously battles them both. Kenobi, separated
   from the battle via holo-shields, watches in horror as his master is
   impaled by Maul's saber. Enraged, Kenobi attacks the Sith Lord,
   fiercely and rapidly engaging Maul in a duel, cutting Maul's lightsaber
   in half. Maul Force-pushes Kenobi into a reactor chasm and kicks his
   lightsaber into the depths below. Kenobi is saved by an extending pole
   that he barely grabs hold of. Utilizing his skills with the Force,
   Kenobi hurls himself into the air and simultaneously brings his
   master's saber into his hand, startling Maul and giving him just enough
   time to slice the Sith apprentice in half. The dying Jinn tells Kenobi
   to train Anakin Skywalker to be a Jedi, and Kenobi promises that he
   will.

   For his heroics in defeating a Sith (making him the first Jedi in a
   thousand years to do so), Master Yoda personally bestows the rank of
   Jedi Knight upon Kenobi, who then says that he would take it upon
   himself to train Anakin whether the Council allowed him to or not. Yoda
   reluctantly agrees, but warns Kenobi to be careful with the troubled
   boy.

Attack of the Clones

   Ten years later, in Attack of the Clones, Kenobi has become an
   experienced Jedi Knight. He and Anakin (now played by Hayden
   Christensen) are tasked with protecting Padmé, now a Senator, after an
   attempt is made on her life. Kenobi tracks the mysterious assassin Zam
   Wesell to Kamino, and learns about a massive clone army that the
   Kaminoans are building for the Galactic Republic. He then meets with
   the bounty hunter Jango Fett ( Temuera Morrison), the template for the
   clones, and figures out that he is the one responsible for the
   assassination attempts on Senator Amidala.

   Attack of the Clones reveals that Kenobi's relationship with Anakin is,
   by now, strained; Over the years, Anakin has become a headstrong and
   arrogant young man, and is beginning to chafe under his Master's
   leadership. More dangerously, he has begun to ignore Kenobi's teachings
   in favour of the advice of Chancellor Palpatine ( Ian McDiarmid), who
   feeds the young man's fragile ego and subtly undermines his faith in
   the old Jedi ways. Anakin and Padmé have also fallen in love, an
   emotional attachment forbidden to Jedi Knights by the Jedi Code.

   Kenobi attempts to apprehend Fett, but he escapes to Geonosis with his
   son/unaltered clone Boba ( Daniel Logan). Kenobi follows them by
   placing a homing beacon on Fett's ship, Slave I.

   On Geonosis, Kenobi learns of the Confederacy of Independent Systems,
   also known as the Separatists, a conspiracy of star systems that wants
   to secede from the Republic, led by rogue Jedi Count Dooku (
   Christopher Lee), who was once Qui-Gon Jinn's master. Kenobi is
   captured shortly after sending a message to Anakin, who arrived with
   Padmé on Geonosis to rescue him afterwards. While in captivity, Dooku
   reveals that the Senate is under the control of a Sith Lord called
   Darth Sidious. Anakin and Padmé are also captured, and all three are
   sentenced to death by the Geonosians. The executions are prevented by
   the timely arrival of Jedi and clone reinforcements, led by Jedi
   Masters Mace Windu ( Samuel L. Jackson) and Yoda ( Frank Oz). Kenobi
   and Anakin confront Dooku and engage him in a lightsaber duel. Dooku
   strikes Anakin with Force lightning as he charges at him in anger, then
   turns the deadly barrage onto Kenobi, who easily blocks the attack with
   his lightsaber. Dooku manages to outmanuever Kenobi, slicing him on
   both his left arm and leg. Dooku is about to deliver a killing blow
   when Anakin recovers from the lightning and blocks Dooku's attack.
   Count Dooku and Anakin fight a short duel, and Dooku cuts off Anakin's
   right arm (which was later replaced by a robotic prosthetic). Yoda
   arrives and fights Dooku as well, but the Sith Lord diverts Yoda's
   attention by using his powers to dislodge a piece of machinery to come
   down on the still incapacitated Anakin and Kenobi. Yoda uses his powers
   to prevent them from being crushed, allowing Dooku to escape.

The Clone Wars

   Throughout the three years of the Clone Wars, Kenobi becomes one the
   galaxy's most storied generals (having been granted the rank of General
   early in the war), nicknamed "The Negotiator" for his diplomatic skill
   and resolve to fight only when all other options have been exhausted.
   Just before the Clone Wars he was granted the rank of Jedi Master, and
   given a seat on the Council.

   The Battle of Geonosis is the first battle in the Clone Wars that
   Kenobi would be involved in. The battle began with 212 Jedi against
   over 1 million Battle Droids. Over 100 Jedi fell in the battle and
   Obi-Wan was one of the few who were skilled enough to stay alive. It
   was due to Kenobi’s mastery of the lightsaber form Soresu, which
   focuses on defense from blaster fire, that he survived. With the
   arrival of 192,000 clone troopers 1,600 LAAT/i gunships, 400 LAAT/c
   cargo gunships, 2,160 AT-TE walkers, 100 SPHA-T artillery units and 12
   Acclamator-class assault ships, the battle fell into the Republics
   favour.

   Kenobi then commands Republic forces in the Battle of Kamino, in which
   the CIS tried to take out the Republic's cloning facilities. Kenobi,
   Anakin and Shaak Ti fight alongside the newly activated Advanced
   Reconnaissance Commando (ARC) troopers and drive back the Separatists.

   The Clone Wars micro series begins with the Battle of Muunilinst. In
   this battle, Kenobi and Anakin's clone forces fight against the
   Intergalactic Banking Clan, a Separatist ally. While Anakin wants to
   launch an all-out military attack, Kenobi has a more strategic plan: to
   distract the Separatists with clone forces while he sends ARC troopers
   to enter at the rear of the battle to infiltrate the command centre. It
   is in this conflict that Chancellor Palpatine promotes Anakin to the
   rank of Commander over Kenobi's objections, exploiting the growing rift
   between Master and apprentice.

   The battle goes well until the bounty hunter Durge leads an army of IG
   lancer droids toward the heart of the Republic's forces. Durge’s attack
   turns the battle in the Separatists' favour after his armirs destroy
   many of the SPHA-T vehicles of the supporting line. Kenobi rallies
   together an army on Lancer Swoop Bikes to meet Durge and his army.
   After a short but Gruesome Lancer Swoop Bike battle that left only
   Obi-Wan Durge living, Kenobi and Durge face off in a duel. Durge
   attacked Kenobi with every weapon he had, but Kenobi easily deflected
   the attacks. Durge would of had a better chance of winning if he
   battled 200 clone troopers, but Against Kenobi he had no chance.
   Piercing Durge with his lightsaber, cutting off his arm and slicing him
   in half, Kenobi wins the duel. The battle ends with San Hill’s
   surrender.

   The Battle of Jabiim is ultimately a victory, but the Jedi suffer
   terrible losses. In the month the battle lasted, 18 Jedi Knights (with
   Kenobi believed to be among them) and some 9,000 clone troopers are
   killed by Jabiimite rebels. The Jedi and their clone troopers are
   forced to retreat leaving the Separatists in control. Kenobi,
   meanwhile, is kidnapped along with an ARC trooper by Asajj Ventress,
   one of Dooku's Sith apprentices. She engages Kenobi in a lightsaber
   duel, in which the injured Jedi Master is at a disadvantage. He escapes
   when an ARC trooper blows up Ventress' fueling station.

   Kenobi meets Ventress many times during the war. Their last encounter
   is on Boz Pity, when Kenobi and Anakin infiltrate a bacta facility in
   which Dooku has placed her to recover from battle wounds. Dooku
   releases her to attack the two Jedi, creating an opportunity to escape.
   As she runs towards the ship, Dooku orders an IG-100 MagnaGuard to kill
   her as she approaches. Blinded with rage and fatally wounded, Ventress
   tries to kill Kenobi as he tries to help her. Anakin attacks from
   behind and and mortally wounds the distracted Sith. The "dying"
   Ventress tells Kenobi the location of the Separatists' next attack. She
   then lets go of her anger and places herself in a Sith trance. Thinking
   her dead, Kenobi places her on a ship to Coruscant.

   While on the planet Nelvaan, on a reconnaissance mission, the Battle of
   Coruscant begins and the Chancellor is kidnapped by General Grievous (
   Matthew Wood). Kenobi and Anakin are then contacted by Mace Windu to
   return to Coruscant. On the way to Coruscant Obi-Wan planned an
   operation to rescue the Chancellor, the plan included sending his clone
   troopers to clear the way to General Grievous’s flag ship “The
   Invisible Hand” while him and Anakin slip past the defences and
   infiltrate the ship with their advanced Jedi starfighters. The rest of
   the Clone Wars continues in the Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith.

Revenge of the Sith

   At the beginning of Revenge of the Sith, Kenobi and Anakin board
   Grievous' flagship, the Invisible Hand, and fight their way to the
   Chancellor. There, they find Dooku, who engages them both in a duel.
   During the duel, Kenobi is rendered unconscious, leaving Anakin to face
   Dooku alone. Anakin defeats Dooku and, at Palpatine's urging, executes
   the defenseless Count, in violation of the Jedi Code.

   When Palpatine appoints Anakin to the Jedi Council as his
   representative, Kenobi (with the rest of the Council) disapproves,
   considering Anakin too young and headstrong, and reasoning that his
   membership gives the Chancellor a vote in Jedi affairs. Anakin protests
   when the Jedi Council denies him the rank of Master and orders him to
   spy on Palpatine, but Kenobi talks him into accepting it, warning
   Anakin of his "dangerous" friendship with the Chancellor.

   Kenobi is called away to Utapau to confront General Grievous. This
   leaves Palpatine, who is secretly the Sith Lord Darth Sidious, free to
   continue corrupting Anakin, who eventually embraces the dark side and
   takes the Sith title and name Darth Vader.

   Kenobi engages Grievous in combat and, after an exhausting battle,
   shoots and kills him with a blaster. Moments later, however, Kenobi's
   own clone forces turn on him, a result of Order 66 issued by Palpatine
   causing clone troopers to turn on their Jedi generals. Kenobi escapes
   by stealing Grievous' star fighter and rendezvousing with Bail Organa (
   Jimmy Smits) and Yoda aboard Organa's ship, the Tantive IV.

   Along with Yoda and Organa, Kenobi returns to Coruscant, where he and
   Yoda discover that every Jedi in the Jedi Temple has been murdered,
   even the children. They kill the clones remaining at the Temple, and
   discover that the clones were led there by Anakin. Kenobi reprogrammes
   a beacon which had been instructing all remaining Jedi to return to
   Coruscant (where they surely would be slain), making it instruct them
   to scatter across the galaxy and remain in hiding.

   Subsequently, Kenobi and Yoda split up to confront the two Sith Lords,
   Vader and Sidious. Kenobi wished to fight Sidious, hating the thought
   of having to kill his long-time friend and pupil. Yoda, however,
   insists that Kenobi is not strong enough to fight Sidious, and that he
   will have to accept that Anakin had been "consumed by Darth Vader."

   Before going to fight his former Padawan, however, Kenobi goes to visit
   Padmé, who by now is Anakin's secret wife and is pregnant with his
   child. He mournfully tells her what Anakin has done, and reveals that
   he knows about their marriage. A horrified Padmé refuses to accept what
   Kenobi tells her, but is brave enough to go out and confront Anakin
   herself. Kenobi stows away in her ship.

   Kenobi finds Vader at the volcanic moon of Mustafar, and attempts to
   reason with his former student to pull him away from the dark side.
   When he emerges from Padmé's ship, however, Vader immediately suspects
   that Padmé has betrayed him, and uses the dark side to choke her into
   unconsciousness. Vader reveals himself to be mad with power and
   corrupted (seemingly) beyond redemption, leaving Kenobi no choice but
   to engage him in a long and epic duel, which spans through the Mustafar
   mining complex, the lava rivers, and finally the black sand. Kenobi
   tries to persuade Vader to relent, but Vader ignores his warnings and
   leaps forward to deliver the killing blow. Kenobi sees an opening and
   severs Vader's legs and remaining arm with one stroke. Kenobi refuses
   to inflict the killing blow to his former apprentice, partner, and
   friend, but leaves Vader burning on the volcanic slopes, and takes
   Anakin's lightsaber with him. Vader sustains near-fatal third-degree
   burns and severe lung and throat damage. He survives long enough to be
   rescued by Palpatine, and is later saved via extensive medical
   prosthetics and an artificial respirator, transforming him into the
   fearsome cyborg we know as Darth Vader from the first trilogy.

   Kenobi assists in hiding Anakin's children after Padmé dies in
   childbirth. Luke is put on Tatooine with Owen Lars, so that Kenobi can
   look after him in secret, while his twin Leia was put on Alderaan with
   Senator Organa. Yoda tells Obi-Wan that he had more training for him:
   the spirit of Qui-Gon Jinn would teach him how to retain his identity
   through the Force and commune with the living after death. (Even though
   this scene was filmed, it was not shown on the DVD or the cinemas.)

A New Hope

   Twenty years after the events of Episode III, Kenobi makes his first
   appearance in the movies in Episode IV: A New Hope. Going by the name
   Ben, (in order to remain in hiding from the Empire) he's first seen
   rescuing Luke Skywalker ( Mark Hamill) from Tusken Raiders while Luke
   is in the Jundland Wastes of Tatooine looking for R2-D2 ( Kenny Baker).
   Kenobi eventually hears R2-D2's message from Princess Leia Organa (
   Carrie Fisher) asking for his help in delivering the schematics of the
   Death Star to Alderaan. Kenobi takes young Luke under his wing in order
   to teach him the ways of the Force with the intention of fully training
   the boy later, on Alderaan. When Luke asks Kenobi about his father,
   Kenobi disguises the truth from him, saying, "a young Jedi named Darth
   Vader... betrayed and murdered your father." In Kenobi's way of
   thinking, this was not entirely untrue: Anakin Skywalker died the
   moment he betrayed the Jedi, completely becoming Darth Vader.

   Kenobi and Luke buy passage to Alderaan on the Millennium Falcon, a
   junk ship owned by smuggler Han Solo ( Harrison Ford) with Chewbacca, a
   Wookiee . Before they can reach their destination, however, Alderaan is
   destroyed by the Death Star on the orders of Grand Moff Tarkin ( Peter
   Cushing). The Millennium Falcon is captured by the Death Star's tractor
   beam. By a quirk of fate, Princess Leia is on board, and her rescue is
   gallantly executed by Han and Luke. Kenobi, meanwhile, sets off to
   disable the tractor beam so that the Falcon can escape. Kenobi is aware
   of Vader's presence, and knows he isn't coming back. He deactivates the
   tractor beam, and is confronted by Vader, who engages him in a
   lightsaber duel. Kenobi allows Vader to kill him in order to create a
   distraction so Luke can escape.

The Empire Strikes Back

   In Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back just before Luke is knocked out
   on the plains of Hoth, Kenobi appears and tells Luke to go to the
   Dagobah system for further training with Yoda. After Luke has been
   trained as a Jedi, Kenobi appears in Dagobah to try and dissuade him
   from going to Cloud City, where Vader holds Han and Leia hostage, as he
   feels his young apprentice is not yet ready to face Vader one-on-one.
   After Luke insists on facing Vader, Kenobi says sadly that he couldn't
   help him.

   Luke is nearly killed in a lightsaber duel with Vader, who reveals to
   him that he was his father and tries to enlist him into the dark side
   of the Force. Luke escapes, but is haunted by the truth Kenobi withheld
   from him.

Return of the Jedi

   In Return of the Jedi, Luke learns from a dying Yoda that Vader is
   indeed his father. After Yoda's death, Kenobi appears on Dagobah to
   explain to a heartbroken, troubled Luke why he did not tell him the
   truth about his father, and to confess that Leia was his sister. Kenobi
   admits that his own pride had been partly to blame for Anakin
   Skywalker's fall from grace: "I thought I could instruct him just as
   well as Yoda. I was wrong." He then tries to explain to Luke that
   killing Vader is the only way to destroy the Empire and save the
   galaxy, even if it meant committing patricide.

   Luke tries to persuade Vader to denounce the dark side, but Vader and
   Palpatine nearly succeed in converting him by appealing to his anger
   and fear for his friends' lives. At the last minute, when an
   out-of-control Luke is about to kill Vader, Kenobi's teachings return
   to him and he refuses, proudly proclaiming himself a Jedi. Palpatine
   then viciously attacks him with Force lightning.

   As Luke cries out to his father to help him, Vader returned to his old,
   pre-corrupted self, giving him the strength to destroy Palpatine and
   return to the light side of the Force as he dies in his son's arms.

   Kenobi appears alongside the souls of fellow Jedi Yoda and a redeemed
   Anakin Skywalker on the forest moon of Endor, watching over Luke and
   his comrades as they celebrate the destruction of the second Death Star
   and, with it, the Empire.

   In Lucas initial outline for Return of the Jedi, Kenobi returned from
   his existence in the Force to become a living human being again.

Expanded Universe

Early life

   Details of Kenobi's life before the prequel trilogy are mostly found in
   Jude Watson's Jedi Apprentice series, a series of novels aimed at
   younger readers. The books span from approximately 44 BBY to 32 BBY;
   Kenobi is 12 years old at the beginning of this series. During this
   time, he meets many Jedi who would later be important friends,
   including Bant Eerin, Siri Tachi, and Quinlan Vos.

   According to the novels, Kenobi was born in 57 BBY and trained as a
   youngling in the Jedi Temple under Yoda. Without a Jedi teacher,
   however, Kenobi would have been appointed to work in agricultural
   labor, where he might never have reached his full potential. Eventually
   he was accepted by Master Qui-Gon Jinn as a padawan learner.

   Neither the movies nor other media give any details of his birth
   family. According to the series Jedi Apprentice and the novelization of
   Return of the Jedi, Obi-Wan does remember a brother named Owen, but
   there is nothing to either suggest or repudiate his relation to Owen
   Lars. It is indicated in the novelization of Revenge of the Sith that
   he speaks with a Coruscanti accent, although, as he was trained at the
   Jedi Temple on that planet, that may not be a clue as to his homeworld.

Other Living appearances

     * Secrets of the Jedi - records the relationship between 18-year-old
       Obi-Wan Kenobi and fellow Padawan Siri Tachi on a mission to
       protect a young witness from bounty hunters. The two Jedi are sent
       on a similar mission twenty years later, near the end of the Clone
       Wars.
     * Cloak of Deception - takes place before The Phantom Menace, when
       Kenobi is still Qui-Gon Jinn's Padawan apprentice.
     * He appeared as a playable character in the game Star Wars: Obi-Wan
       at the same age, 25, as he was in The Phantom Menace. He is also a
       playable hero in Star Wars: Battlefront II, makes an appearance in
       one of the missions of the Gungan Campaign in Star Wars: Galactic
       Battlegrounds and is one of the main characters in the Star Wars
       III: Revenge of the Sith video game (2005).
     * The Jedi Quest series of young reader novels takes place between
       the events of The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones and
       explores the relationship between Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker.
     * Rogue Planet - He appears in this novel after the events of The
       Phantom Menace as a Jedi Knight sent along with a 12-year-old
       Anakin to discover the location of missing Jedi Vergere.
     * Outbound Flight - Following the events of Rogue Planet and before
       those of The Approaching Storm, Kenobi, along with his apprentice,
       are sent to keep an eye on power-hungry Jedi Master Jorus C'Baoth,
       who is obsessed with his "Outbound Flight Project".
     * The Approaching Storm - Just before the events of Attack of the
       Clones, Kenobi travels to Ansion with Anakin, Jedi Master Luminara
       Unduli, and her Padawan, Barriss Offee, in order to solve a dispute
       that, if handled improperly, could bring hundreds of worlds into
       the Separatist fold.
     * Jedi Trial - Kenobi makes an appearance in the prologue, in which
       Anakin gets unnecessarily excited about going on a mission with his
       Master. Obi-Wan says that the Jedi Council only gave him a mission,
       not both him and Anakin.
     * The Cestus Deception - Kenobi is a major character in this novel,
       set during the Clone Wars. He is sent with Kit Fisto and a small
       force of Clones to Cestus to prevent the manufacture of Jedi Killer
       Droids for the Separatists.
     * Yoda: Dark Rendezvous - Kenobi makes an appearance in this Clone
       Wars-era novel, which is centered on Yoda.
     * Dark Lord: The Rise of Darth Vader - Kenobi appears at the end of
       the book, set immediately after the events of Revenge of the Sith.
       He is stunned to see on the Holonet that Emperor Palpatine has a
       new right-hand man, a Sith Lord named Darth Vader — whom, of
       course, he knows to be Anakin. He is then visited by the spirit of
       Qui-Gon Jinn, who tells him that Darth Vader is indeed Anakin, but
       that he shouldn't worry about Luke's safety, as Vader would never
       set foot on Tatooine in fear of bringing back painful memories.
     * Last of the Jedi. Following two years of solitude on Tatooine after
       the events of Revenge of the Sith, Kenobi heard that a former Jedi
       apprentice, Ferus Olin, was still alive. He had to make a painful
       choice on whether to find him and leave Luke or stay behind. Jinn
       contacted him and told him he would watch over Luke and that Ferus
       was the key to the future of the Jedi. He headed to the planet
       Bellasa to find him. He ran into a boy named Trever Flume and asked
       many people on Ferus' whereabouts. He came in contact with the
       Eleven, a group Ferus and his friend and business partner Roan
       Lands founded. Kenobi crash landed in Bellasa's polar region and
       found Ferus, who chose to return to Ussa because the Empire was
       plotting to kill many civilians if he didn't hand himself over on
       request of Inquisitor Malorum. Kenobi pointed out that Malorum was
       not a Sith, but the dark side was part of him. The two ran into
       Boba Fett, but escaped, with Trever tagging along. Kenobi then
       found that his friend Garen was still alive in the caves of Ilum.
       He then returned to Tatooine and kept in close contact with Ferus,
       who was searching for remaining Jedi on the HoloNet.
     * A rebel hero character in the RTS Star Wars: Empire at War

Postmortem appearances

     * Kenobi appeared briefly in the 1978 made-for-TV movie, The Star
       Wars Holiday Special. He was shown in flashbacks that Chewbacca was
       having during the Life Day ceremonies, of his former adventures
       that involved Kenobi from the film, Star Wars Episode IV: A New
       Hope.
     * In The Truce at Bakura, a novel that is set immediately after the
       Battle of Endor, Kenobi speaks again to Luke Skywalker warning him
       of the threat posed by the invading Ssi-Ruuvi Imperium.
     * Kenobi, Yoda, and Anakin Skywalker again appeared to Luke in spirit
       form a few months later to warn him of the dangers presented by the
       Dark Lord Flint, apprentice of Lady Lumiya, heir to the Sith
       legacy. Because of their warning, Luke was able to redeem Flint,
       leaving the reigning Sith Master without an apprentice. This is the
       last known time Luke saw his father and Yoda, though Anakin
       Skywalker spoke to Luke's nephew, Jacen Solo, decades later in the
       New Jedi Order novels Balance Point and The Unifying Force.
     * Kenobi appeared to Luke again in 5 ABY to alert him to the presence
       of the Jedi Prince Ken, Palpatine's grandson, who soon became a
       pawn in a coup orchestrated by a group of false Prophets of the
       Dark Side set up by Imperial Intelligence.
     * In Timothy Zahn's novel Heir to the Empire, which takes place in 9
       ABY, Kenobi, still a spirit, visited Luke for the last time in a
       dream. Kenobi told Luke that he must move on from his spirit form
       to another realm. As Kenobi explained it, from the time of his
       death until the time of the novel, his spirit had been in an
       intermediate stage between life and the afterlife. This was
       Kenobi's final appearance in the timeline of the Star Wars
       universe. His final words are: "Not the last of the old Jedi, Luke.
       The first of the new."
     * In Kenobi's Blade, a young reader novel featuring Anakin Solo,
       Anakin Skywalker's grandson, it is revealed that Vader hid his
       former master's lightsaber in a retreat on Vjun. Unsurprisingly,
       Solo and company recover the lightsaber from Vader's palace.
     * In Edge of Victory: Rebirth, Luke's son is born and is given the
       name Ben, after the name Luke had always known the older man by.
     * Luke Skywalker, who never knew his father growing up, viewed Kenobi
       as the father he never had. (Ironically, Luke's real father,
       Anakin, felt the same way about Kenobi before he was corrupted.)
       According to the book Star Wars: The Essential Guide To Characters,
       Kenobi returned the parental feelings to both Anakin and Luke. It
       is revealed in the book that one of the last things Obi-Wan ever
       said to Luke was "I loved you like a son."

Powers and abilities

   During his exile, Kenobi's skills with a lightsaber declined. Whereas
   in reality the choreography of the swordplay in Episodes I-III was much
   advanced over the older films, fans have retconned the explanation that
   Kenobi had to keep his connection to the Force to a minimum while
   guarding Luke as a child, lest he attract the Emperor's attention.
   Thus, his ability to draw on the Force for strength and speed was
   "rusty" when it came time to battle Vader in Episode IV. Also, his
   harsh, ascetic lifestyle for 20 years led to a physical decline. He
   seemingly re-focused some of his energies into understanding better the
   formalist sword play of Dooku's Form II.

   Obi-Wan is a master of lightsaber combat and the art of mind tricks and
   Force persuasion. He also learned from the spirit of Qui-Gon Jinn the
   ability to become a Force ghost, essentially obtaining a form of
   immortality that is reached only by the greatest or most powerful of
   Jedi Masters (as hinted by the final sentence of the Jedi Code),
   something he later used to guide and counsel Luke.

Inspirations

   The role is loosely inspired by General Makabe Rokuruta, a character
   from The Hidden Fortress played by Toshiro Mifune, whom Lucas also
   considered casting as Kenobi.

Outside of Star Wars

     * On the BBC's radio and television show Dead Ringers, Kenobi was
       portrayed by Jon Culshaw, getting himself into all sorts of trouble
       and dueling against Vader with lightsabers or baguettes. He often
       employed Jedi mind tricks on other celebrities like Kirsty Wark in
       different skits. In one scene he is revealed to be Tony Blair's
       chief spin doctor during the Hutton inquiry. In another scene,
       Kenobi is at a car dealership, trying to buy an automobile/fast
       ship that would take him to Aldershot, but Vader appears and the
       two duel against each other with baguettes, much to the enjoyment
       of the car salesmen ("Darth Vader: Your bakery products are weak,
       old man", "Obi Wan: You can't win, Darth. If you strike me down,
       you will lose your No-Claims Bonus.")
     * Kenobi became the "narrator" of the "Weird Al" Yankovic Parody of "
       American Pie", " The Saga Begins," that retells The Phantom
       Menace's story.
     * He has appeared in several Family Guy episodes. In one episode,
       Peter says that he constructed a Tusken Raiders chorus and they run
       away, prompting Obi-Wan to enter and tell him (as in "A New Hope")
       "The Sand People are easily scared, but they will be back. And in
       greater numbers." Yet another episode shows Luke Skywalker about to
       perform laser eye surgery, when his master appears and urges him to
       Use the Force. After he accidentally impales his patient, Luke
       angrily turns and asks "Are you happy now?!", to which Obi-Wan
       replies "I've never been happy". Main character Peter also informs
       his wife that "if you strike me down, I shall become more powerful
       than you can possibly imagine".
     * In Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom, the film starts at a
       Shanghai club named Obi Wan.

   Obi-Wan Kenobi Street sign
   Enlarge
   Obi-Wan Kenobi Street sign
     * In Grabowiec, a village in Poland near Toruń, one of the streets
       was named after Obi-Wan Kenobi in April 2005.
     * In the MMORPG World of Warcraft, there is a raptor named Obi just
       off the path leading from Un'Goro crater into Silithus. He is level
       one, making him Obi (1).

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Obi-Wan_Kenobi"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
