   #copyright

Order of the Thistle

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Military History and War

   Banners of Knights of the Thistle, hanging in St Giles Cathedral
   Enlarge
   Banners of Knights of the Thistle, hanging in St Giles Cathedral

   The Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle is an order of
   chivalry associated with Scotland. While its original date of
   foundation is unknown, James VII (also King of England as James II)
   instituted the modern Order in 1687. The Order consists of the
   Sovereign and sixteen Knights and Ladies, as well as certain "extra"
   knights (members of the British Royal Family and foreign monarchs). The
   Sovereign alone grants membership of the Order; he or she is not
   advised by the Government, as occurs with most other Orders. The
   sixteen members are required to be Scottish-born, though not the
   "extra" knights and ladies.

   The Order's primary emblem is the thistle, the national flower of
   Scotland. The motto is Nemo me impune lacessit (Latin for "No one
   provokes me with impunity"); the same motto also appears on the Royal
   Coat of Arms of the United Kingdom for use in Scotland and on some
   pound coins. The patron saint of the Order is St Andrew.

   Most British orders of chivalry cover the entire kingdom, but the three
   most exalted ones each pertain to one constituent country only. The
   Order of the Thistle, which pertains to Scotland, is the second-most
   senior in precedence. Its equivalent in England, The Most Noble Order
   of the Garter, is the oldest documented order of chivalry in the United
   Kingdom, dating to the middle fourteenth century. In 1783 an Irish
   equivalent, The Most Illustrious Order of St Patrick, was founded;
   since the independence of the greater part of Ireland the Order has
   fallen dormant (its last surviving knight died in 1974).

History

   James VII ordained the modern Order
   Enlarge
   James VII ordained the modern Order

   The original date of the Order's foundation is unknown. According to
   legend, Óengus mac Fergusa (Angus), King of the Picts, while engaged in
   battle at Athelstaneford with the Saxon King Aethelstan of East Anglia,
   saw in the heavens the cross of St Andrew. After he won the battle,
   Angus is said to have established the Order of the Thistle, dedicating
   it to the saint, in 787. The tale is not credible, not only because of
   the unlikeliness of the alleged miracle, but also because the two
   individuals purported to have fought each other did not even reign
   during the same century. Another story states that Angus founded the
   Order in 809 to commemorate an alliance with the Emperor Charlemagne,
   which is a little less implausible given the Scottish bodyguards
   employed by Charlemagne. There is, in addition, a tradition that it was
   instituted, or re-instituted, on the battlefield by Robert I at
   Bannockburn. Many credit James III, who adopted the thistle as the
   royal plant badge and issued coins depicting thistles, with founding
   the Order during the fifteenth century. Others state that James V, who
   had been admitted to the Order of the Garter in England, the Order of
   St Michael in France and the Order of the Golden Fleece in the Holy
   Roman Empire, established the Order of the Thistle in 1540 because he
   was embarrassed that he had no honour to confer on foreign monarchs. He
   allegedly conferred membership of the "Order of the Burr or Thissil" on
   Francis I, King of France.

   Some Scottish order of chivalry definitely existed during the sixteenth
   century, but had lapsed by its conclusion. James VII issued letters
   patent "reviving and restoring the Order of the Thistle to its full
   glory, lustre and magnificency" in 1687. Eight knights, out of a
   maximum of twelve, were appointed, but the King was deposed in 1688.
   His successors, the joint monarchs William and Mary, did not make any
   further appointments to the Order, which consequently fell into
   desuetude. In 1703, however, Anne once again revived the Order of the
   Thistle, which survives to this day.

Composition

   The Kings of Scotland—later the Kings of Great Britain and of the
   United Kingdom—have served as Sovereigns of the Order. When James VII
   revived the Order, the statutes stated that the Order would "consist of
   the Sovereign and twelve Knights-Brethren in allusion to the Blessed
   Saviour and his Twelve Apostles." In 1827, George IV augmented the
   Order to sixteen members. Women (other than Queens regnant) were
   originally excluded from the Order; Elizabeth II, however, allowed the
   admission of Ladies of the Thistle in 1987.

   From time to time, individuals may be admitted to the Order by special
   statutes. Such members are known as "Extra Knights" and do not count
   towards the sixteen-member limit. Members of the British Royal Family
   are normally admitted through this procedure; the first to be so
   admitted was a younger son of George III, HRH The Prince William Henry
   (later William IV). Olav V, King of Norway, the first foreigner to be
   admitted to the Order, was also admitted by special statute in 1962.

   The Sovereign has historically had the power to choose Knights and
   Ladies of the Order. From the eighteenth century onwards, the Sovereign
   made his or her choices upon the advice of the Government. George VI
   felt that the Orders of the Garter and the Thistle had been used only
   for political patronage, rather than to reward actual merit. Therefore,
   with the agreement of the Prime Minister ( Clement Attlee) and the
   Leader of the Opposition (Winston Churchill) in 1946, the Order of the
   Thistle returned to the personal gift of the Sovereign.

   Knights and Ladies of the Thistle may also be admitted to the Order of
   the Garter. Formerly, many, but not all, Knights elevated to the senior
   Order would resign from the Order of the Thistle. The first to resign
   from the Order of the Thistle was John Campbell, 2nd Duke of Argyll in
   1710; the last to take such an action was Thomas Dundas, 2nd Earl of
   Zetland in 1872. Knights and Ladies of the Thistle may also be deprived
   of their knighthoods. The only individual to have suffered such a fate
   was John Erskine, 6th Earl of Mar who lost both the knighthood and the
   earldom after participating in the Jacobite rising of 1715.

   The Order has five officers: the Dean, the Chancellor, the Usher, the
   King of Arms and the Secretary. The Dean is normally a cleric of the
   Church of Scotland. The Chancellor is normally one of the knights,
   though not necessarily the most senior. The Usher of the Order is the
   Gentleman Usher of the Green Rod (unlike his Garter equivalent, the
   Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, he does not have another function
   assisting the House of Lords). The King of Arms of the Order,
   responsible for heraldry, is the Lord Lyon King of Arms, the head of
   Scottish Heraldry. The Lord Lyon often—but not invariably—also serves
   as the Secretary.

Vestments and accoutrements

   The insignia of a Knight of The Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of
   the Thistle
   Enlarge
   The insignia of a Knight of The Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of
   the Thistle

   For the Order's great occasions, such as its annual service each June
   or July, as well for coronations, the Knights and Ladies wear an
   elaborate costume:
     * The mantle is a green robe worn over their suits or military
       uniforms. The mantle is lined with white taffeta; it is tied with
       green and gold tassels. On the left shoulder of the mantle, the
       star of the Order (see below) is depicted.
     * The hat is made of black velvet and is plumed with white osprey
       feathers.
     * The collar is made of gold and depicts thistles and sprigs of rue.
       It is worn over the mantle.
     * The St Andrew, also called the badge-appendant, is worn suspended
       from the collar. It comprises a gold enamelled depiction of St
       Andrew, wearing a green gown and purple coat, holding a white
       saltire. Gold rays are shown emanating from St Andrew's head.

   Aside from these special occasions, however, much simpler insignia are
   used whenever a member of the Order attends an event at which
   decorations are worn.
     * The star of the Order consists of a silver St Andrew's saltire,
       with clusters of rays between the arms thereof. In the centre is
       depicted a green circle bearing the motto of the Order in gold
       majuscules; within the circle, there is depicted a thistle on a
       gold field. It is worn pinned to the left breast. (Since the Order
       of the Thistle is the second-most senior chivalric order in the UK,
       a member will wear its star above that of other orders to which he
       or she belongs, except that of the Order of the Garter; up to four
       orders' stars may be worn.)
     * The broad riband is a dark green sash worn across the body, from
       the left shoulder to the right hip.
     * At the right hip of the Riband, the badge of the Order is attached.
       On the obverse, the badge depicts St Andrew in the same form as the
       star. On the reverse, it depicts a thistle, on a green ground and
       surrounded by the Order's motto.

   However, on certain "collar days" designated by the Sovereign, members
   attending formal events may wear the Order's collar over their military
   uniform, formal wear, or other costume. They will then substitute the
   broad riband of another order to which they belong (if any), since the
   Order of the Thistle is represented by the collar.

   Upon the death of a Knight or Lady, the insignia must be returned to
   the Central Chancery of the Orders of Knighthood. The badge and star
   are returned personally to the Sovereign by the nearest relative of the
   deceased.

   Officers of the Order also wear green robes. The Gentleman Usher of the
   Green Rod also bears, as the title of his office suggests, a green rod.
   Lord Lyon wears a tabard depicting the Royal Arms.

Chapel

   Swords, helms and crests of Knights of the Thistle above their stalls
   in the Thistle Chapel
   Enlarge
   Swords, helms and crests of Knights of the Thistle above their stalls
   in the Thistle Chapel
   Stall plates of Knights of the Thistle
   Enlarge
   Stall plates of Knights of the Thistle

   When James VII revived the Order in 1687, he directed that the Abbey
   Church at the Palace of Holyroodhouse be converted to a Chapel for the
   Order of the Thistle, perhaps copying the idea from the Order of the
   Garter (whose chapel is located in Windsor Castle). James VII, however,
   was deposed by 1688; the Chapel, meanwhile, had been destroyed during
   riots. The Order did not have a Chapel until 1911, when one was added
   onto St Giles High Kirk in Edinburgh. Each year, the Sovereign resides
   at the Palace of Holyroodhouse for a week in June or July; during the
   visit, a service for the Order is held. Any new Knights or Ladies are
   installed at annual services.

   Each member of the Order, including the Sovereign, is allotted a stall
   in the choir of the Chapel, above which his or her heraldic devices are
   displayed. Perched on the pinnacle of a knight's stall is his helm,
   decorated with a mantling and topped by his crest. Under the laws of
   heraldry, women other than monarchs do not bear helms or crests;
   instead, the coronet appropriate to the Lady's rank is used (see
   coronet). Unlike other British Orders, the armorial banners of Knights
   and Ladies of the Thistle are not hung in the chapel, but instead in an
   adjacent part of St Giles High Kirk. The Thistle Chapel does, however,
   bear the arms of members living and deceased on stall plates. These
   pieces of brass are affixed to the back of the stall and display its
   occupant's name, arms, and date of admission into the Order.

   Upon the death of a Knight, helm, mantling, crest (or coronet or crown)
   and sword are taken down. The stall plates, however, are not removed;
   rather, they remain permanently affixed somewhere about the stall, so
   that the stalls of the chapel are festooned with a colourful record of
   the Order's Knights (and now Ladies) since 1911.

Precedence and privileges

   The Royal arms encircled by the circlet and collar of the Order. The
   badge of the Order is depicted suspended from the collar. Knights and
   Ladies of the Thistle may also use the circlet, collar and badge on
   their arms.
   Enlarge
   The Royal arms encircled by the circlet and collar of the Order. The
   badge of the Order is depicted suspended from the collar. Knights and
   Ladies of the Thistle may also use the circlet, collar and badge on
   their arms.

   Knights and Ladies of the Thistle are assigned positions in the order
   of precedence, ranking above all others of knightly rank, and above
   baronets. Wives, sons, daughters and daughters-in-law of Knights of the
   Thistle also feature on the order of precedence; relatives of Ladies of
   the Thistle, however, are not assigned any special precedence.
   (Generally, individuals can derive precedence from their fathers or
   husbands, but not from their mothers or wives.) (See order of
   precedence in Scotland for the exact positions.)

   Knights of the Thistle prefix "Sir," and Ladies prefix "Lady," to their
   forenames. Wives of Knights may prefix "Lady" to their surnames, but no
   equivalent privilege exists for husbands of Ladies. Such forms are not
   used by peers and princes, except when the names of the former are
   written out in their fullest forms.

   Knights and Ladies use the post-nominal letters "KT" and "LT,"
   respectively. When an individual is entitled to use multiple
   post-nominal letters, "KT" or "LT" appears before all others, except
   "Bt" or "Btss" ( Baronet or Baronetess), "VC" (Victoria Cross), "GC" (
   George Cross) and "KG" or "LG" (Knight or Lady of the Garter).

   Knights and Ladies may encircle their arms with the circlet (a green
   circle bearing the Order's motto) and the collar of the Order; the
   former is shown either outside or on top of the latter. The badge is
   depicted suspended from the collar. The Royal Arms depict the circlet,
   superimposed over the collar, of the Thistle only in Scotland; they
   show the Garter in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.

   Knights and Ladies are also entitled to receive heraldic supporters.
   This high privilege is only shared by members of the Royal Family,
   peers, Knights and Ladies of the Garter, and Knights and Dames Grand
   Cross and Knights Grand Commanders of the junior orders.

Current members and officers

Sovereign

     * Her Majesty The Queen

Knights and Ladies Companion

     * The Right Honourable The Earl of Wemyss and March KT DL (1966)
     * His Grace The Duke of Buccleuch and Queensberry KT VRD DL (1978)
     * The Right Honourable The Earl of Elgin and Kincardine KT CD DL
       (1981)
     * The Right Honourable The Lord Thomson of Monifieth KT PC DL (1981)
     * The Right Honourable The Earl of Airlie KT GCVO PC (1985)
     * The Right Honourable The Viscount of Arbuthnott KT CBE DSC (1996)
     * The Right Honourable The Earl of Crawford and Balcarres KT GCVO PC
       (1996)
     * Lady Marion Fraser LT (1996)
     * The Right Honourable The Lord Macfarlane of Bearsden KT DL (1996)
     * The Right Honourable The Lord Mackay of Clashfern KT PC (1997)
     * The Right Honourable The Lord Wilson of Tillyorn KT GCMG (2000)
     * The Right Honourable The Lord Sutherland of Houndwood KT (2002)
     * Sir Eric Anderson KT (2002)
     * The Right Honourable The Lord Steel of Aikwood KT KBE PC (2004)
     * The Right Honourable The Lord Robertson of Port Ellen KT GCMG PC
       (2004)

   There is one vacancy

Supernumerary Knights and Ladies

     * HRH The Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh KG KT OM GBE AC QSO PC
       (1952)
     * HRH The Prince Charles, Duke of Rothesay KG KT GCB OM AK QSO PC ADC
       (1977)
     * HRH The Princess Royal LG LT GCVO QSO (2000)

Officers

     * Dean: The Very Reverend Gilleasbuig Iain MacMillan CVO
     * Chancellor: His Grace The Duke of Buccleuch and Queensberry KT VRD
     * Usher: Rear Admiral Christopher Hope Layman CB DSO LVO (Gentleman
       Usher of the Green Rod)
     * King of Arms and Secretary: Robin Orr Blair LVO WS ( Lord Lyon King
       of Arms)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Order_of_the_Thistle"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
