   #copyright

Order of the Bath

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Military History and War

   Badge of a Companion of the Order of the Bath (Military Division)
   Enlarge
   Badge of a Companion of the Order of the Bath (Military Division)

   The Most Honourable Order of the Bath (formerly The Most Honourable
   Military Order of the Bath) is a British order of chivalry founded by
   George I on 18 May 1725. The name derives from the medieval ceremony
   for creating a knight, which involved bathing (as a symbol of
   purification) as one of its elements. The knights so created were known
   as Knights of the Bath. George I "erected [the Knights of the Bath]
   into a regular Military Order". He did not (as is often stated) revive
   the Order of the Bath, since it had never previously existed as an
   Order, in the sense of a body of knights who were governed by a set of
   statutes and whose numbers were replenished when vacancies occurred.

   The Order consists of the Sovereign (the British Sovereign), the Great
   Master (currently HRH The Prince of Wales), and three Classes of
   members:
     * Knight Grand Cross or Dame Grand Cross (GCB)
     * Knight Commander or Dame Commander (KCB or DCB)
     * Companion (CB)

   Members belong to either the Civil or the Military Division. Prior to
   1815 the order had only a single class, Knights Companion (KB), which
   no longer exists. Recipients of the Order are now usually senior
   military officers or senior civil servants.

   The Order of the Bath is the fourth-most senior of the British Orders
   of Chivalry, after The Most Noble Order of the Garter, The Most Ancient
   and Most Noble Order of the Thistle, and The Most Illustrious Order of
   St Patrick. The last of the aforementioned Orders, which relates to
   Ireland, still exists but has been in disuse since the formation of the
   Irish Free State. Only two appointments have been made to it since
   1922, both of which were for sons of George V and had the approval of
   the Irish government; the last surviving member ( Prince Henry, Duke of
   Gloucester, who was also Great Master of the Order of the Bath) died in
   1974.

History

Knights of the Bath

   A painting by Edmund Leighton depicting a fictional scene of a knight
   receiving the accolade
   Enlarge
   A painting by Edmund Leighton depicting a fictional scene of a knight
   receiving the accolade

   In the Middle Ages knighthood was often conferred with elaborate
   ceremonies. These usually involved the knight-to-be taking a bath
   (possibly symbolic of spiritual purification) during which he was
   instructed in the duties of knighthood by more senior knights. He was
   then put to bed in order to dry. Clothed in a special robe, he was led
   with music to the chapel where he spent the night in a vigil. At dawn
   he made confession and attended Mass, then retired to his bed to sleep
   until it was fully daylight. He was then brought before the King, who
   after instructing two senior knights to buckle the spurs to the
   knight-elect's heels, fastened a belt around his waist, then struck him
   on the neck (with either a hand or a sword), thus making him a knight.
   It was this "accolade" which was the essential act in creating a
   knight, and a simpler ceremony developed, conferring knighthood merely
   by striking or touching the knight-to-be on the shoulder with a sword,
   or "dubbing" him, as is still done today. In the early medieval period
   the difference seems to have been that the full ceremonies were used
   for men from more prominent families.

   From the coronation of Henry IV in 1399 the full ceremonies were
   restricted to major royal occasions such as coronations, investitures
   of the Prince of Wales or royal Dukes, and royal weddings, and the
   knights so created became known as Knights of the Bath. Knights
   Bachelor continued to be created with the simpler form of ceremony. The
   last occasion on which Knights of the Bath were created was the
   coronation of Charles II in 1661.

   From at least 1625, and possibly from the reign of James I, Knights of
   the Bath were using the motto Tria iuncta in uno (Latin for "Three
   joined in one"), and wearing as a badge three crowns within a plain
   gold oval. These were both subsequently adopted by the Order of the
   Bath; a similar design of badge is still worn by members of the Civil
   Division. Their symbolism however is not entirely clear. The 'three
   joined in one' may be a reference to the kingdoms of England, Scotland
   and either France or Ireland, which were held (or claimed in the case
   of France) by British monarchs. This would correspond to the three
   crowns in the badge. Another explantion of the motto is that it refers
   to the Holy Trinity. Nicolas quotes a source (although he is skeptical
   of it) who claims that prior to James I the motto was Tria numina
   iuncta in uno, (three powers/gods joined in one), but from the reign of
   James I the word numina was dropped and the motto understood to mean
   Tria [regna] iuncta in uno (three kingdoms joined in one).
   Sir Robert Walpole, the first Prime Minister, who used the Order of the
   Bath as a source of political patronage
   Enlarge
   Sir Robert Walpole, the first Prime Minister, who used the Order of the
   Bath as a source of political patronage

Foundation of the Order

   The prime mover in the establishment of the Order of the Bath was John
   Anstis, Garter King of Arms, England's highest heraldic officer. Sir
   Anthony Wagner, a recent holder of the office of Garter, wrote of
   Anstis's motivations:


   Order of the Bath

    It was Martin Leake's opinion that the trouble and opposition Anstis
    met with in establishing himself as Garter so embittered him against
     the heralds that when at last in 1718 he succeeded, he made it his
   prime object to aggrandise himself and his office at their expense. It
   is clear at least that he set out to make himself indispensable to the
     Earl Marshal, which was not hard, their political principles being
     congruous and their friendship already established, but also to Sir
    Robert Walpole and the Whig ministry, which can by no means have been
       easy, considering his known attachment to the Pretender and the
    circumstances under which he came into office ... The main object of
   Anstis's next move, the revival or institution of the Order of the Bath
    was probably that which it in fact secured, of ingratiating him with
             the all-powerful Prime Minister Sir Robert Walpole.


   Order of the Bath

   The use of honours in the early 18th century differed considerably from
   the modern honours system in which hundreds, if not thousands, of
   people each year receive honours on the basis of deserving
   accomplishments. The only honours available at that time were
   hereditary (not life) peerages and baronetcies, knighthoods and the
   Order of the Garter (or the Order of the Thistle for Scots), none of
   which were awarded in large numbers (the Garter and the Thistle are
   limited to 24 and 16 living members respectively.) The political
   environment was also significantly different from today:


   Order of the Bath

      The Sovereign still exercised a power to be reckoned with in the
     eighteenth century. The Court remained the centre of the political
     world. The King was limited in that he had to choose Ministers who
    could command a majority in Parliament, but the choice remained his.
       The leader of an administration still had to command the King's
     personal confidence and approval. A strong following in Parliament
    depended on being able to supply places, pensions, and other marks of
                Royal favour to the government's supporters.


   Order of the Bath

   The attraction of the new Order for Walpole was that it would provide a
   source of such favours to strengthen his political position. George I
   having agreed to Walpole's proposal, Anstis was commissioned to draft
   statutes for the Order of the Bath. As noted above, he adopted the
   motto and badge used by the Knights of the Bath, as well as the colour
   of the riband and mantle, and the ceremony for creating a knight. The
   rest of the statutes were mostly based on those of the Order of the
   Garter, of which he was an officer (as Garter King of Arms). The Order
   was founded by letters patent under the Great Seal dated 18 May 1725,
   and the statutes issued the following week.

   The Order initially consisted of the Sovereign, a Prince of the blood
   Royal as Principal Knight, a Great Master and thirty-five Knights
   Companion. Seven officers (see below) were attached to the Order. These
   provided yet another opportunity for political patronage, as they were
   to be sinecures at the disposal of the Great Master, supported by fees
   from the knights. Despite the fact that the Bath was represented as a
   military Order, only a few military officers were among the initial
   appointments (see List of Knights Companion of the Order of the Bath).
   They may be broken down into categories as follows (note that some are
   classified in more than one category):
     * Members of the House of Commons: 14
     * The Royal Household or sinecures: 11
     * Diplomats: 4
     * The Walpole family, including the Prime Minister: 3
     * Naval and Army Officers: 3
     * Irish Peers: 2
     * Country gentlemen with Court Appointments: 2

   Admiral George Rodney (appointed a Knight Companion in 1780) wearing
   the riband and star of the Order
   Enlarge
   Admiral George Rodney (appointed a Knight Companion in 1780) wearing
   the riband and star of the Order

   The majority of the new Knights Companion were knighted by the King and
   invested with their ribands and badges on 27 May 1725. Although the
   statutes set out the full medieval ceremony which was to be used for
   creating knights, this was not performed, and indeed was possibly never
   intended to be, as the original statutes contained a provision allowing
   the Great Master to dispense Knights Companion from these requirements.
   The original knights were dispensed from all the medieval ceremonies
   with the exception of the Installation, which was performed in the
   Order's Chapel, the Henry VII Chapel in Westminster Abbey, on June 17.
   This precedent was followed until 1812, after which the Installation
   was also dispensed with, until its revival in the twentieth century.
   The ceremonies however remained part of the Statutes until 1847.

   Although the initial appointments to the Order were largely political,
   from the 1770s appointments to the Order were increasingly made for
   naval, military or diplomatic achievements. This is partly due to the
   conflicts Britain was engaged in over this period. The Peninsular War
   resulted in so many deserving candidates for the Bath that a statute
   was issued allowing the appointment of Extra Knights in time of war,
   who were to be additional to the numerical limits imposed by the
   statutes, and whose number was not subject to any restrictions. Another
   statute, this one issued some 80 years earlier, had also added a
   military note to the Order. Each knight was required, under certain
   circumstances, to supply and support four men-at-arms for a period not
   exceeding 42 days in any year, to serve in any part of Great Britain.
   This company was to be captained by the Great Master, who had to supply
   four trumpeters, and was also to appoint eight officers for this body,
   however the statute was never invoked.

Restructuring in 1815

   In 1815, with the end of the Napoleonic Wars, the Prince Regent (later
   George IV) expanded the Order of the Bath


   Order of the Bath

      to the end that those Officers who have had the opportunities of
     signalising themselves by eminent services during the late war may
     share in the honours of the said Order, and that their names may be
       delivered down to remote posterity, accompanied by the marks of
                distinction which they have so nobly earned.


   Order of the Bath

   The Order was now to consist of three classes: Knights Grand Cross,
   Knights Commander, and Companions. The existing Knights Companion (of
   which there were 60) became Knight Grand Cross; this class was limited
   to 72 members, of which twelve could be appointed for civil or
   diplomatic services. The military members had to be of the rank of at
   least Major-General or Rear Admiral. The Knights Commander were limited
   to 180, exclusive of foreign nationals holding British commissions, up
   to ten of whom could be appointed as honorary Knights Commander. They
   had to be of the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel or Post-Captain. The number
   of Companions was not specified, but they had to have received a medal
   or been mentioned in despatches since the start of the war in 1803. A
   list of about 500 names was subsequently published. Two further
   officers were appointed, an "Officer of arms attendant on the Knights
   Commander and Companions", and a "Secretary appertaining to the Knights
   Commanders and Companions" The large increase in numbers caused some
   complaints that such an expansion would reduce the prestige of the
   Order.
   Knights Grand Cross wear their mantles over suits in modern times.
   During the nineteenth century, as depicted above, they wore them over
   imitations of seventeenth century dress.
   Enlarge
   Knights Grand Cross wear their mantles over suits in modern times.
   During the nineteenth century, as depicted above, they wore them over
   imitations of seventeenth century dress.

The Victorian era

   In 1847 Queen Victoria issued new statutes eliminating all references
   to an exclusively military Order. As well as removing the word
   'Military' from the full name of the Order, this opened up the grades
   of Knight Commander and Companion to civil appointments, and the
   Military and Civil Divisions of the Order were established. New
   numerical limits were imposed, and the opportunity also taken to
   regularise the 1815 expansion of the Order. The 1847 statutes also
   abolished all the medieval ritual, however they did introduce an formal
   Investiture ceremony, conducted by the Sovereign wearing the Mantle and
   insignia of the Order, attended by the Officers and as many GCBs as
   possible, in their Mantles.

   In 1859 a further edition of the Statutes was issued; the changes
   related mainly to the costs associated with the Order. Prior to this
   date it had been the policy that the insignia (which were provided by
   the Crown) were to be returned on the death of the holder; the
   exception had been foreigners who had been awarded honorary membership.
   In addition foreigners had usually been provided with stars made of
   silver and diamonds, whereas ordinary members had only embroidered
   stars. The decision was made to award silver stars to all members, and
   only require the return of the Collar. The Crown had also been paying
   the fees due to the officers of the Order for members who had been
   appointed for the services in the recent war. The fees were abolished
   and replaced with a salary of approximately the same average value. The
   offices of Genealogist and Messenger were abolished, and those of
   Registrar and Secretary combined.

The 20th century

   In 1910 after his accession to the throne George V ordered the revival
   of the Installation ceremony, perhaps prompted by the first
   Installation ceremony of the more junior Order of St Michael and St
   George, held a few years earlier, and the building of a new chapel for
   the Order of the Thistle in 1911. The Installation ceremony took place
   on July 22, 1913 in the Henry VII Chapel, and Installations have been
   held at regular intervals since. Prior to the 1913 Installation it was
   necessary to adapt the chapel to accommodate the larger number of
   members. A appeal was made to the members of the Order, and following
   the Installation a surplus remained. A Committee was formed from the
   Officers to administer the 'Bath Chapel Fund', and over time this
   committee has come to consider other matters than purely financial
   ones.

   Another revision of the statutes of the Order was undertaken in 1925,
   to consolidate the 41 additional statutes which had been issued since
   the 1859 revision.

   Women were admitted to the Order in 1971. In 1975, Princess Alice,
   Duchess of Gloucester, an aunt of Elizabeth II, became the first to
   reach the highest rank, Dame Grand Cross. Princess Alice (whose maiden
   name was Lady Alice Douglas-Montagu-Scott) was a direct descendant of
   the Order's first Great Master, and her husband, who had died the
   previous year, had also held this office.

Composition

Sovereign

   The British Sovereign is the Sovereign of the Order of the Bath. As
   with all honours except those in the Sovereign's personal gift, the
   Sovereign makes all appointments to the Order on the advice of the
   Government.

Great Master

   The next-most senior member of the Order is the Great Master, of which
   there have been nine:
     * 1725 – 1749: John Montagu, 2nd Duke of Montagu
     * 1749 – 1767: (vacant)
     * 1767 – 1827: Prince Frederick, Duke of York and Albany
     * 1827 – 1830: William, Duke of Clarence and St. Andrews (later King
       William IV)
     * 1830 – 1837: (vacant)
     * 1837 – 1843: Prince Augustus Frederick, Duke of Sussex
     * 1843 – 1861: Prince Albert, the Prince Consort
     * 1861 – 1897: (vacant)
     * 1897 – 1901: Albert Edward, Prince of Wales (later King Edward VII)
     * 1901 – 1942: Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught and Strathearn
     * 1942 – 1974: Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester
     * 1974 – present: Charles, Prince of Wales

   Originally a Prince of the Blood Royal, as the Principal Knight
   Companion, ranked next after the sovereign. This position was joined to
   that of the Great Master in the statutes of 1847. The Great Master and
   Principal Knight is now either a descendant of George I or "some other
   exalted personage"; the holder of the office has custody of the seal of
   the order and is responsible for enforcing the statutes.

Members

   Air Chief Marshal Sir Richard Johns, wearing the star, riband and badge
   of a military Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath
   Enlarge
   Air Chief Marshal Sir Richard Johns, wearing the star, riband and badge
   of a military Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath

   The statutes also provide for the following:
     * 120 Knights or Dames Grand Cross (GCB), (of whom the Great Master
       is the First and Principal)
     * 355 Knights Commander (KCB) or Dames Commander (DCB)
     * 1,925 Companions (CB).

   Regular membership is limited to citizens of the United Kingdom and of
   Commonwealth countries. Members appointed to the Civil Division must
   "by their personal services to [the] crown or by the perfomance of
   public duties have merited ... royal favour." Appointments to the
   Military Division are restricted by the rank of the individual. GCBs
   must hold the rank of Rear Admiral, Major General or Air Vice Marshal.
   KCBs must hold the rank of Captain in the Navy, Colonel in the Army or
   Marines, or Group Captain in the Air Force. CBs must be of the rank of
   Lieutenant Commander, Major or Squadron Leader, and in addition must
   have been mentioned in despatches for distinction in a command position
   in a combat situation. Non-line officers (e.g. engineers, medics) may
   be appointed only for meritorious service in war time.

   Non-Commonwealth foreigners may be made Honorary Members. Queen
   Elizabeth II has established the custom of awarding an honorary GCB to
   visiting heads of state, for example Ronald Reagan (in 1989), Lech
   Wałęsa (in 1991) and George H. W. Bush (in 1993). Foreign generals are
   also often given honorary appointments to the Order, for example Dwight
   D. Eisenhower and Douglas Macarthur after World War II, and Norman
   Schwarzkopf and Colin Powell after the Gulf War.

   Honorary members do not count towards the numerical limits in each
   class. In addition the statutes allow the Sovereign to exceed the
   limits in time of war or other exceptional circumstances.

Officers

   The Order of the Bath now has six officers:
     * the Dean
     * the King of Arms
     * the Registrar and Secretary
     * the Deputy Secretary
     * the Genealogist
     * the Gentleman Usher of the Scarlet Rod

   The office of Dean is held by the Dean of Westminster. The King of
   Arms, responsible for heraldry, is known as the Bath King of Arms; he
   is not, however, a member of the College of Arms, like many heralds.
   The Order's Usher is known as the Gentleman Usher of the Scarlet Rod;
   he does not, unlike his Order of the Garter equivalent (the Gentleman
   Usher of the Black Rod) perform any duties in the House of Lords.

   There were originally seven officers, each of whom was to receive fees
   from the Knights Companion both on appointment and annually thereafter.
   The office of Messenger was abolished in 1859. The office of
   Genealogist was abolished at the same time, but revived in 1913. The
   offices of Registrar and Secretary were formally merged in 1859,
   although the two positions had been held concurrently for the previous
   century. An Officer of Arms and a Secretary for the Knights Commander
   and Companions were established in 1815, but abolished in 1847. The
   office of Deputy Secretary was created in 1925.

   Under the Hanoverian kings certain of the officers also held heraldic
   office. The office of Blanc Coursier Herald of Arms was attached to
   that of the Genealogist, Brunswick Herald of Arms to the Gentleman
   Usher, and Bath King of Arms was also made Gloucester King of Arms with
   heraldic jurisdiction over Wales. This was the result of a move by
   Anstis to give the holders of these sinecures greater security; the
   offices of the Order of the Bath were held at the pleasure of the Great
   Master, while appointments to the heraldic offices were made by the
   King under the Great Seal and were for life.

Vestments and accoutrements

   The insignia of a Knight Grand Cross of the civil division of the
   order.
   Enlarge
   The insignia of a Knight Grand Cross of the civil division of the
   order.

   Members of the Order wear elaborate costumes on important occasions
   (such as its quadrennial installation ceremonies and coronations),
   which vary by rank:
     * The mantle, worn only by Knights and Dames Grand Cross, is made of
       crimson satin lined with white taffeta. On the left side is a
       representation of the star (see below). The mantle is bound with
       two large tassels.
     * The hat, worn only by Knights and Dames Grand Cross and Knights and
       Dames Commanders, is made of black velvet; it includes an upright
       plume of feathers.
     * The collar, worn only by Knights and Dames Grand Cross, is made of
       gold and weighs 30 troy ounces (933 g). It consists of depictions
       of nine imperial crowns and eight sets of flowers ( roses for
       England, thistles for Scotland and shamrocks for Ireland),
       connected by seventeen silver knots.

   On lesser occasions, simpler insignia are used:
     * The star is used only by Knights and Dames Grand Cross and Knights
       and Dames Commanders. Its style varies by rank and division; it is
       worn pinned to the left breast:
          + The star for military Knights and Dames Grand Cross consists
            of a Maltese Cross on top of an eight-pointed silver star; the
            star for military Knights and Dames Commander is an
            eight-pointed silver cross pattée. Each bears in the centre
            three crowns surrounded by a red ring bearing the motto of the
            Order in gold letters. The circle is flanked by two laurel
            branches and is above a scroll bearing the words Ich dien
            (older German for "I serve") in gold letters.
          + The star for civil Knights and Dames Grand Cross consists of
            an eight-pointed silver star, without the Maltese cross; the
            star for civil Knights and Dames Commanders is an
            eight-pointed silver cross pattée. The design of each is the
            same as the design of the military stars, except that the
            laurel branches and the words Ich dien are excluded.

   The insignia of a Knight Grand Cross of the military division of the
   order.
   Enlarge
   The insignia of a Knight Grand Cross of the military division of the
   order.
     * The badge varies in design, size and manner of wearing by rank and
       division. The Knight and Dame Grand Cross' badge is larger than the
       Knight and Dame Commander's badge, which is in turn larger than the
       Companion's badge; however, these are all suspended on a crimson
       ribbon. Knights and Dames Grand Cross wear the badge on a riband or
       sash, passing from the right shoulder to the left hip. Knights
       Commanders and male Companions wear the badge from a ribbon worn
       around the neck. Dames Commanders and female Companions wear the
       badge from a bow on the left side:
          + The military badge is a gold Maltese Cross of eight points,
            enamelled in white. Each point of the cross is decorated by a
            small gold ball; each angle has a small figure of a lion. The
            centre of the cross bears three crowns on the obverse side,
            and a rose, a thistle and a shamrock, emanating from a sceptre
            on the reverse side. Both emblems are surrounded by a red
            circular ring bearing the motto of the Order, which are in
            turn flanked by two laurel branches, above a scroll bearing
            the words Ich dien in gold letters.
          + The civil badge is a plain gold oval, bearing three crowns on
            the obverse side, and a rose, a thistle and a shamrock,
            emanating from a sceptre on the reverse side; both emblems are
            surrounded by a ring bearing the motto of the Order.

   On certain "collar days" designated by the Sovereign, members attending
   formal events may wear the Order's collar over their military uniform
   or eveningwear. When collars are worn (either on collar days or on
   formal occasions such as coronations), the badge is suspended from the
   collar.

   The collars and badges of Knights and Dames Grand Cross are returned to
   the Central Chancery of the Orders of Knighthood upon the decease of
   their owners. All other insignia may be retained by their owners.

Chapel

   Westminster Abbey with a procession of Knights of the Bath, by
   Canaletto, 1749.
   Enlarge
   Westminster Abbey with a procession of Knights of the Bath, by
   Canaletto, 1749.

   The Chapel of the Order is Henry VII Lady Chapel in Westminster Abbey.
   Every four years, an installation ceremony, presided over by the Great
   Master, and a religious service are held in the Chapel; the Sovereign
   attends every alternate ceremony. The last such service was in May 2006
   and was attended by the Sovereign. The Sovereign and each knight who
   has been installed is allotted a stall in the choir of the chapel.
   Since there are a limited number of stalls in the Chapel, only the most
   senior Knights and Dames Grand Cross are installed. A stall made vacant
   by the death of a military Knight Grand Cross is offered to the next
   most senior uninstalled military GCB, and similarly for vacancies among
   civil GCBs. Waits between admission to the Order and installation may
   be very long; for instance, Marshal of the Air Force Lord Craig of
   Radley was created a Knight Grand Cross in 1984, but was not installed
   until 2006.

   Above each stall, the occupant's heraldic devices are displayed.
   Perched on the pinnacle of a knight's stall is his helm, decorated with
   a mantling and topped by his crest. Under English heraldic law, women
   other than monarchs do not bear helms or crests; instead, the coronet
   appropriate to the dame's rank (if she is a peer or member of the Royal
   family) is used.

   Above the crest or coronet, the knight's or dame's heraldic banner is
   hung, emblazoned with his or her coat of arms. At a considerably
   smaller scale, to the back of the stall is affixed a piece of brass (a
   "stall plate") displaying its occupant's name, arms and date of
   admission into the Order.

   Upon the death of a Knight, the banner, helm, mantling and crest (or
   coronet or crown) are taken down. The stall plates, however, are not
   removed; rather, they remain permanently affixed somewhere about the
   stall, so that the stalls of the chapel are festooned with a colourful
   record of the Order's Knights (and now Ladies) throughout history.

   When the grade of Knight Commander was established in 1815 the
   regulations specified that they too should have a banner and stall
   plate affixed in the chapel. This was never implemented (despite some
   of the KCBs paying the appropriate fees) primarily due to lack of
   space, although the 1847 statutes allow all three classes to request
   the erection of a plate in the chapel bearing the member's name, date
   of nomination, and (for the two higher classes) optionally the coat of
   arms.

Precedence and privileges

   Members of the Order of the Bath are assigned positions in the order of
   precedence. Wives of male members also feature on the order of
   precedence, as do sons, daughters and daughters-in-law of Knights Grand
   Cross and Knights Commanders; relatives of female members, however, are
   not assigned any special precedence. Generally, individuals can derive
   precedence from their fathers or husbands, but not from their mothers
   or wives. (See order of precedence in England and Wales for the exact
   positions.)

   Knights Grand Cross and Knights Commanders prefix "Sir," and Dames
   Grand Cross and Dames Commanders prefix "Dame," to their forenames.
   Wives of Knights may prefix "Lady" to their surnames, but no equivalent
   privilege exists for husbands of Dames. Such forms are not used by
   peers and princes, except when the names of the former are written out
   in their fullest forms. Furthermore, honorary members and clergymen do
   not receive the accolade of knighthood.

   Knights and Dames Grand Cross use the post-nominal "GCB"; Knights
   Commanders use "KCB"; Dames Commanders use "DCB"; Companions use "CB".

   Knights and Dames Grand Cross are also entitled to receive heraldic
   supporters. Furthermore, they may encircle their arms with a depiction
   of the circlet (a red circle bearing the motto) with the badge pendant
   thereto and the collar; the former is shown either outside or on top of
   the latter.

   Knights and Dames Commanders and Companions may display the circlet,
   but not the collar, around their arms. The badge is depicted suspended
   from the collar or circlet. Members of the Military division may
   encompass the circlet with "two laurel branches issuant from an escrol
   azure inscribed Ich dien", as appears on the badge.

   It is possible for membership in the Order to be revoked. Under the
   1725 statutes the grounds for this were heresy, high treason, or
   fleeing from battle out of cowardice. Knights Companion could in such
   cases be degraded at the next Chapter meeting. It was then the duty of
   the Gentleman Usher to "pluck down the escocheon [i.e. stallplate] of
   such knight and spurn it out of the chapel" with "all the usual marks
   of infamy". Only two people were ever degraded — Lord Cochrane in 1813
   and General Sir Eyre Coote in 1816, both for political reasons, rather
   than any of the grounds given in the statute. Lord Cochrane was
   subsequently reinstated, Coote had died a few years after his
   degradation.

   Under Queen Victoria's 1847 statutes a member "convicted of treason,
   cowardice, felony, or any infamous crime derogatory to his honour as a
   knight or gentleman, or accused and does not submit to trial in a
   reasonable time, shall be degraded from the Order by a special
   ordinance signed by the sovereign". The Sovereign was to be the sole
   judge, and also had the power to restore such members.

   The situtation today is that membership may be cancelled or annulled,
   and the entry in the register erased, by an ordinance signed by the
   Sovereign and sealed with the seal of the Order, on the recommendation
   of the appropriate Minister. Such cancellations may be susequently
   reversed.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Order_of_the_Bath"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
