   #copyright

Order of the Garter

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Military History and War


   This is a featured article. Click here for more information.
   The insignia of a knight of the Order of the Garter.
   Enlarge
   The insignia of a knight of the Order of the Garter.

   The Most Noble Order of the Garter is an English order of chivalry with
   a history stretching back to mediæval times; today it is the world's
   oldest national order of knighthood in continuous existence and the
   pinnacle of the British honours system. Its membership is extremely
   limited, consisting of the Sovereign and not more than twenty-five full
   members, or Companions. Male members are known as Knights Companion,
   whilst female members are known as Ladies Companion (not Dames, as in
   most other British chivalric orders). The Order can also include
   certain extra members (members of the British Royal Family and foreign
   monarchs), known as "Supernumerary" Knights and Ladies. The Sovereign
   alone grants membership to the Order; by convention the Prime Minister
   does not tender binding advice as to appointments, as he or she does
   for most other orders. Thus, membership of the order is regarded as
   being the Sovereign's gift. Except for the grants of supernumerary
   membership, awards are only made for those with an exceptional record
   of service to the United Kingdom.

   As the name suggests, the Order's primary emblem is a garter bearing
   the motto Honi soit qui mal y pense (Old French for, "shame upon him
   who thinks evil of it") in gold letters. The Garter is an actual
   accessory worn by the members of the Order during ceremonial occasions.
   It is also depicted on several insignia, including British coins.

   Most British orders of chivalry cover the entire kingdom, but the three
   most exalted ones each pertain to one constituent nation only. The
   Order of the Garter, which pertains to England, is most senior in both
   age and precedence; its equivalent in Scotland is The Most Ancient and
   Most Noble Order of the Thistle. While the Order of the Thistle was
   certainly in existence by the sixteenth century and possibly has
   mediæval origins (or even, according to legend, dates to the eighth
   century), the foundation of the institution in its modern form dates to
   1687. In 1783 an Irish equivalent, The Most Illustrious Order of St
   Patrick, was founded, but since the independence of the greater part of
   Ireland the Order has fallen dormant (its last surviving knight died in
   1974).

History

   Queen Victoria wearing the Garter around her left arm.
   Enlarge
   Queen Victoria wearing the Garter around her left arm.

   The Order was founded in 1348 by King Edward III as "a society,
   fellowship and college of knights." Various dates ranging from 1344 to
   1351 have also been proposed. The wardrobe account of the king first
   shows Garter habits issued in the autumn of 1348. Regardless, the Order
   was probably not constituted before 1346; the original statutes
   required that each member already be a knight (described currently as "
   knight bachelor") and several initial members of the Order were
   knighted in that year.

   Various legends have been described to explain the origin of the Order.
   The most popular legend involves the "Countess of Salisbury" (possibly
   Joan of Kent). While she was dancing with or near King Edward at Eltham
   Palace, her garter is said to have slipped from her leg to the floor.
   When the surrounding courtiers sniggered, the king supposedly picked it
   up and tied it to his own leg, exclaiming "Honi soit qui mal y pense"
   (Shame on him who thinks evil of it). This phrase has become the motto
   of the Order. According to another legend, King Richard I was inspired
   in the 12th century by St George the Martyr while fighting in the
   Crusades to tie garters around the legs of his knights, who
   subsequently won the battle. King Edward III supposedly recalled the
   event in the 14th century when he founded the Order.

   Soon after the founding of the Order, many women were appointed "Ladies
   of the Garter," but were not knighted as companions. King Henry VII
   stopped the practice in 1488 and created no more Ladies of the Garter
   after his mother Margaret Beaufort. The Order was thereafter
   exclusively male (except, of course, for the occasional female
   sovereign) until 1901, when King Edward VII created his wife Queen
   Alexandra a Lady of the Garter. The same occurred when King George V
   made his consort Queen Mary a Lady of the Garter and subsequently King
   George VI made his consort Queen Elizabeth also a Lady of the Garter.
   Throughout the 20th century, women continued to be associated with the
   Order, but except for foreign female monarchs, they were not
   companions. In 1987, however, it became possible to install "Ladies
   Companion of the Garter" under a statute of Queen Elizabeth II.

The Order

   Knights Companion in the procession to St George's Chapel for the
   Garter Service
   Enlarge
   Knights Companion in the procession to St George's Chapel for the
   Garter Service

Members

   Membership of the Order is extremely limited and includes the monarch
   of the United Kingdom, the Prince of Wales, not more than twenty-five
   companion members, and various supernumerary members. The monarch alone
   can grant membership. The monarch of the United Kingdom is known as the
   "Sovereign of the Garter" and the Prince of Wales is known as a "Knight
   Companion of the Garter."

   Male members of the Order are known as "Knights Companion," while
   female members are known as "Ladies Companion." Formerly, vacancies
   were filled by the Sovereign upon the nomination of the members. Each
   member would nominate nine candidates (of whom three had to have the
   rank of Earl or higher, three the rank of Baron or higher, and three
   the rank of Knight or higher). The Sovereign would then choose as many
   nominees as were necessary to fill any vacancies that had developed in
   the Order; he or she was not obliged to choose those who received the
   most nominations. The last occasion on which candidates were nominated
   was in 1860. Appointments have since been made by the Sovereign acting
   alone, without any prior nominations; the statutes prescribing such a
   procedure were not amended until 1953 however.

   Since the 18th century, the Sovereign made his or her choices upon the
   advice of the Government. However, King George VI believed in 1946 that
   the Order of the Garter and the Order of the Thistle had become too
   linked with political patronage. With the agreement of the Prime
   Minister and the Leader of the Opposition, membership of these two
   orders became a personal gift of the Sovereign. Thus, the Sovereign
   personally selects Knights and Ladies Companion of the Garter, and need
   not act upon the advice of the Government.
   The Prince of Wales with his siblings the Princess Royal, the Earl of
   Wessex and the Duke of York, who are supernumerary member of the Order
   Enlarge
   The Prince of Wales with his siblings the Princess Royal, the Earl of
   Wessex and the Duke of York, who are supernumerary member of the Order

   In addition, the Order includes several "supernumerary" members, who do
   not count towards the limit of twenty-four companions. Several
   supernumerary members belong to the royal family; these members are
   known as "Royal Knights and Ladies of the Garter." This title was
   introduced in 1786 by King George III so that his many sons would not
   count towards the limit of twenty-four companions. He created the
   statute of supernumerary members in 1805 so that any descendant of King
   George II could be created such a member. This statute was extended
   again in 1831 to all descendants of King George I.

   Since 1813, when Emperor Alexander I of Russia was installed,
   supernumerary membership may also be extended to foreign monarchs, who
   are known as "Stranger Knights and Ladies of the Garter". Every such
   installation originally required the enactment of a statute; however, a
   statute of 1954 authorises the regular admission of Stranger Knights or
   Ladies without further special enactments.

   The Sovereign may "degrade" members who have committed serious crimes
   such as treason. During the First World War, several Stranger Knights
   who were monarchs of enemy nations were removed by the "annulment" of
   their installations. Thus, for example, the appointments of Emperor
   Wilhelm II of Germany and Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria were
   annulled in 1915. Emperor Hirohito of Japan similarly had his
   membership of the order removed after Japan's entry into World War II,
   he was however re-appointed to the order by Elizabeth II in the post
   war years. Hirohito therefore uniquely was made a Knight of the Garter
   twice by different Sovereigns.

Officers

   Officers of the Order of the Garter:(l-r) Secretary (barely visible),
   Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, Garter Principal King of Arms,
   Registrar, Prelate, Chancellor
   Enlarge
   Officers of the Order of the Garter:(l-r) Secretary (barely visible),
   Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, Garter Principal King of Arms,
   Registrar, Prelate, Chancellor

   The Order has six officers: the Prelate, the Chancellor, the Register,
   the Garter Principal King of Arms, the Usher, and the Secretary. The
   offices of Prelate, Registrar and Usher were created upon the order's
   foundation; those of Garter Principal King of Arms and Chancellor,
   during the 15th century; and that of Secretary, during the 20th
   century.

   The office of Prelate is held by the Bishop of Winchester,
   traditionally one of the senior bishops of the Church of England. The
   office of Chancellor is now held by one of the companions of the order.
   For most of its existence it has been held by the Bishop of Salisbury,
   although from 1553 to 1671 it was held by laymen. In 1837 after
   boundary changes meant that Windsor Castle now fell in the diocese of
   Oxford, the Chancellorship was transferred to the Bishop of Oxford.
   This was challenged a century later by the Bishop of Salisbury, on the
   grounds that the Chancellorship had been attached to his office
   regardless of the diocese in which the chapel of the order lay, and in
   any event St George's Chapel, as a Royal Peculiar, was not under
   diocesan jurisdiction. The office of Chancellor was removed from the
   Bishop of Oxford, and has subsequently been held by one of the Knights
   Companion. Since 1937 the following members have held the post of
   Chancellor:
     * The Duke of Portland (1937–1943)
     * The Earl of Halifax (1943–1959)
     * The Marquess of Salisbury (1960–1972)
     * The Viscount Cobham (1972–1977)
     * The Marquess of Abergavenny (1977–1994)
     * Lord Carrington (since 1994)

   The office of Register has been held by the Dean of Windsor since 1558.
   Garter Principal King of Arms is ex officio the senior officer of the
   College of Arms (the heraldic authority of England), and is usually
   appointed from among the other officers of arms at the College. As the
   title suggests, Garter Principal King of Arms has specific duties as
   the officer of arms of the Order, attending to the companions' crests
   and banners of arms which are exhibited in the chapel. The Secretary,
   who acts as deputy to Garter in the ceremonial aspects of the Order,
   has since 1952 also been selected from the other officers of the
   College of Arms. The office of Usher is held by the Gentleman Usher of
   the Black Rod who is also the Serjeant-at-Arms of the United Kingdom
   House of Lords (although his functions are more often performed there
   by his deputy, the Yeoman Usher).

Military Knights of Windsor

   At the founding of the Order of the Garter, twenty-six "poor knights"
   were appointed and attached to the Order and its chapel. The number was
   not always maintained, and by the 17th century, there were only
   thirteen such knights. King Charles II increased the number to eighteen
   after his coronation in 1660. After the knights objected to being
   termed "poor", King William IV redesignated them in the 19th century as
   the Military Knights of Windsor.

   The poor knights or military knights were originally impoverished
   military veterans. They were required to pray daily for the Knights
   Companion. In return, they received a salary and were lodged in Windsor
   Castle. The knights are no longer necessarily poor, but are still
   military pensioners. They participate in the Order's processions and
   escort the members, and in the chapel services. However, they are not
   considered knights or members of the Order.

Vestments and accoutrements

Members

   Queen Elizabeth in the robes of the Sovereign of the Order and the Duke
   of Edinburgh in the robes of a Royal Knight.
   Enlarge
   Queen Elizabeth in the robes of the Sovereign of the Order and the Duke
   of Edinburgh in the robes of a Royal Knight.
   Leopold I of Belgium wearing the vestments of a Knight of the Garter.
   Enlarge
   Leopold I of Belgium wearing the vestments of a Knight of the Garter.

   For ceremonial occasions of the Order such as the annual Garter Day,
   the members wear elaborate vestments and accoutrements (or
   accessories):
     * The mantle is a vestment or robe which members have worn since the
       15th century. Once made of wool, it had come to be made of velvet
       by the 16th century. The mantle was originally purple, but varied
       during the 17th and 18th centuries between celestial blue, pale
       blue, royal blue, dark blue, violet and ultramarine. Mantles are
       now dark blue in colour and lined with white taffeta. The mantles
       of the Sovereign, the Prince of Wales, Royal Knights and Ladies end
       in trains. The heraldic shield of St George's Cross encircled by
       the Garter is sewn onto the left shoulder of the mantle, except
       that the Sovereign's mantle has the star of the Order instead.
       Attached to the mantle over the right shoulder are a dark-red
       velvet hood and surcoat which have lost all function over time and
       appear to the modern observer simply as a splash of colour.

     * The hat is of black velvet with a plume of white ostrich and black
       heron feathers.

     * The collar is an accessory which is worn around the neck over the
       mantle and, like the mantle, was introduced in the 15th and 16th
       centuries. Made of pure gold, it weighs 30 troy ounces (0.933 kg).
       The collar is composed of gold knots alternating with enamelled
       medallions showing a rose encircled by the Garter. During King
       Henry VII's reign, each garter surrounded two roses — one red and
       one white — but he changed the design such that each garter
       encircled only one red rose.

     * The George which is worn suspended from the collar is a colourfully
       enamelled three-dimensional figurine of St George the Martyr on
       horseback slaying a dragon.

     * The Garter is worn on ceremonial occasions around the left calf by
       knights and the left arm by ladies, and is depicted on several
       insignia. As the name of the Order suggests, its primary symbol is
       the Garter that is a buckled dark-blue (originally light-blue)
       velvet strap and bears the motto in gold letters. The garters of
       Stranger Knights and Ladies were once set with several jewels.

   For other occasions when decorations are worn, the members wear simpler
   insignia:
     * The collar is worn on designated "collar days" over military
       uniform or evening wear by members attending formal events. The
       collar is fastened to the shoulders with silk ribbons. Since the
       collar signifies the Order of the Garter, members can then wear the
       riband of any other order to which they belong.

     * The star, which is worn pinned to the left breast, was introduced
       in the 17th century by King Charles I and is a colourfully
       enamelled depiction of the heraldic shield of St George's Cross,
       encircled by the Garter, which is itself encircled by an
       eight-point silver badge. Each point is depicted as a cluster of
       rays with the four points of the cardinal directions longer than
       the intermediate ones. The stars of Stranger Knights and Ladies
       were once set with several jewels. Since the Order of the Garter is
       the senior order of the United Kingdom, a member will wear its star
       above others (up to three) which he holds.

     * The riband is a 4-inch (10.16 cm) wide sash worn over the left
       shoulder, or pinned beneath it, to the right hip, and was
       introduced in the 17th century by King Charles II. The riband's
       colour has varied over the years: it was originally light blue, but
       was a dark shade under the Hanoverian monarchs. In 1950, the colour
       was fixed as "kingfisher blue." A member will wear only one riband,
       even if he or she belongs to several orders.

     * The badge is worn suspended from a small gold link from the riband
       at the right hip and is sometimes known as "the Lesser George".
       Like the George, the badge shows St George the Martyr on horseback
       slaying a dragon, but is flatter and gold. In the 15th century, the
       badge was worn attached to a ribbon around the neck. As this was
       not convenient when riding a horse, the custom of wearing it with a
       riband under the right arm developed.

   On the death of a member, the badge and star are returned personally to
   the Sovereign by the former member's nearest male relative, and the
   other insignia to the Central Chancery of the Orders of Knighthood.

Officers

   For ceremonial occasions of the Order, the officers wear the following
   garments and accessories:
     * The mantles for the prelate and chancellor are dark blue like those
       of the members (as a member, the chancellor wears a member's
       mantle), but the mantles for the other officers are dark red. All
       mantles are embroidered with a heraldic shield of St George's
       Cross. For Garter ceremonies Garter Principal King of Arms wears
       this red mantle rather than the tabard of the royal arms worn for
       other State ceremonial.

     * Officers wear badges of office suspended from a chain worn around
       the neck. The badge for the prelate shows the Lesser George
       encircled by the Garter which is surmounted by a bishop's mitre.
       The badge for the chancellor is a rose encircled by the Garter. The
       badge for the register is two crossed quills over a book encircled
       by the Garter surmounted by a crown. The badge for Garter Principal
       King of Arms is the royal arms impaled with St George's Cross
       encircled by the Garter and surmounted by a crown. The badge for
       the usher is a knot (like those on the Collars of the companions of
       the order) encircled by the Garter surmounted with the crown. The
       badge for the secretary shows two crossed quills in front of a rose
       and encircled by the Garter surmounted with the crown.

   The chancellor carries a purse which is embroidered with the royal arms
   impaled by the Cross of St. George. The purse contains the seal of the
   Order. Garter Principal King of Arms carries his baton of office. The
   usher carries his staff of office, the Black Rod.

Military knights of Windsor

   Military Knights of Windsor in the procession to the Garter Service
   Enlarge
   Military Knights of Windsor in the procession to the Garter Service

   The poor knights originally wore red mantles, each of which bore St
   George's Cross, but did not depict the Garter. Queen Elizabeth I
   replaced the mantles in the 16th and 17th centuries with blue and
   purple gowns, but the red mantles returned in the 17th century under
   King Charles I. When the knights were renamed, the mantles were
   abandoned. The military knights now wear the old military uniform of an
   "army officer on the unattached list": black trousers with red stripe,
   a red double-breasted swallow-tailed coat, gold epaulets and brushes, a
   cocked hat with a plume, and a sword on a white sash.

Precedence and privileges

   Members are assigned positions in the order of precedence coming before
   all others of knightly rank and above baronets. The wives, sons,
   daughters and daughters-in-law of Knights Companion are also assigned
   precedence. Relatives of Ladies Companion are not, however, assigned
   any special positions (generally, individuals can derive precedence
   from their fathers or husbands but not from their mothers or wives).
   The Chancellor is also assigned precedence, but except for the period
   between 1553 and 1671 when the office was held by a layman who was not
   necessarily a member of the Order, this precedence has been purely
   theoretical. As a member of the Order, the Chancellor has a higher
   precedence than that attached to the office, and when the office was
   filled by a diocesan bishop of the Church of England, the holder again
   had a higher precedence by virtue of that office than any that the
   chancellorship could bestow.
   These arms of John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough are encircled by
   both the Garter and the collar.
   Enlarge
   These arms of John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough are encircled by
   both the Garter and the collar.

   Knights Companion prefix "Sir" and Ladies Companion prefix "Lady" to
   their forenames. Wives of Knights Companion may prefix "Lady" to their
   surnames, but no such privilege exists for husbands of Ladies
   Companion. Such forms are not used by princes and peers, except when
   peers' names are written out in their fullest forms.

   Knights and Ladies Companion use the post-nominal letters "KG" and "LG"
   respectively. When an individual is entitled to use multiple
   post-nominal letters, those of the Order of the Garter appear before
   all others except "Bt" ( Baronet), "VC" (Victoria Cross) and "GC" (
   George Cross).

   The members may encircle their arms with the Garter, and, if they wish,
   with a depiction of the collar as well. However, the Garter is normally
   used alone; the more elaborate version is seldom seen. Stranger Knights
   and Ladies do not, of course, embellish the arms they use in their
   countries with English decorations.

   Knights and Ladies Companion are also entitled to receive heraldic
   supporters, a privilege granted to few other private individuals. While
   some families claim supporters by ancient use, and others have been
   granted them as a special reward, only peers, Knights and Ladies
   Companion of the Garter, Knights and Ladies of the Thistle, and certain
   other knights and ladies are automatically entitled to them.

Garter service at St George's Chapel

   The Order of the Garter once held frequent services at St George's
   Chapel, Windsor Castle, but they became rare in the eighteenth century.
   Discontinued after 1805, the ceremony was revived by King George VI in
   1948 and it has become an annual event. Each June, on the Monday of
   Royal Ascot week, the members of the Order (wearing their ceremonial
   vestments and insignia) meet in the state apartments in the Upper Ward
   of Windsor Castle, then (preceded by the Military Knights of Windsor)
   process on foot down through the castle to St George's Chapel for the
   service. If there are any new knights, they are installed on this
   occasion. After the service, the members of the Order return to the
   Upper Ward by carriage.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Order_of_the_Garter"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
