   #copyright

Oslo

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: European Geography

   CAPTION: Oslo kommune


   County Oslo NO-03
   District Viken
   Municipality NO-0301
   Administrative centre Oslo
   Mayor (2004) Per Ditlev-Simonsen ( H)
   Official language form Neutral
   Area
    - Total
    - Land
    - Percentage Ranked 224
   454 km²
   426 km²
   0.14 %
   Population
    - Total ( 2006)
    - Percentage
    - Change (10 years)
    - Density Ranked 1
   544,073(within city boudries), 825,105(irrespective of city boudries),
   approx. 1,3 million(in city region)
   11.40 %
   9.2 %
   1,225/km²
   Coordinates 59°56′N 10°45′E
                             www.oslo.kommune.no

   Data from Statistics Norway

   Coordinates: 59°56′N 10°45′E

   Oslo (called Christiania 1624-1878, Kristiania 1878-1924) is the
   capital and largest city of Norway. The population of the city proper
   is 544,073 (as of July 1, 2006). The city area extends into the
   surrounding county of Akershus, with a total population of 825,105 in
   the conurbation (as of January 1, 2006). The city has a current annual
   growth exceeding 15,000. The city centre of Oslo is situated at the end
   of the Oslofjord from where the city sprawls out both to the north and
   to the south on both sides of the fjord giving the city area more or
   less the shape of a U. Oslo's metropolitan area, also referred to as
   Greater Oslo region, which extends beyond the city boundaries, has an
   estimated population of 1,300,000 citizens. In the entire Oslo Fjord
   Region there is a total population of about 1.7 million.

   About 22 % of the population of Oslo is comprised of immigrants. The
   urban municipality (bykommune) of Oslo and county (fylke) is the same
   entity. Of Oslo's total area, 115 km² is built-up and 7 km² is
   agricultural. The open areas within the built-up zone amount to 22 km².

Name

   The meaning of the name Oslo has been the subject of much debate. It is
   certainly derived from Old Norse, and was in all probability the name
   of a large farm at the site of the first settlements in Bjørvika.

   The last component has been positively identified as the Old Norse word
   'ló', meaning 'level meadow' or 'plain'. During the Middle Ages the
   name was initially spelled 'Ásló', later 'Ósló'. The earlier spelling
   suggests that the first component 'ás' refers either to the Ekeberg
   ridge southeast of the town ('ås' in modern Norwegian), or to the Norse
   homonym meaning 'god' or 'divinity'. The most likely interpretations
   would therefore be 'the meadow beneath the ridge' or 'the meadow of the
   gods'. Both are equally plausible.

   A fire in 1624 destroyed much of the medieval city (the section now
   known as Gamlebyen), and the city was relocated nearer to the Akershus
   Fortress. King Christian IV of Norway renamed the reborn city
   Christiania (later, 1878-1924, Kristiania). The original name of Oslo
   was restored on 1 January 1925.

          When I was young, the capital of Norway was not called Oslo. It
          was called Christiania. But somewhere along the line, the
          Norwegians decided to do away with that pretty name and call it
          Oslo instead. -- Roald Dahl, Boy.

   The city was once referred to as Tigerstaden (City of tigers) by the
   author Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson around 1870. This name has over the years
   achieved an almost official status, to the extent the 1000 year jubilee
   was celebrated by a row of tiger sculptures around the City Hall. (A
   derogatory pun is Tiggerstaden (City of beggars), referring to the
   notable presence of beggars in the city centre). A harsh picture of the
   city was drawn by Knut Hamsun in his novel Sult (Hunger) from 1890
   (cinematised in 1966 by Henning Carlsen).

History

   Christiania in July of 1814, as seen from Ekeberg.
   Enlarge
   Christiania in July of 1814, as seen from Ekeberg.

   According to the Norse sagas, Oslo was founded around 1049 by king
   Harald Hardråde. Recent archaeological research has uncovered Christian
   burials from before 1000, evidence of a preceding urban settlement.
   This called for the celebration of Oslo's millennium in 2000.

   It has been regarded as the capital city since the reign of Håkon V (
   1299- 1319), who was the first king to reside permanently in the city.
   He also started the construction of the Akershus Fortress. A century
   later Norway was the weaker part in a personal union with Denmark, and
   Oslo's role was reduced to that of provincial administrative centre,
   with the kings residing in Copenhagen. The fact that the University of
   Oslo was founded as late as 1811 had an adverse effect on the
   development of the nation.
   Hansken Sculpture and Theater Museum, Christiania Torv.
   Enlarge
   Hansken Sculpture and Theatre Museum, Christiania Torv.
   View from the Akershus Fortress towards the fjord.
   Enlarge
   View from the Akershus Fortress towards the fjord.

   Oslo was destroyed several times by fire, and after the fourteenth
   calamity, in 1624, King Christian IV of Norway ordered it rebuilt at a
   new site across the bay, near Akershus Fortress and given the name
   Christiania (later, 1878-1924, Kristiania). The original name of Oslo
   was restored in 1925. But long before this, Christiania had started to
   regain its stature as a centre of commerce and culture in Norway. In
   1814 Christiania once more became a real capital when the union with
   Denmark was dissolved. Many landmarks were built in the 19th century,
   including the Royal Palace (1825-1848), Stortinget (the Parliament)
   (1861-1866), the University, Nationaltheatret and the Stock Exchange.
   Among the world-famous artists who lived here during this period were
   Henrik Ibsen, Edvard Munch, Knut Hamsun and Sigrid Undset (the latter
   two were awarded the Nobel Prize for literature). In 1850, Oslo also
   overtook Bergen and became the most populous city in the country.

   Oslo's centrality in the political, cultural and economical life of
   Norway continues to be a source of considerable controversy and
   friction. Numerous attempts at decentralisation have not appreciably
   changed this during the last century. While continuing to be the main
   cause of the depopulation of the Norwegian countryside, any form of
   development is almost always opposed by neighbors, and as a consequence
   the growth of a modern urban landscape has all but stopped.
   Specifically, the construction of highrises in the city centre has been
   met with skepticism. It is projected, however, that the city will need
   some 20,000 additional apartments before 2020, forcing the difficult
   decision of whether to build tall or the equally unpopular option of
   sprawling out.
   View from Ekeberg toward Grefsen
   Enlarge
   View from Ekeberg toward Grefsen

   A marked reluctance to encourage the growth of the city for fear of
   causing further depletion of the traditional farming and fishing
   communities has led to several successive bursts of construction both
   in infrastructure and building mass, as the authorities kept waiting in
   vain for the stream of people to diminish. Neoclassical city apartments
   built in the 1850s to 1900s dotted with remnants of "Christian Quart"'s
   renaissance grid dominate the architecture around the city centre,
   except where slums were demolished in the 1960s to construct modernist
   concrete and glass low-rises, now generally regarded as embarrassing
   eyesores. The variety in Oslos architectural cityscape does however
   provide for some striking, and often hauntingly beautiful sights. While
   most of the forests and lakes surrounding Oslo are in private hands,
   there is great public support for not developing it. Parts of Oslo
   suffer from congestion, yet it is the only European capital where
   people live with the wilderness literally in their back yard, or with
   access to a suburban train line that allows the city's many hikers and
   long-distance skiers to simply step off the train and start walking or
   skiing.

Geography and climate

   Oslo occupies an arc of land at the northernmost end of the Oslofjord.
   The fjord, which is nearly bisected by the Nesodden peninsula opposite
   Oslo, lies to the south; in all other directions Oslo is surrounded by
   green hills and mountains. There are 40 islands within the city limits,
   the largest being Malmøya (0.56 km²), and scores more around the
   Oslofjord. Oslo has 343 lakes, the largest being Maridalsvannet (3.91
   km²). This is also a main source of drinking water for large parts of
   Oslo. The highest point is Kirkeberget, at 629 m. Although the city's
   population is small compared to most European capitals, it occupies an
   unusually large land area, of which two thirds are protected areas of
   forests, hills and lakes. Its boundaries encompass many parks and open
   areas, giving it an airy and often very green appearance. It is not
   uncommon to encounter wild moose in relatively urban areas of Oslo,
   especially during wintertime.
   View of Oslo looking south from Holmenkollen, directly facing Nesodden.
   Enlarge
   View of Oslo looking south from Holmenkollen, directly facing Nesodden.

   Oslo has a hemiboreal/ humid continental climate (Dfb according to the
   Köppen climate classification system). Summers are mild or even warm,
   with daily high temperatures averaging between 20.1°C and 21.5°C during
   the summer months (June-August). September is often as warm, with
   colder temperatures arriving at the end of October and into November.
   The highest temperature ever recorded was 35°C on July 21, 1901.

   Winters are long and fairly cold. Temperatures below zero may be
   experienced from November until March, the coldest month being January
   with a mean temperature of -4.3°C, and both January and February may
   have daily minimum temperatures of around -7°C. The coldest temperature
   recorded is -27.9°C in February 1871. Snowfall is spread evenly
   throughout the winter months and on average more than 25 cm of snow
   cover is experienced 30 days per year. Temperatures have tended to be
   higher in recent years [( 1)].

   The annual average precipitation is 763 mm, with winter being somewhat
   drier than summer.
        Month          Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr May  Jun  Jul  Aug  Sep  Oct Nov  Dec
     Avg high °C       -1.8 -0.9 3.5  9.1 15.8 20.4 21.5 20.1 15.1 9.3 3.2  -0.5
Avg low temperature °C -6.8 -6.8 -3.3 0.8 6.5  10.6 12.2 11.3 7.5  3.8
                                                                       -1.5 -5.6
Source: World Weather Information Service

Main sights

   Akershus Fortress.
   Enlarge
   Akershus Fortress.
   The Royal Palace.
   Enlarge
   The Royal Palace.
   Vigeland Park.
   Enlarge
   Vigeland Park.
   King Karl Johan.
   Enlarge
   King Karl Johan.
   Vikingship Museum at Bygdøy.
   Enlarge
   Vikingship Museum at Bygdøy.
     * Akershus Castle and Fortress
     * Norsk Folkemuseum, the Norwegian Museum of Cultural History at
       Bygdøy, with a large open air museum
     * The Armed Forces Museum
     * The City Hall, where the annual Nobel Peace Prize ceremony is held
     * The Historical Museum
     * The Museum of Modern Art
     * The Holmenkollen ski jump, arena of the 1952 Winter Olympics and
       the Holmenkollen ski festival, Holmenkollen
     * The Holmenkollen Ski Museum, Holmenkollen
     * The Kon-Tiki Museum, Bygdøy
     * The Munch Museum, Tøyen
     * The river Akerselva
     * The National Gallery
     * The Norwegian Maritime Museum, including Gjøa, Bygdøy
     * The Fram Museum, exhibiting the ship Fram, Bygdøy
     * The Oslo City Museum, at Frogner Manor
     * The Royal Palace
     * The Henie-Onstad Art Centre, Høvikodden in Bærum
     * Oslo Cathedral
     * The Storting, parliament building
     * The Vigeland Park in the Frogner park (Frognerparken)
     * The Viking Ship Museum, displaying ships from Gokstad, Oseberg and
       Tune at Bygdøy
     * Tryvannstårnet

Shopping

   There are three main shopping areas in Oslo
   1) The downtown close to the main pedestrian street ' Karl Johans gate'
   where you will find stores like "Sten og Strøm" - a smaller version of
   stores like Macy's or Selfridges.
   2) Bogstadveien close to Majorstuen where you can find some of the more
   famous designers
   3) Grünerløkka where you can find exciting new designers.

Politics and government

   Oslo is the capital of Norway, and as such is the seat of Norway's
   national government. Most government offices, including that of the
   Prime Minister, are gathered at Regjeringskvartalet, a cluster of
   buildings close to the national Parliament - the Storting.

   Constituting both a municipality and a county of Norway, the city of
   Oslo is represented in the Storting by seventeen Members of Parliament.
   Six MPs are from the Labour Party; the Conservative Party and the
   Progress Party have three each, the Socialist Left Party and the
   Liberals have two each, and one is from the Christian Democrats.

   Oslo has had a parliamentary system of government since 1986. The
   supreme authority of the city is the City Council (Bystyret), which
   currently has 59 seats. Representatives are popularly elected every
   four years. The City Council has five standing committees, each with
   their own areas of responsibility. These are: Health and Social
   Welfare, Education and Cultural Affairs, Urban Development, Transport
   and Environmental Affairs, and Finance. The council's executive branch
   (Byrådet) consists of a head of government (byrådsleder) and six
   commissioners (byråder, sing. byråd) holding ministerial positions.
   Each of the commissioners needs the confidence of the City Council and
   each of them can be voted out of office.

   Since the local elections of 2003, the city government has been a
   coalition of the Conservative Party and the Progress Party. Based
   mostly on support from the Christian Democrats and the Liberals, the
   coalition maintains a majority in the City Council. The largest
   political parties are the Conservatives and the Labour Party, with
   fifteen representatives each in the City Council.

   The Mayor of Oslo is the head of the City Council and the highest
   ranking representative of the city. It used to be the most powerful
   political position in Oslo, but after the implementation of
   parliamentarism the Mayor has had more of a ceremonial role, similar to
   that of the President of the Storting at the national level. The
   current Mayor of Oslo is Per Ditlev-Simonsen, who is in his third term
   of office. Though a member of the Conservative Party, he maintains a
   neutral political stance, asserting that the Mayor of Oslo should be a
   representative of all its citizens and political parties.

Administrative divisions

   Following the latest reform of January 1, 2004, the city is divided
   into fifteen boroughs (bydeler) that are to a considerable extent self
   governed. Each borough is responsible for local services not overseen
   by the City Council, such as social services, basic healthcare, and
   kindergartens.
    1. Gamle Oslo
    2. Grünerløkka
    3. Sagene
    4. St. Hanshaugen
    5. Frogner
    6. Ullern
    7. Vestre Aker
    8. Nordre Aker
    9. Bjerke
   10. Grorud
   11. Stovner
   12. Alna
   13. Østensjø
   14. Nordstrand
   15. Søndre Nordstrand
   16. Sentrum
   17. Marka

   Sentrum (the city centre) and Marka (the rural/recreational areas
   surrounding the city) are separate geographical entities, but do not
   have an administration of their own. Sentrum is governed by the borough
   of St. Hanshaugen. The administration of Marka is shared between
   neighbouring boroughs.

Economy

   Oslo is an important centre of maritime knowledge in Europe and is home
   to approximately 980 companies and 8,500 employees within the maritime
   sector, among which are some of the world's largest shipping companies,
   shipbrokers, and insurance brokers . Det Norske Veritas, headquartered
   at Høvik outside Oslo, is one of the three major maritime
   classification societies in the world, with 16.5% of the world fleet to
   class in its register . The city's port is the largest general cargo
   port in the country and its leading passenger gateway. Close to 6,000
   ships dock at the Port of Oslo annually with a total of 6 million
   tonnes of cargo and over five million passengers.

   The gross domestic product of Oslo totaled NOK268.047 billion (€33.876
   billion) in 2003, which amounted to 17% of the national GDP . This
   compares with NOK165.915 billion (€20.968 billion) in 1995. The
   metropolitan area, bar Moss and Drammen, contributed 25% of the
   national GDP in 2003 and was also responsible for more than one quarter
   of tax revenues. In comparison, total tax revenues from the oil and gas
   industry on the Norwegian Continental Shelf amounted to about 16% . The
   region has one of the highest per capita GDPs in Europe, at NOK391,399
   (€49,465) in 2003. If Norway were a member of the European Union, the
   capital region would have the fourth strongest GDP per capita, behind
   Inner London, Brussels-Capital and Luxembourg.

   Oslo is one of the most expensive cities in the world. As of 2006, it
   is ranked tenth according to the Worldwide Cost of Living Survey
   provided by Mercer Human Resource Consulting and first according to the
   Economist Intelligence Unit . The reason for this discrepancy is that
   the EIU omits certain factors from its final index calculation, most
   notably housing. Although Oslo does have the most expensive housing
   market in Norway it is comparably cheaper to other cities on the list
   in that regard. Meanwhile, prices on goods and services remain some of
   the highest of any city. According to a report compiled by Swiss bank
   UBS in the month of August 2006, Oslo and London were the world's most
   expensive cities. Total pay packets were the biggest in Oslo along with
   Copenhagen and Zurich -- but residents of the Nordic cities lose out
   when tax is taken into account.

Institutions of higher learning

     * University of Oslo (Universitetet i Oslo)
     * Oslo University College (Høgskolen i Oslo)
     * Norwegian School of Management (Handelshøyskolen BI)
     * Norwegian School of Information Technology (Norges
       Informasjonsteknologiske Høyskole)
     * Oslo School of Architecture and Design (Arkitektur- og
       designhøgskolen i Oslo)
     * Norwegian University of Sport and Physical Education (Norges
       idrettshøgskole)
     * Norwegian Academy of Music (Norges musikkhøgskole)
     * Norwegian Lutheran School of Theology (Det teologiske
       Menighetsfakultet - MF)
     * Oslo National Academy of the Arts (Kunsthøgskolen i Oslo KHIO)
     * Norwegian Military Academy (Krigsskolen)
     * Norwegian School of Vetrinary Science (Norges Veterinærhøgskole)

   Oslo now has over 50 schools, colleges and universities in itself
   alone.

Transport

   The "trikk": Oslo's tram system.
   Enlarge
   The "trikk": Oslo's tram system.
   Oslo City Bus.
   Enlarge
   Oslo City Bus.

Air

     * Oslo Airport Gardermoen served by high speed train ( Flytoget)
     * Sandefjord Airport Torp (in Vestfold county)

Sea

   There are daily ferry connections to Kiel (Germany), Copenhagen
   (Denmark), Frederikshavn (Denmark), Hirtshals (Denmark) and Nesodden.

Train

   Oslo Sentralstasjon is the main railway station in Oslo. From there,
   there are connections in the directions of: Trondheim, Bergen,
   Stavanger, Stockholm, Gothenburg and Copenhagen. In 2004 Norwegian
   trains were Europe's third most punctual national train company. For
   the 4 first months in 2005 the punctuality was 92.9%. During winter in
   particular, weather conditions such as snow and blizzards may cause
   delays and cancellations on the routes crossing the central mountains.

Public transport

   The public transportation system in Oslo is managed by the municipal
   transport company Oslo Sporveier. This includes metro, tram, bus and
   ferry, but not the local train lines, which are run by the state
   railway company NSB. All public transport in Oslo operates on a common
   ticket system, allowing free transfer within a period of one hour with
   a regular ticket. Tickets also transfer to the local and inter-city
   trains, unless you intend to cross the city border. In 2004, 160
   million journeys were made using public transport, of which 85% was
   handled by Oslo Sporveier's own subsidiaries and 15% by private bus and
   ferry operators under cost-based contracts.

   Oslo's tram- and metro system is the largest in Europe compared to the
   number of inhabitants, and Oslo is the smallest city in the world with
   a comprehensive metro system. The tram system, Oslotrikken, is made up
   of six lines that criss-cross the inner parts of the city and extend
   out towards the suburbs. The metro system, known as the T-bane,
   connects the eastern and western suburbs and comprises six lines which
   all converge in a tunnel beneath downtown Oslo. The metro lines are
   identified by numbers from 1 to 6, with two lines running into the
   municipality of Bærum in the west. The tramway lines are numbered 11 to
   13 and 17 to 19.

   A new, partially underground loop line was opened in August 2006,
   connecting Ullevål in the north-west and Carl Berners plass in the
   east. Two new stations, Nydalen and Storo, have been operational for a
   couple of years already, the third station, Sinsen, opened August 20,
   2006. This completed the loop. In conjunction with the opening of the
   circle line, there will be a major upgrade of the rolling stock, with
   delivery taking place between 2007 and 2010. An RFID ticketing system
   with automatic turnstile barriers will also be introduced.

Sports

   The Holmenkollen ski jump hill.
   Enlarge
   The Holmenkollen ski jump hill.

   Oslo was the host city for the 1952 Winter Olympics. Except for the
   downhill skiing at Norefjell, all events took place within the city
   limits. The opening and closing ceremonies were held at Bislett
   stadion, which was also used for the speed skating events. In recent
   years, the stadium has been better known for hosting the annual Bislett
   Games track and field event in the IAAF Golden League. The stadium was
   rebuilt in 2004/2005 and was formally opened for the Bislett Games on
   July 29, 2005.

   Holmenkollen nordic skiing arena, and its centrepiece the ski jump, was
   an important venue during the 1952 Olympics. The arena has hosted
   numerous nordic skiing and biathlon world championships since 1930, and
   its ski jump competition is the second oldest in the world, having been
   contested since 1892. Holmenkollen has been selected to once again host
   the FIS Nordic World Ski Championships, in 2011.

   During the summer months, the harbour becomes a venue for various
   maritime events, including the start of a large sailing regatta that
   attracts around 1,000 contesting boats each year, and one race of the
   international Class 1 offshore powerboat racing circuit.

   Two football clubs from Oslo, Vålerenga and Lyn, play in the Norwegian
   Premier League. In the 2005 season, the teams placed 1st and 3rd
   respectively. Oslo had two ice hockey teams in the highest division in
   the previous season, Vålerenga Ishockey and Manglerud Star, the former
   winning the cup and the latter being relegated. Speed skating is also
   held at the Valle Hovin venue, which in the summer is host to large
   popular music concerts.

   Ullevaal stadion, located in the borough of Nordre Aker, is the home of
   the Norwegian national football team. Built in 1926, it is the largest
   football stadium in Norway, and has served as the venue for the
   Norwegian Cup final since 1948. Both Lyn and Vålerenga use the stadium
   as their home ground.

   Oslo is also home of Norway Cup - the worlds biggest football
   tournament for youth from all over the earth.

Historical population

   The Cathedral of Oslo.
   Enlarge
   The Cathedral of Oslo.
   Year Population
   1801   9,500
   1825   15,400
   1855   31,700
   1875   76,900
   1900  227,900
   1925  255,700
   1951  434,365
   1960  471,511
   1970  487,363
   1980  454,872
   1990  458,364
   2000  507,467
   2005  529,407

   See also:
     *
     *

   Sculptures in the Vigeland Park.
   Enlarge
   Sculptures in the Vigeland Park.

Conurbation population

     * 1999: 763,957
     * 2005: 811,688
     * 2006: 825,105

Born in Oslo

     * Sonja Henie (April 8, 1912 - October 12, 1969), Norwegian figure
       skater and actress
     * Grete Waitz (October 1, 1953), Norwegian marathon runner
     * Christian Ruud (August 24, 1972), Norwegian professional tennis
       player
     * Jan Axel Blomberg, drummer of many Norwegian black metal bands.

Sister cities

   Cooperation agreements have been signed with the following
   cities/regions:

   Sweden Gothenburg, Sweden
   Germany Schleswig-Holstein, Germany
   People's Republic of China Shanghai, China
   Russia St.Petersburg, Russia
   Lithuania Vilnius, Lithuania

   Oslo has a longstanding tradition of sending a Christmas tree each year
   to the cities of Washington, D.C., London, Rotterdam, Antwerp and
   Reykjavík.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oslo"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
