   #copyright

Osteomalacia

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Health and medicine

   CAPTION: Osteomalacia
   Classifications and external resources

   X-ray of the legs in a two-year-old child with rickets.
    ICD- 10   E 55.0 E 83.3 M 83.
     ICD- 9   268.2 275.3
   DiseasesDB 9351
   eMedicine  ped/2014  radio/610
      MeSH    D010018

   Osteomalacia ( pronounced /ˌɑstioməˈleɪʃiə/) is the adult equivalent of
   the disease rickets. Osteomalacia denotes those disorders where
   mineralisation of newly formed bone matrix is defective.

Causes

     * Nutritional inadequacy of Vitamin-D, calcium, or both

     * Renal tubular defects that produce hypophosphatemia and chronic
       metabolic acidosis

     * Chronic administration of diphenylhydantoin leading to excessive
       metabolism of Vitamin D

     * Osteoporosis

     * Following a parathyrodectomy

Clinical features

   Osteomalacia starts as aches and pains insidiously, in lumbar spine and
   thighs spreading later to arms and ribs. Pain is non-radiating
   symmetrical and accompanied by tenderness in the involved bones.
   Proximal muscles are weak and there is difficulty in climbing upstairs
   and getting up from squatting position. Physical signs include
   deformities like triradiate pelvis and spinal kyphosis. Pathologic
   fractures due to weight bearing may develop. Biochemical features are
   similar to rickets.jklj;jkl; Radiological feature is characterised by
   appearance of "pseudofractures"

Treatment

   Nutritional osteomalacia responds well to administration of 2000-4000
   IU of Vitamin D for 6-12 weeks, followed by a maintanence dose of
   400-600 IU daily. Dietary supplimentation in the form of milk is
   recommended. Medicinal calcium in the form of calcium gluconate,
   lactate, or carbonate can be given.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Osteomalacia"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
