   #copyright

Póvoa de Varzim

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: European Geography

   Póvoa de Varzim

                      Official flag of Póvoa de Varzim

                      Coat of arms of Póvoa de Varzim

   Flag Coat of arms
   Location of Póvoa de Varzim
   Area 82.1 km²
   Population 65,882 ( 2005)
   Density 802.46 /km²
   Region Norte
   Subregion Grande Porto
   District Porto
   Former region Douro Litoral
   ( Entre Douro e Minho)
   Establishment or foral March 9, 1308
   Number of parishes 12
   Mayor Macedo Vieira ( PSD)
   Municipal holiday June 29 ( Saint Peter)
   Official website http://www.cm-pvarzim.pt/
   Municipalities of Portugal

   Póvoa de Varzim ( pron. IPA: ['pɔvuɐ dɨ vɐɾ'zĩ] local pron.['pɔβuɐ dɨ
   bɐɾ'ziŋ]) is a Portuguese city in the Northern Region and sub-region of
   Greater Porto, with a 2005 estimated population of 65,882 in its
   municipality. It is located in a sandy coastal plain, surrounding Cape
   Santo André, halfway between the Minho and Douro rivers.

   Permanent habitation in Póvoa de Varzim dates from around four to six
   thousand years ago; around 900 BC, unrest in the region leads to the
   establishment of a fortified city. The ocean has always played an
   important part in its economy and subsistence, initially through
   maritime trade, and later through fishing, leading it to acquire a
   foral in 1308 and consequently to become, in the 18th century, the main
   fishing port in northern Portugal. Since late 19th century, due to its
   large beaches, it has become one of the main tourist areas of the
   region.

   Póvoa de Varzim has a rich seafood cuisine and retains ancient customs,
   such as siglas poveiras and masseiras. It is one of the few legal
   gambling areas in Portugal and has significant textile and food
   industries.

History

   The Cividade in the east of the current city is over 3000 years old.
   The city's fall was the basis of the novel Uma Deusa na Bruma (A
   Goddess in the Mist) by João Aguiar.
   Enlarge
   The Cividade in the east of the current city is over 3000 years old.
   The city's fall was the basis of the novel Uma Deusa na Bruma (A
   Goddess in the Mist) by João Aguiar.

   Discoveries of Acheulean stone tools suggest Póvoa de Varzim has been
   inhabited since the Lower Palaeolithic, around 200,000 BC. The first
   groups of shepherds settled on the coast of Póvoa de Varzim between the
   4th millennium and early 2nd millennium BC. Their dead were deposited
   in tumuli, which are the oldest monuments found in the municipality.

   Widespread pillaging by rival tribes led the resident populations of
   the coastal plain of Póvoa de Varzim to raise a fortified town atop the
   hill that stood next to the sea. Cividade de Terroso thus emerged; it
   increased in importance and became a major Castro culture settlement.
   The city area covered 120,000 square metres and had several hundred
   inhabitants. It maintained commercial relations with the Mediterranean
   civilizations, specifically during the Carthaginian dominium in the
   southern Iberian Peninsula.

   During the Punic Wars, the Romans became aware of the Castro region's
   rich deposits of gold and tin. Viriathus, who led Lusitanian troops,
   hindered the expansion of the Roman Republic north of the river Douro.
   However, his murder in 138 BC opened the way for the Roman legions.
   Over the following two years, Decimus Junius Brutus advanced into the
   Castro region from south of the Douro, crushed the Castro armies, and
   took Cividade de Terroso, leaving it in ruins.

   The region was incorporated into the Roman Empire and totally pacified
   during the reign of Caesar Augustus. In the coastal plain, a Roman
   villa was constructed, the property of a Roman family — the Euracini,
   who mixed with the Castro people who returned to live on the plain —
   Villa Euracini probably developed in this way. Fishing developed with
   the cetariæ, a Roman fish factory, chiefly for the production of garum,
   an Ancient Roman fish sauce condiment and aphrodisiac.

   With the fall of the Roman Empire, Suevi populations established
   themselves in the region. Commencing in the 9th century, Viking
   fishermen originating from Britanny raised a peaceful colony in Villa
   Euracini. In the following century, Viking raids took place throughout
   northwestern Iberia. It was first mentioned as a Portuguese town in
   March 26, 953 during the rule of Countess Mumadona Dias in the Era of
   the first County of Portugal. During the Middle Ages, the name Euracini
   evolved to Uracini, Vracini, Veracini, Verazini, Verazim, and
   eventually Varazim.
   The former Póvoa Bay, and its seawall, was once the largest and busiest
   seaport in northern Portugal. The Port of Póvoa de Varzim and marina
   are, at present, located in this site.
   Enlarge
   The former Póvoa Bay, and its seawall, was once the largest and busiest
   seaport in northern Portugal. The Port of Póvoa de Varzim and marina
   are, at present, located in this site.

   The natural wealth of Varazim's coast attracted aristocrats and nobles
   to the land. The northern area belonged to a military order, the
   Knights Hospitaller. It was named Varazim dos Cavaleiros (Knights'
   Varazim). The southern division of Varazim, the royal land, was
   important for fishery and agriculture, and because of this, disputes
   arose over the income brought in by fishing.

   In 1308, King Denis conceded a charter (known in Portugal as a Foral),
   giving the royal land to the 54 families of Varazim; these had to found
   a type of medieval town known as Póvoa. In 1312, King Denis donated the
   town to his bastard son, Afonso Sanches, Lord of Albuquerque, who
   included it in the patrimony of the Convent of Santa Clara, which he
   had just founded in Vila do Conde. In 1514 during the era of charter
   reform, King Manuel I gave a new charter to Villa da Povoa de Varzim.
   The town gained a Town Hall, public square and a pillory, and involved
   itself in the Portuguese discoveries.
   Avenida dos Banhos in mid-20th century.
   Enlarge
   Avenida dos Banhos in mid-20th century.

   In the 17th century, the brine preservation business developed
   considerably, which, by the next century, transformed Póvoa into the
   biggest fish market in the north of the country, supplying even inland
   provinces via a battalion of hawkers. As a result the Poveiros became
   known in the region as "the people who most worked and better knew the
   sea". The community became wealthier; following a royal provision by
   Queen Mary I, Corregedor Almada reorganized the layout of town so that
   it finally became attractive and thus provided potential for a new
   business — sea baths.

   In the 19th century, the town became popular as a summer destination
   for the upper classes of Porto and Minho regions due to its large
   beaches and the development of leisure and private gambling businesses:
   in the end of the 19th century, there were 17 illegal casinos, often in
   the back doors of popular cafés.
   Póvoa's shoreline in early 1960s.
   Enlarge
   Póvoa's shoreline in early 1960s.

   On February 27, 1892, a tragedy devastated the community: 105 fishermen
   were killed in a storm, just metres off the shore.

   The thriving state of the textile, food and tourist industries; the
   rail connection to Porto in 1875; and its development into the most
   popular holiday destination in northern Portugal, led to a major growth
   between the 1930s and 1960s, with the result that on June 16 1973, the
   statute allowing it to be considered a city was finally achieved.

   In modern times, the centuries-old fishing industry has lost much of
   its importance. Póvoa de Varzim is essentially a service-sector city,
   but unlike other urban areas of Porto, it is not a dormitory community
   for commuters. In fact, it developed and grew independently: being one
   of northern Portugal's main locations, it developed a cosmopolitan
   style and serves as a centre for neighbouring towns.

Geography

   Map with the 12 civil parishes of Póvoa de Varzim.
   Enlarge
   Map with the 12 civil parishes of Póvoa de Varzim.
   Satellite image with Cape Santo André (north), Ave River (south) and
   Serra de Rates forest (the great dark area in the middle).
   Enlarge
   Satellite image with Cape Santo André (north), Ave River (south) and
   Serra de Rates forest (the great dark area in the middle).

   Occupying an area of 82.1 square kilometres or 31.7 square miles, Póvoa
   de Varzim lies between the Cávado and Ave rivers, or, from a wider
   perspective, halfway between the Minho and Douro rivers on the northern
   coast of Portugal — the Costa Verde. The city is limited to the north
   by the municipality of Esposende, to the northeast by Barcelos, to the
   east by Vila Nova de Famalicão, and to the south by Vila do Conde. To
   the west, it has a shoreline on the Atlantic Ocean.

   Wandering along the coast one discerns Cape Santo André which is,
   possibly, the Avarus Promontory referred by Ptolemy, geographer of
   Ancient Greece, in the territory of the Callaici. The rocky cliffs,
   common features from the estuary of Minho River down, disappear in
   Póvoa de Varzim giving way to a coastal plain. The plain originates
   from an old marine plateau conferring a sandy soil to the lands that
   cross the coast, and forming sand dunes, mainly in northern Aguçadoura.

   São Félix Hill (202 m, 663 ft) and Cividade Hill (155 m, 509 ft) are
   easily visible rising above the landscape. Despite the modest rise, the
   expanse of the plain makes these easy reference points on the horizon.
   The mountain chain known as Serra de Rates divides the municipality in
   two distinctive areas: the coastal plain gives way to hills where the
   forests become more abundant and the soils have less sea influence. In
   this landscape dominated by the plain and low hills, only the hill of
   Corga da Soalheira (150 m, 492 ft), in the interior, is easily
   recognizable.

   The hydrography of the municipality has no large rivers, but abundant
   small water courses exist due to the relief of the coastal plain. Some
   of these water courses are permanent, such the Este River, which feeds
   into the Ave River. The Esteiro River's source is located at the base
   of Cividade Hill and empties at the beach of Aver-o-Mar while the Alto
   River's source is at the base of São Félix and reaches the Atlantic at
   Rio Alto Beach. The land is well-irrigated, the appearance of springs
   and wells are very common, since underground water is often close to
   the surface.
   Rocks and sand dunes covered by native vegetation near Cape Santo
   André.
   Enlarge
   Rocks and sand dunes covered by native vegetation near Cape Santo
   André.

   The forest areas suffer from strong demographic pressure and intensive
   agriculture. Forests are still important in parishes surrounded by the
   Serra de Rates, whose flora is distinguished by the pedunculate oak or
   the european holly. In 18th century, the monks of Tibães planted
   pinewood, which today characterizes the civil parish of Estela. In the
   past the Atlantic forest predominated, with trees from medium to great
   size, such as oaks, ash trees, hazels, strawberry trees, holm oak, and
   alders. The rocks throughout the entire coastline are the true
   fisheries of clams, fish and seaweed. These rocks and the dunes form
   ecosystems that possess an important ecological wealth, but are
   threatened by holiday-makers, dune-based sports and coastal
   constructions.

   In the urban sphere, the City Park (800,000 m^2) will be extended from
   the A28 motorway to Pedreira Lagoon and will have densely forested
   areas, open spaces, hills, a new lake and sports area. In addition,
   there is Anjo’s Urban Green, which is of environmental importance to
   the city.

Climate

   The city possesses a microclimate and is considered the region least
   subject to frosts in all northern Portugal due to the winter winds
   that, normally, blow from south and southwest. The prevailing northern
   wind (known as Nortada) arise, typically, in the summer after midday,
   these refresh the air in a climate that is classified as temperate
   marine.

   The municipality has gentle summers and mild winters, with average
   temperatures oscillating between 12.5 and 15 °C (54.5 and 59 °F). The
   annual precipitation varies between 1,200 and 1,400 mm (47.2 and 55
   inches). Due to proximity, its climate shares many characteristics with
   the climate of Porto. Sporadically, during its dry summer, a mass of
   hot and wet air, brought by the south and western maritime winds,
   creates the city's characteristic fog covering only the coast, which
   often dissipates with the afternoon sun.

Cityscape

   The city of Póvoa de Varzim is located in a total area of 12.8 km²
   (4.94 mi²) and is divided in eleven districts.
   Enlarge
   The city of Póvoa de Varzim is located in a total area of 12.8 km²
   (4.94 mi²) and is divided in eleven districts.

   Located in the coastal plain and imprisoned between the sea and hills,
   the city of Póvoa de Varzim is constituted by eleven Partes (parts),
   which are significant areas of the city and have population and
   topological differences. These districts are, in turn, part of three
   formal administrative structures known as freguesias ( civil parishes):
   Póvoa de Varzim (parish), A Ver-o-Mar, and Argivai. To the south, there
   is an urban continuity with the city of Vila do Conde to where the city
   grew in the past. Most of Póvoa de Varzim’s population growth and
   commercial development are occurring in the eastern parts of the city.

   The city started from an inland town that extended to the coast. The
   Bairro da Matriz was a significant settlement in the 14th century,
   whose nucleus was the centre from whence the city grew and is the
   historical district of the city, being a neighbourhood composed by old
   single family homes. Bairro Sul grew from the population of fishermen
   that came from the Matriz neighbourhood and its structure of streets
   parallel to the coast with fishermen's houses — "beehive of the
   fishermen" — was already reasonably developed in the 18th century.

   Bairro Norte developed at the beginning of the 20th century with
   streets parallel to the sea, resembling Bairro Sul. In earlier times a
   fishery district, it became a beach resort and very urbanized (the most
   populous area with high buildings). This neighbourhood has triggered
   the development of neighbouring areas, such as Agro-Velho, Barreiros,
   and Parque da Cidade.

   Mariadeira, Regufe, Penalves, and Gândara are old areas, with only
   modest development, possessing different topologies and of almost
   exclusively residential nature with small central areas. Downtown
   (Centro) has the opposite character to the previous ones, in particular
   Junqueira that became in a commercial district.

   Giesteira, which maintains a rural facet in the interior of the city,
   originated from the old village of Giesteira that, with Argivai,
   constituted the main nucleus of the settlement before the 14th century,
   and whose lavradores ( farmers) had helped in the installation of
   "póvoa" in the coast. Aver-o-Mar developed a distinctive character by
   mixing both communities, forming a genuine community of fishing-farmers
   or pescadores-lavradores. With the exception of Santo André, in the
   northern zone, which keeps an unchanged fishing character identified by
   family homes that have grown up in a spontaneous way.

   The neighbourhoods have greater importance for the inhabitants during
   the Rusgas in which the most traditional neighbourhoods compete amongst
   themselves on the night of Saint Peter, part of the city’s festivals.

Ruralscape

   São Pedro de Rates in 1669 by Pier Maria Baldi, drawn during the
   pilgrimage of Prince Cosimo de Medici (future Cosimo III de' Medici,
   Grand Duke of Tuscany) to Santiago de Compostela.
   Enlarge
   São Pedro de Rates in 1669 by Pier Maria Baldi, drawn during the
   pilgrimage of Prince Cosimo de Medici (future Cosimo III de' Medici,
   Grand Duke of Tuscany) to Santiago de Compostela.

   The green belt of Póvoa de Varzim is the group of civil parishes known
   as Aguçadoura, Amorim, Balasar, Beiriz, Estela, Laundos, Navais, Rates,
   and Terroso. In these rural parishes, beyond the main rural
   communities, there are smaller villages, namely: Além, Fontaínhas,
   Gandra, Gestrins, Gresufes, Sejães, and Têso.

   The parishes of Beiriz and Amorim are areas of transition between the
   urban and rural surroundings given that these are close to the city.
   Beiriz is recognized by its Beiriz carpets and Amorim is popular in the
   city for its bread, characteristically eaten at high temperatures just
   after being made — the Broa de Amorim.

   In the extensive sandy beaches of the north of the municipality, there
   are the parishes of the Aguçadoura, Estela, and Navais. The first two
   have common aspects, such as the beach based agriculture: the masseira
   fields. Aguçadoura has productive land, supplier of horticultural
   goods, and Estela became a recreation area. Widely known in Navais is
   the Fountain of the Enchanted Moorish Girl, on the east of the EN13
   road, whose water was used, long ago, to celebrate masses. The people
   attribute legends and magical virtues to it, believing gold oxens or
   witches combing their hair appear there during the night.

   In the parishes of Laundos and Terroso there are the hills of Póvoa:
   São Félix and Cividade. During the Middle Ages, Saint Félix would have
   lived and meditated on the first; on the second there is one of the
   main cities of the Castro culture, Cividade de Terroso.

   Rates is a historic small town that developed around the monastery
   established by Henry of Burgundy in 1100 on the site of an older temple
   and gained importance due to the legend of Saint Peter of Rates, first
   bishop of Braga, becoming in a central place in the Portuguese Way of
   Saint James. Nearby, the parish of Balasar achieved religious
   importance and became a pilgrimage destination in the 20th century due
   to Alexandrina (died 1955) who gained fame as a saint, beatified by
   Pope John Paul II.

Demographics

                                                        [USEMAP:48931.png]

   A native of Póvoa de Varzim is called a Poveiro. According to the 2001
   Census, there were 63,470 inhabitants that year, 38 848 (61.2%) of whom
   lived in the city. The number goes up to 100,000 if adjacent satellite
   areas are taken into account. The population of the entire municipality
   grew only 1% between 1981 and 1991, then increased by 15.3% between
   1991 and 2001. During that period, the urban population had grown 23%,
   with the number of families increasing considerably — by about 44.5%.

   The urban area has a population density of 3035/km² (7,864/mi²), while
   the rural area has a density of 355.5/km² (920/mi²). The rural areas
   away from the city tend to be scarcely populated, becoming much denser
   near it. During the summer the resident population in the city triples;
   this seasonal movement from neighbouring cities is due to the draw of
   the beach and 29.9% of homes had seasonal use in 2001, the highest in
   Greater Porto.

   According to the Urbanization Plan, the city proper will have a
   population of 46,170 inhabitants in 2011, representing an increase of
   almost 19%. The population will continue to be predominantly young
   (17.5%), though there will be more older people, with the aged
   population projected to grow to 14.2%. Póvoa de Varzim is the youngest
   city in Greater Porto with a birth rate of 13.665 and mortality rate of
   8.330.
   Heterogeneous group of Poveiros during the 2006 celebrations of the
   city's Saint Peter festival.
   Enlarge
   Heterogeneous group of Poveiros during the 2006 celebrations of the
   city's Saint Peter festival.

   Due to practice of endogamy and the caste system, Póvoa's fishing
   community maintained its local ethnic characteristics; at the beginning
   of 20th century, anthropologists had classified the local population as
   being a Semitic-Norman community, composed of descendants of
   Phoenicians and Vikings. In a research published in O poveiro in 1908,
   Fonseca Cardoso considered that a dolichocephalous anthropologic
   element, the aquiline nose, was of Semitic-Phoenician origin.
   Anthropological and cultural data indicate Nordic fishermen settling
   during the period of the coast's resettlement. In the book The Races of
   Europe, Poveiros were distinguished by having a slightly greater than
   usual degree of blondism, broad faces of unknown origin, and broad
   jaws. Other noteworthy settlers were the Castro people (of mixed Celtic
   and pre-Celtic origin), the Romans, and the Suebi. The population
   remained heterogeneous for centuries: the man of the coastal area was
   devoted to fishing, blond or red-haired and well-built; the man from
   the interior was a farmer with Galician character (typical northern
   Portuguese), shorter with dark hair.

   Poveiros have migrated to other places and this attenuated the
   population growth. On the other hand, during the emigration period of
   the 20th century, many Brasileiros (Portuguese emigrants to Brazil)
   returned to their native land. And, nowadays, the migratory flow is
   reversed; there is a growing community of Ukrainians, Brazilians,
   Chinese and Russians. An inflow of people from neighbouring
   municipalities, who the city now tries to attract, further increases
   the population.

   In 2005, in a study published by the Expresso, Póvoa de Varzim was
   considered the seventh most developed, in terms of quality of life,
   among the Portuguese municipalities and the most developed in Porto
   district. The newspaper Primeiro de Janeiro honoured Póvoa, on the same
   occasion, as the "city of future" in the Porto district, in fields such
   as environment, cultural heritage, music, sports, and literary events.

Culture

   Camisola Poveira, used by men, during a Poveiro folklore show in
   Passeio Alegre Square.
   Enlarge
   Camisola Poveira, used by men, during a Poveiro folklore show in
   Passeio Alegre Square.
   Matrix of Siglas Poveiras.
   Enlarge
   Matrix of Siglas Poveiras.

   Poveiro culture is the result of what is found in the Minho Region
   influenced by the local fishery habits, protected and shaped by local
   factors over the course of generations. The docudrama film Ala-Arriba!
   by José Leitão de Barros, popularized this unique Portuguese fishing
   community within the country during the 1940s. The local expression
   ala-arriba means "go (upwards)" and it represents the co-operation
   between the inhabitants and is also the motto of Póvoa de Varzim.

   According to a tradition that persists to this day, the youngest son is
   the heir of the family, as in old Brittany and Denmark, because it was
   expected that he would take care of his parents when they became old.
   Women govern and lead the family, because men were usually away from
   home fishing.

   Formerly, the population was divided into different " castes": The
   Lanchões (those who possessed boats which were capable of deep-water
   fishing, therefore more prosperous), the Sardinheiros (those who
   possessed small boats and could only catch fish of smaller size along
   the shore) and the Lavradores (the farmers). As a rule, the three
   groups remained distinct, and mixed marriages between them were
   forbidden, mostly because of the isolationism of the fishermen who were
   headed by a group of patriarchs.

   Siglas Poveiras are a form of proto-writing system, with a restricted
   number of symbols that were combined to form more complex symbols;
   these were used as a rudimentary visual communication system, and as a
   family coat of arms or signature to mark belongings. Merchants wrote
   them in their books of credit; fishermen used it in religious rituals
   by marking them in the door of Catholic chapels near hills or beaches;
   in the table of their town’s first church during marriage; and also had
   magical significance, such as the São Selimão sigla , that could be
   used as a protecting symbol and not as family mark. Children used the
   same family mark with piques as a form of cadency. The youngest son
   would not have any pique and would inherit the marca-brasão, his
   father's symbol. The siglas are still used, though much less commonly,
   by some fishing families; and are, possibly, related with Viking
   traditions.
   Lancha Poveira is a boat that developed from the Drakkar Viking, but
   without a long stern and bow and with a Mediterranean sail.
   Enlarge
   Lancha Poveira is a boat that developed from the Drakkar Viking, but
   without a long stern and bow and with a Mediterranean sail.

   The camisolas poveiras are local pullovers, with fishing motifs and
   name embroidered in sigla, made for celebration and decorative
   purposes. The pullovers were a local dress until 1892, when a
   misfortune at sea led the community to stop wearing it. It became
   popular again at the end of the 1970s. Today, there are efforts to
   modernize it on one hand and on the other there are endeavours to
   preserve the long-established practices. Other typical handicrafts are
   the Tapetes de Beiriz or Beiriz carpets, which are characteristic
   carpets renowned and demanded nationally and internationally.

   Due to modern national influences, some local traditions started to be
   lost: the caste structure perished; the traditional casamento poveiro,
   in which the newly-wed couple was covered by a fisherman's net and
   watered with vinho verde in order to bring fortune to the marriage, is
   becoming a forgotten practice; the lancha poveira, which was formerly
   common around the beaches of Póvoa, was gone by the 1950s.

   The most traditional ingredients of the local cuisine are locally-grown
   vegetables and fish. The fish used to create the traditional dishes are
   divided in two categories, the "poor" fish ( sardine, ray, mackerel,
   and others) and the "wealthy" fish (such as whiting, snook, and
   alfonsino). The most famous local dish is Pescada à Poveira (Poveira
   Whiting), whose main ingredients are, along with the fish that gives
   the name to the dish, potatoes, eggs and a boiled onion and tomato
   sauce. Other fishery dishes include the Arroz de Sardinha (sardine
   rice), Caldeirada de Peixe (fish stew), Lulas Recheadas à Poveiro
   (Poveiro stuffed squids), Arroz de Marisco (seafood rice) and Lagosta
   Suada (steamed lobster). Shellfish and boiled iscas, pataniscas, and
   bolinhos de bacalhau are popular snacks. Other dishes include Feijoada
   Poveira, made with white beans and served with dry rice (arroz seco);
   and Francesinha Poveira made in long bread that first appeared in 1962
   as fast food for holidaymakers.

Government and politics

                                         City Council of Póvoa de Varzim.
                                                                   Enlarge
                                         City Council of Póvoa de Varzim.

                                    Civil parishes of Póvoa de Varzim
                                 * A Ver-o-Mar

                                 * Aguçadoura

                                 * Amorim

                                 * Argivai

                                 * Balasar

                                 * Beiriz

                                                * Estela

                                                * Laundos

                                                * Póvoa de Varzim (parish)

                                                * Navais

                                                * Rates

                                                * Terroso

   The city of Póvoa de Varzim is governed by a Câmara Municipal (City
   Council) composed of nine councilmen. A Municipal Assembly exists and
   it is the legislative body of the municipality, consisting of 39
   members, twelve of whom are presidents of civil parishes. After the
   2005 municipal elections, six councilmen were members of the
   centre-right Partido Social Democrata (PSD) and the remaining three of
   the centre-left Partido Socialista (PS). The mayor is Macedo Vieira,
   for the PSD, elected with 54.21% of the votes. The PSD holds the
   majority of public offices both in the Municipal Assembly and in the
   civil parishes.

   After the first free elections, with the end of the Estado Novo period,
   only right-wing parties have governed the city: the city council was
   governed by the CDS between 1976 and 1989 and since then by the PSD.
   The CDS saw its popularity suffer an abrupt decline in 1997, and has
   since then been the third political party. On the other hand, the PSD
   in the same year achieved its first absolute majority with 62.4% of the
   votes.

   Between 1308 and 1836, the municipality was made up of a single parish
   territory of which, over time, grew to approach the medieval borders.
   With the administrative reform of the territory in 1836 Póvoa began to
   control the territories: the council of Rates was annexed, the lands of
   Argivai recouped, and other parishes acquired.

   Póvoa de Varzim is the northernmost municipality in the Porto
   Metropolitan Area, about 27 km (16 mi) north of downtown Porto. Despite
   being enclosed in the northern metropolis, Póvoa de Varzim is part of
   the Association of Municipalities of the Ave Valley. Within the context
   of the European Union, Póvoa de Varzim is twinned, since 1986, with the
   city of Montgeron in France with which it has a very close relation,
   and due to this, it received two Golden Stars of Town-twinning from the
   European Commission (1995 and 2005). It also has friendship agreements
   with Eschborn in Germany (since 2000) and Żabbar in Malta (since 2001).

Economy

   Seaport of Póvoa de Varzim.
   Enlarge
   Seaport of Póvoa de Varzim.
   Casino da Póvoa.
   Enlarge
   Casino da Póvoa.
   Redonda Beach.
   Enlarge
   Redonda Beach.

   The economy of Póvoa de Varzim is driven by tourism (namely gambling,
   hotels and restaurants), manufacturing, construction, fishing, and
   agriculture. During the 2001 census, 1770 companies were headquartered
   in Póvoa de Varzim, of which 2.82% were of the primary sector, 33.73%
   of the secondary and 63.45% of the tertiary, including some software
   companies operating nationally and abroad. Despite its weight in
   Greater Porto international trade is weak, in 2004 it represented 1.1%
   of departures and 0.9% of arrivals, its coverage rate of arrivals
   against departures suppressed the 100% mark. The activity rate had
   grown from 48% to 51.1% from 1991 to 2001, but there were 3353 citizens
   unemployed in June 2006.

   The fact that it is a seaside city has shaped Póvoa de Varzim's
   economy: the fishing industry, from the fishing vessels that put in
   each day to the canning industry and to the city's fish market, beach
   agriculture, seaweed-gathering for fertilizing fields, and tourism are
   the result of its geography. Tourism and the related industries are
   more relevant in Póvoa's economy these days, as fisheries have lost
   importance. Nevertheless, the mean value of fish landed in 2004, in its
   seaport, was almost three times that of Matosinhos seaport and
   significantly higher in the average vessels' capacity. Its fishing
   productivity is also comparatively higher than the national average.

   Energy self-sustainability is foreseen with the installation of the
   world's first wave power plant, the Okeanós. This plant, consisting of
   three Pelamis devices, is being installed north of the city. In the
   first phase (2006), the park will produce 2.25 megawatts, enough energy
   for 1500 homes. In 2008, it is expected that the Okeanós will become a
   true plant consisting of 28 machines capable to produce 24 mW,
   supplying 250 thousand inhabitants, 10% of that energy, (capable of
   supplying one third of the population of the municipality) will be
   assigned to the city.

   The manufacturing industry is still an important employer, mostly in
   the textile industry that has low productivity and income. These
   industries are located out of the city in Beiriz, Balasar, and Rates.
   Other employers include the blanket handicraft industry of Terroso and
   Laundos, rope making, and the wood industries of Rates. One of the
   thriving initiatives of the municipality is the Parque Industrial de
   Laundos (Industrial Park of Laundos) that is in close proximity and
   linked to the A28 Motorway.
   Medas of sargassum. Seaweeds are used as a natural fertilizer.
   Enlarge
   Medas of sargassum. Seaweeds are used as a natural fertilizer.

   Despite being a small municipality, Póvoa de Varzim is one of the
   principal food suppliers for Greater Porto and is part of the ancient
   Vinho Verde winemaking region. The coastal populations developed the
   masseira farm fields. The masseira technique increases agricultural
   yields by using large, rectangular depressions dug into sand dunes,
   with the spoil piled up into banks surrounding the depression. Grapes
   are cultivated on the banks to the south, east and west, and trees and
   reeds on the northern slope act as a windbreak against the prevailing
   northern wind. Garden crops are grown in the central depression. Large
   amounts of fresh water are required to irrigate the crops, together
   with sargassum seaweed for fertilisation. Production is still
   specialized in horticultural goods, but most of the masseiras were
   substituted by greenhouses. On the other hand, the interior region is
   dedicated to milk production. The Agros Enterprise Centre (part of
   Lactogal, the largest dairy products and milk producer company in
   Portugal) is under construction and will be the headquarters of the
   company and will have several departments such as exhibition park and
   laboratories, thus becoming the largest agricultural project in the
   north of Portugal.

Transport

   Motorway network reaching Póvoa de Varzim.
   Enlarge
   Motorway network reaching Póvoa de Varzim.

   The city of Póvoa de Varzim is served by a well-developed
   transportation network that employs maritime, aerial and terrestrial
   travel. The terrestrial access infrastructure is composed of national
   motorways ( freeways), the national roads system, and metro trains.
   These infrastructures and the airport, bus terminal, marina and harbour
   are used daily by thousands of people to travel to the city.

   The city is connected by road on a north-south axis from Valença to
   Porto by the A28 motorway. It is also reached by the A7 and A11
   motorways on a east-west axis, through the south and north of the city,
   in that order, and both cross the A28.

   The Francisco Sá Carneiro Airport (OPO) is located 18 km (11 mi) south
   of the city. It is the second biggest international airport in Portugal
   and serves all Greater Porto. The Póvoa de Varzim Bus Central is a
   terminus for urban and long distance buses also used as an entrance for
   travellers arriving from national cities, as well from other European
   cities. The Line B of Porto Metro links Póvoa de Varzim to Porto with
   two services: a standard and a shuttle (the Expresso); through Verdes
   station, Metro trains link the city and the airport.

   The traditional road system of the city, composed of roads that run
   parallel in the direction of the sea, can be seen in any of the
   following avenues: Avenida do Mar, Avenida Vasco da Gama, Avenida
   Mouzinho de Albuquerque, and Avenida Santos Graça. The Avenida dos
   Descobrimentos and Avenida dos Banhos, in other hand, run parallel to
   the coast. The growth of the city inland and northwards made ring roads
   more important, this can be seen in the setup of the B and C ways,
   inner and outer belt roads.

   Although it lost usefulness for average and long distances, the
   National Roads system has acquired municipal interest: EN13 that cuts
   the city in half in a north-south direction, is used by commuters
   originating from the northern parishes and from the city of Vila do
   Conde, in the south, to travel downtown. The EN205 and the EN206 are
   used by commuters starting from the interior of the municipality.

Healthcare and security

   The first healthcare structure, the Santa Casa da Misericórdia da Póvoa
   de Varzim (Holy House of Mercy), opened in 1756. The hospitals of the
   city are the Hospital São Pedro Pescador (state-run) and HOSPOR
   Clipóvoa (private). The public hospital suffers from lack of quality
   bed spaces. Due to this, there is an on-going plan to build a modern
   hospital, in the border between the cities of Póvoa de Varzim and Vila
   do Conde, to serve the population of both municipalities. The Centro de
   Saúde da Póvoa de Varzim (Health Centre) is a public primary care
   building which has extensions in the main parishes.

   Policing in Póvoa de Varzim is provided by the Municipal Police of
   Póvoa de Varzim and national polices. The Municipal Police of Póvoa de
   Varzim, one of the first to be established in the country, is an
   administrative police force that acts solely within the municipality
   and reports directly to the President of the City Council.

   The Escola Prática dos Serviços, just east of the city by the A28
   motorway, is the national headquarters for military administration
   instruction, with the Battalion of Military Administration, and, due to
   the reorganization of army services, the former Escola Prática de
   Administração Militar, from 2006 onwards it gained the material and
   transport services, thus increasing its range of functions and troop
   numbers.

   In terms of crime, Póvoa de Varzim is considered by the Polícia de
   Segurança Pública as a "calm" zone in all categories of offense;
   violent crime, in particular, is practically non-existent. Mostly,
   crime consists of minor robberies of homes, stores, or from cars.

Education

   Póvoa de Varzim has public, denominational and independent schools in
   the city and rural areas. Public education in the municipality is
   provided by five school districts: Flávio Gonçalves, Cego do Maio,
   Aver-o-Mar, Campo Aberto, and Rates. These school districts arrange
   kindergartens and schools to the 9th grade of different locales of the
   municipality and are headed by Escolas de Educação Básica do 2.º e 3.º
   Ciclos (6th to the 9th grade schools) that give the name to the
   respective districts. Private schools in Póvoa de Varzim are primarily
   run by catholic parishes or groups, but the Grande Colégio da Póvoa de
   Varzim and Campo Verde School of Agriculture are eminent independent
   schools and MAPADI is a large facility and school for children with
   down syndrome.
   Porto Polytechnic's Superior School of Industrial Studies and
   Management.
   Enlarge
   Porto Polytechnic's Superior School of Industrial Studies and
   Management.

   High schools (10th to the 12th grade) are situated in the city centre:
   Escola Secundária Eça de Queirós and Escola Secundária Rocha Peixoto.
   The Colégio de Amorim is an independent school in the civil parish of
   Amorim that also offers secondary education. Eça de Queirós was a
   lyceum created in 1904 that maintains its humanist outlook and Rocha
   Peixoto was a former industrial and commercial school created in 1924.

   The Porto Polytechnic runs, jointly in Póvoa de Varzim and Vila do
   Conde, the Superior School of Industrial Studies and Management
   (ESEIG), which once was based in two campuses (one in each city), but
   it was united in a single new school, on the border between the two
   cities. A little more than one quarter of the population now has
   intermediate or superior level qualifications. The illiteracy level in
   Póvoa de Varzim was reduced between 1991 and 2001 from 7 to 5.9
   percent.

Arts

   The Rocha Peixoto Municipal Library is located near the main schools.
   Enlarge
   The Rocha Peixoto Municipal Library is located near the main schools.

   Póvoa de Varzim is strongly associated with Portuguese literature. It
   was the city where Eça de Queirós, one of the main writers in the
   Portuguese language, was born; and where José Régio passed his free
   time writing (mostly in Diana, a writers meeting place that is
   currently the beach library). Other famous writers closely associated
   with the city are Almeida Garrett, Camilo Castelo Branco, António
   Nobre, and Agustina Bessa-Luís. The Rocha Peixoto Municipal Library,
   established in 1880, on the 300th anniversary of the death of Luís de
   Camões received in 1913, as an inheritance, the private library of the
   Poveiro scientist Rocha Peixoto and, after some relocation, was finally
   housed in the current building in 1991.

   The city organizes international meetings, one of which is the
   Correntes d'Escritas between writers from countries where Iberian
   languages are spoken, specifically from Portugal, Spain, Brazil,
   Lusophone Africa and Hispanic America. Another erudite event of the
   city is the International Music Festival of Póvoa de Varzim, that, in
   2006, commemorated its 28th year.

   The Filantrópica, created in 1935, has as its purpose the execution of
   cultural activities, inducement to artistic creation, and aid in the
   integration of Eastern European immigrants (represented by free classes
   in Portuguese and paid classes of Russian). The Varazim Teatro is a
   cultural and youth group of amateur theatre that has encouraged local
   drama. The municipal auditory of Póvoa de Varzim had been created in
   early 21st century and is where the School of Music of Póvoa de Varzim
   and the Octopus Film club with exhibitions of quality cinema coexist.

   The Ethnography and History Municipal Museum of Póvoa de Varzim was
   established in 1937 by António dos Santos Graça in order to preserve
   the Poveiro’s practices and traditions which were being lost without
   record or research. Two themed museums exist: the Museum Nucleus of the
   Romanesque Church of Saint Peter of Rates which is dedicated to the
   dissemination of the history, legend and art surrounding the Romanesque
   Church of Saint Peter of Rates, and the Archaeological Nucleus of
   Cividade de Terroso, which serves as a presentation of Cividade de
   Terroso. The Arquivo Municipal is the city's archive planned for those
   who are interested in tracing their own family pedigree chart or
   scrutinize the city's records.

Leisure and entertainment

   Rio Alto is a tourist area attracting golfers, naturists, campers, and
   agronomists.
   Enlarge
   Rio Alto is a tourist area attracting golfers, naturists, campers, and
   agronomists.

   Póvoa de Varzim's beach is a 12 km stretch of golden sands, with water
   temperatures roughly 18 degrees Celsius during the summer; but notable
   for being rich in iodine. The beaches of the city: Redonda, Salgueira,
   Lagoa to Fragosa are very popular to locals and visitors. The beaches
   to the north: Quião, Santo André, Aguçadoura, and Rio Alto, where sand
   dunes formed, have hassle-free surroundings. The latter, given its
   difficult access and the privacy offered by the sand dunes, is
   frequently chosen by naturists, even though it is not official, nearby
   there is a camping park and other venues.
   Passeio Alegre district.
   Enlarge
   Passeio Alegre district.
   The Junqueira shopping area.
   Enlarge
   The Junqueira shopping area.

   Several beaches are divided by rocks, and in Verde Beach there are
   ruins in a rocky formation. Thus, the beaches have raised the city’s
   profile in the north and are responsible for the development of leisure
   activities in the city. The Casino da Póvoa is a central gaming and
   entertainment location in the North since the 1930s, where gambling and
   shows take place throughout the year.

   Passeio Alegre is used by locals and visitors to take a walk along the
   beaches of the city. It is a popular nightlife area during the summer
   and weekends. Younger Poveiros meet at the night in the bars near
   Passeio Alegre, mostly in Passeio Alegre Square, but as well in the
   Carvalhido, Lota and Lagoa Beach, before going on to the nightclubs,
   located in the two extremities of Passeio Alegre, very late at night.

   Póvoa de Varzim's busiest shopping district is Junqueira, whose central
   street has been solely pedestrian since 1955 and renowned, nationwide,
   for its jewellery. It is rich in 19th century and early 20th century
   buildings. Some of the nearby streets have also become pedestrian.
   Restaurants are located for some kilometres along the EN13 road that
   crosses the interior of the city, especially in the northern section.
   Quite a few are well-known and reputed due to Portuguese barbecued
   chicken, seafood, francesinha, bacalhau or even due to sexy waiters.

   São Félix Hill possesses windmills converted into tourist accommodation
   with panoramic views over the city, the hilltop is reached using the
   São Félix stairs. Póvoa de Varzim has varied hotels, some of which
   include the Grand Hotel (Mercure Hotel), built in the 1930's, neighbour
   of the casino; and the inns installed in the Santo André Beach, on the
   top of the São Félix hill and near the golf course.

Sports

   City Park Stadium. The aim of the stadium is to be discreet but it
   offers facilities for several sports, especially football.
   Enlarge
   City Park Stadium. The aim of the stadium is to be discreet but it
   offers facilities for several sports, especially football.

   The city has developed a number of sporting venues and because of that
   it has hosted several national, European and world championships in
   different sports. 38% of the population practise sport, a high rate
   when compared to the national average.

   The most popular sport in Póvoa de Varzim is the association football.
   The City Park's Stadium and synthetic fields for football practice and
   athletics are today the main stage for Póvoa de Varzim's People's
   championship where its 19 people's football clubs compete: Aguçadoura,
   Amorim, Argivai, Averomar, Balasar, Barreiros, Beiriz, Belém, Estela,
   Juve Norte, Laundos, Leões da Lapa, Mariadeira, Matriz, Navais, Rates,
   Regufe, Terroso, and Unidos ao Varzim. Varzim SC is the professional
   football club of the city; as of 2006 it plays in the Liga de Honra
   (2nd level), but several times has reached the Portuguese Liga.

   Swimming is the second most popular sport; it is practised in school or
   in the swimming pool complexes near the beach. One of the complexes
   belongs to Varzim Lazer, a municipal company that runs the sports
   equipment found north of the city: the tennis academy, the bullfighting
   arena, the municipal pavilion, along with the swimming pools. The other
   complex is property of Clube Desportivo da Póvoa, a club that is
   notorious, in the city, because it competes in several sports: rink
   hockey, volleyball, basketball, athletics, and auto racing.

   The Casino da Póvoa Rally is a rally racing event taking place along
   the Minho region, starting and ending in the city. In athletics, Póvoa
   de Varzim organizes the Cego do Maio Half Marathon and the São Pedro
   Grand Prix in the city’s streets. The first one aims at the promotion
   of the city and among the population; the second is part of the
   national calendar of the Portuguese Athletics Federation.

   The marina near the seaport offers several sport activities developed
   by the Clube Naval Povoense, especially sailing, sport fishing, and
   surfing. One of the regattas organized by the club is the Costa Verde
   Trophy, linking the coastal cities of Póvoa de Varzim and Viana do
   Castelo. The marina of Póvoa is a stop for boats that are exploring the
   west Iberian coast. It is located in a sheltered area and provides
   facilities with boatyard services.

   Near São Félix Hill, the São Pedro de Rates shooting camp is considered
   one of the best in Portugal and in Europe, with great prestige among
   nationals. There is also a links golf course and a greyhound racing
   track in Estela. The Monumental Praça de Touros da Póvoa de Varzim is
   the only active bullfighting arena in northern Portugal. Today, the
   most important run of this arena occurs in late July, with the "Grande
   Corrida TV Norte" (TV's Great Run North), an event that follows the
   bullfighting Portuguese tradition, which is a variety of bloodless and
   skilful bullfighting. A harmless, traditional and fun bullfight, known
   as Garraida, with young bulls and students occurs in the beginning of
   May as part of Porto's student festivities - the Queima das Fitas.

Festivals

   Traditional festival dress during a parade.
   Enlarge
   Traditional festival dress during a parade.

   There are several religious or popular celebrations (singular festa,
   plural festas). The city's holiday is June 29, Saint Peter's day, the
   fisherman saint. The neighbourhoods are decorated; and, on the night of
   28th to 29th the population gets together in celebration, dancing and
   eating by the light of fires. The traditional neighbourhoods compete in
   the rusgas (a sort of carnival) and the creation of thrones to Saint
   Peter. During the festivities, the population behaves much like
   football supporters, and occasionally there are disturbances when fans
   defend their preferred district; but the competition is usually very
   healthy. Families, having previously emigrated to the United States and
   beyond, have been known to come back to Póvoa, time and again, simply
   to relish the spectacular feelings of excitement and community present
   at this festival.

   Easter Monday is considered to be the second "municipal holiday". The
   populace works on Good Friday (national holiday) to have Monday free to
   picnic (Anjo festival). The local companies follow this tradition and
   are open on Friday and closed on Monday.
   Penedo do Santo shows evidences of the work of man since, at least, the
   Roman era.
   Enlarge
   Penedo do Santo shows evidences of the work of man since, at least, the
   Roman era.

   On August 15 there is the Feast of the Assumption, one of the largest
   of this kind in Portugal, the pinnacle of the procession occurs in
   front of the seaport, where fireworks are launched from carefully
   arranged boats. In the last fortnight of September, during the Senhora
   das Dores festival, there is the century-old Senhora das Dores Pottery
   Fair, with many tents, installed in the square near the Senhora das
   Dores Church, which sell diverse wares of traditional Portuguese
   pottery.

   São Félix Hill is a reference point for fishermen at sea. On the last
   Sunday of May, the Pilgrimage of Nossa Senhora da Saúde (Our Lady of
   Health) covers a distance of 7 km (4.25 mi) between the Matriz Church
   and the Nossa Senhora da Saúde Chapel, at the foot of São Félix. In
   Cape Santo André there is a rocky formation known as Penedo do Santo or
   Saint's Rock, which has a mark that the Poveiro fishermen believe to be
   a footprint of Saint Andrew (Santo André). They still believe that this
   saint is the "Boatman of Souls" and that he frees the souls of those
   who drown in the sea, fishing them from the depths of the ocean after a
   shipwreck. The celebration of Saint Andrew occurs on the dawn of the
   last day of November, when groups of men and women, wearing black hoods
   and holding lamps, go to the chapel via the beach.

Architecture

   Fortress of Póvoa.
   Enlarge
   Fortress of Póvoa.
   Lighthouse of Lapa church.
   Enlarge
   Lighthouse of Lapa church.
   Praça do Almada.
   Enlarge
   Praça do Almada.
   Santa Clara Aqueduct.
   Enlarge
   Santa Clara Aqueduct.
   Tourism Post on one of the market towers of 1904.
   Enlarge
   Tourism Post on one of the market towers of 1904.
     * Nossa Senhora da Conceição Fortress (mostly known as castelo),
       built in the reigns of Peter II and John V (between 1701 and 1740)
       to defend the town from pirate attacks, in the site of an earlier
       fort.
     * Solar dos Carneiros, an 18th century nobleman's house. It became a
       museum in 1937; in it, visitors can become acquainted with previous
       generations of Poveiros.
     * Churches:, emphasizing the thousand-year-old church of São Pedro de
       Rates (national monument and and one of the main medieval
       Romanesque buildings in Portugal); the 17th century's baroque
       Matriz Church with its rich rococo altarpiece, filled with siglas
       poveiras; the 17th century's and fishermen's Lapa Church, with its
       old lighthouse which was once a link between the church and the
       fishermen on the sea; the 18th century Senhora das Dores church
       with the pains of Mary sculptures in several chapels; and the
       Balasar church with the remnants of Alexandrina of Portugal in the
       village of Balasar.
     * City Council, building of neoclassical style, influenced by the
       English colony of Porto, conceived in 1790 to lodge the city
       council of Póvoa de Varzim. The Coreto of Póvoa de Varzim is
       located in the same square.
     * Cividade de Terroso, a 3000 year-old Castro town, the cradle of
       Póvoa de Varzim. Archaeologists from northern Portugal and Galicia
       (northern Spain) are preparing a joint submission to UNESCO in
       order to classify Cividade de Terroso as a World Heritage site.
     * Castros: beyond the main Castro settlement, three of Cividade de
       Terroso’s outposts are known: Castro de Laundos (mostly
       unexplored), Castro de Navais (only the fountain and site remains,
       due to the fact that it is inhabited to this day), and Castro de
       Argivai (severely damaged).
     * Aqueducts: Aqueduct of Santa Clara (national monument), raised
       between 1626 and 1714, was composed of 999 archs taking the waters
       from the spring of Terroso for the convent of Santa Clara in Vila
       do Conde, and remaining portions of the Aqueduct of Coelheiro (18th
       century), an aqueduct that formerly supplied Praça do Almada.
     * Fountains: Of several sources, ancestral fountains gain relevance
       due the fact that the population attribute legends and miraculous
       or therapeutic effects to them: the two Fountains of Saint Peter of
       Rates (in Balasar and Rates) and the Fountain of the Enchanted
       Mourish Girl, in Navais.
     * Pillories: The manueline pillory of Póvoa de Varzim built in 1514
       is a national monument; the pillory of Rates also from the 16th
       century is a listed property of Public Interest.
     * Sculptures. Amongst other monuments the most distinguished are:
          + Cego do Maio — local hero. By Poveiros of Brazil in 1909.
          + Cruzeiro da Independência — 800 years of the independence of
            Portugal. By the National Body of Scouts in 1940.
          + Eça de Queiroz — the most notable among the Poveiros. By
            Poveiros of Brazil in 1952,
          + Millennium Mark — commemorates 1000 years — from March 26, 953
            — of the recorded existence of Póvoa de Varzim.
          + To Poveiro peoples — honouring the unity of the municipality
            and the difference between the fisherman of the coast and the
            inland farmer. By the Rotary Club of Póvoa de Varzim in 1995.
          + Saint Peter — patron saint. Saint Peter Festival of 1996.
          + To the Fisherwoman / Poveira Woman — honours the central role
            of women in the daily life of the community. Saint Peter
            Festival of 1997.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/P%C3%B3voa_de_Varzim"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
