   #copyright

Pakistan

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Asian Countries;
Countries

   SOS Children works in Pakistan. For more information see SOS Children
   in Pakistan
       اسلامی جمہوریۂ پاکستان
   Islami Jumhuriyah Pākistān
   Islamic Republic of Pakistan

   Flag of Pakistan State Emblem of Pakistan
   Flag             State Emblem
   Motto: Ittehad, Tanzim, Yaqeen-e-Muhkam ( Urdu)
   ("Unity, Discipline and Faith")
   Anthem: Qaumi Tarana
   Location of Pakistan
         Capital       Islamabad
                       33°40′N 73°10′E
      Largest city     Karachi
   Official languages  Urdu, English
   Government          Semi-presidential system
    - President        Pervez Musharraf
    - Prime Minister   Shaukat Aziz
      Independence     from the United Kingdom
    - Abbasid Dynasty  711-962
    - Ghaznavid Empire 962-1187
    - Ghorid Kingdom   1187-1206
    - Delhi Sultanate  1210-1526
    - Mughal Empire    1526-1707
    - Declared         August 14, 1947
    - Republic         March 23, 1956
                          Area
    - Total            803,940 km² ( 36th)
                       310,403 sq mi
    - Water (%)        3.1
                       Population
    - 2006 estimate    165,803,560 ( 6th)
    - Density          206/km² ( 53rd)
                       534/sq mi
       GDP ( PPP)      2006 estimate
    - Total            $439.7 billion ( 26th)
    - Per capita       $2,829.5 ( 125th)
       HDI  (2006)     0.539 (medium) ( 134th)
        Currency       Rupee (Rs.) ( PKR)
        Time zone      PST ( UTC+5:00)
    - Summer ( DST)    not observed ( UTC+6:00)
      Internet TLD     .pk
      Calling code     +92

   Pakistan, officially the Islamic Republic of Pakistan ( Urdu: اسلامی
   جمہوریۂ پاکستان‎), is a country located in South Asia. It has a
   thousand-kilometre coastline along the Arabian Sea in the south and
   borders Afghanistan and Iran to the west, India to the east and the
   People's Republic of China in the far northeast.

   Pakistan is the sixth most populous country in the world and is the
   second most populous Muslim country. It was established as a modern
   state in 1947, as one of the two parts of the partitioned British
   India, but the region has a long history of settlement and civilisation
   including the Indus Valley Civilisation. The region was invaded by
   Persians, Greeks, Arabs, Turks, Mongols, Afghans, and was incorporated
   into the British Raj in the nineteenth century. Since independence,
   Pakistan has experienced times of significant military and economic
   growth, and periods of instability, with the secession of East Pakistan
   (present-day Bangladesh). Pakistan is a declared nuclear weapons state.

Etymology

   The name "Pakistan" ( IPA: [paːkɪst̪aːn]) means "Land of the Pure" in
   Urdu and Persian. It was coined in 1933 by Choudhary Rahmat Ali, who
   published it in the pamphlet Now or Never as an acronym of the names of
   the "Muslim homelands" of western India — P for Punjab, A for Afghania
   (the Afghan (Pashtun) areas in the Northwest Frontier Province), K for
   Kashmir, S for Sindh and tan for Balochistan. The i was later added to
   the name since in Urdu, the national language of Pakistan, "istan"
   refers to "land of" while "pak" means pure. Officially, the nation was
   founded as the Dominion of Pakistan in 1947, and was renamed as the
   Islamic Republic of Pakistan in 1957.

History

   The modern day Pakistan consists of four major parts called provinces
   Punjab, Sind, Balochistan and NWFP.Modern Pakistan is a country that
   has , Harappan, Aryan, Persian, Greek, Saka, Parthian, Kushan, White
   Hun, Afghan, Arab, Turkic, and Mughal heritage. Waves of invaders and
   migrants settled down in Pakistan through out the centuries,
   influencing the locals and being absorbed among them. Pakistan is home
   to the oldest Asian civilisation (and one of the oldest in the world
   after Mesopotamia and Egypt), Indus Valley Civilization (2500 BC - 1500
   BC). The modern state of Pakistan was established on 14 August 1947,
   but the region it encompasses has an extensive history that overlaps
   with the histories of Ancient India, Iran and Afghanistan. The region
   is a crossroad of historic trade routes, including the Silk Road, and
   was settled over thousands of years by many groups, including
   Dravidians, Indo-Aryans, Persians, Macedonians, Greeks, Scythians,
   Parthians Kushans, White Huns, Afghans, Arabs, Turks, and Mongols. The
   earliest evidence of humans in the region are pebble tools from the
   Soan Culture in the province of Punjab, dated from 100,000 to 500,000
   years ago. The Indus region was the site of several ancient cultures
   including Mehrgarh, one of the world's earliest known towns, and the
   Indus Valley Civilisation at Harrappa and Mohenjo-Daro.
   17th Century Badshahi Masjid built by Mughal emperor Aurangzeb in
   Lahore
   Enlarge
   17th Century Badshahi Masjid built by Mughal emperor Aurangzeb in
   Lahore

   .

   The Indus Valley civilisation collapsed in the middle of the second
   millennium BCE and was followed by the Vedic Civilisation, which
   extended over much of northern India and Pakistan. Successive empires
   and kingdoms ruled the region from the Achaemenid Persian empire around
   543 BCE, to Alexander the Great in 326 BCE and the Mauryan empire. The
   Indo-Greek Kingdom founded by Demetrius of Bactria included Gandhara
   and Punjab from 184 BCE, and reached its greatest extent under
   Menander, establishing the Greco-Buddhist period with advances in trade
   and culture. The city of Taxila (Takshashila) became a major centre of
   learning in ancient times - the remains of the city, located to the
   west of Islamabad, are one of the country's major archaeological sites.

   In 712 CE, the Arab general Muhammad bin Qasim conquered Sindh and
   Multan in southern Punjab, setting the stage for several successive
   Muslim empires including the Ghaznavid Empire, the Ghorid Kingdom, the
   Delhi Sultanate and the Mughal Empire. During this period Sufi
   missionaries played a pivotal role in converting a majority of the
   regional Hindu population to Islam. The gradual decline of the Mughal
   Empire in the early eighteenth century provided opportunities for the
   Afghans, Balochis and Sikhs to exercise control over large areas until
   the British East India Company gained ascendancy over South Asia.
   Governor General Jinnah delivering the opening address on 11 August
   1947 to the new state of Pakistan.
   Enlarge
   Governor General Jinnah delivering the opening address on 11 August
   1947 to the new state of Pakistan.

   The War of Independence in 1857 was the region's last major armed
   struggle against the British Raj, and it laid the foundations for the
   generally unarmed freedom struggle led by the Congress. However, the
   Muslim League rose to popularity in the late 1930's amid fears of
   under-representation and neglect of Muslims in politics. On 29 December
   1930, Allama Iqbal's presidential address called for a separate Muslim
   state in northwest and eastern South Asia. Muhammad Ali Jinnah espoused
   the Two Nation Theory and led the Muslim League to adopt the Lahore
   Resolution of 1940, which ultimately led to the creation of Pakistan.
   The two wings of Pakistan in 1970; East Pakistan separated from the
   West wing in 1971 as an independent Bangladesh.
   Enlarge
   The two wings of Pakistan in 1970; East Pakistan separated from the
   West wing in 1971 as an independent Bangladesh.

   Pakistan was formed on 14 August 1947 with two Muslim-majority wings in
   the eastern and northwestern regions of South Asia, separated by
   Hindu-majority India, and comprising the provinces of Balochistan, East
   Bengal, the North-West Frontier Province, West Punjab and Sindh. The
   partition of British India resulted in communal riots across India and
   Pakistan—millions of Muslims moved to Pakistan and millions of Hindus
   and Sikhs moved to India. Disputes arose over several princely states
   including Jammu and Kashmir whose ruler had acceded to India and
   finally led to the First Kashmir War (1948) ending with Pakistan and
   India each occupying large parts of the state. From 1947 to 1956,
   Pakistan was a Dominion in the Commonwealth of Nations. The republic
   declared in 1958 was stalled by a coup d'etat by Ayub Khan (1958–69),
   who was president during a period of internal instability and a second
   war with India in 1965. His successor, Yahya Khan (1969–71) had to deal
   with the cyclone which caused 500,000 deaths in East Pakistan.

   Economic and political dissent in East Pakistan led to violent
   political repression and tensions escalating into civil war (
   Bangladesh Liberation War) and the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 and
   ultimately the secession of East Pakistan as the independent state of
   Bangladesh.

   Civilian rule resumed from 1972 to 1977 under Zulfikar Ali Bhutto,
   until he was deposed and later sentenced to death in what accounts to a
   judicial murder in 1979 by General Zia-ul-Haq, who became the third
   military president. Pakistan's secular policies were replaced by Zia's
   introduction of the Islamic Shariah legal code, which increased
   religious influences on the civil service and the military. With the
   death of General Zia in a plane crash in 1988, Benazir Bhutto, daughter
   of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, was elected as the first female Prime Minister
   of Pakistan. Over the next decade, she alternated power with Nawaz
   Sharif, as the country's political and economic situation worsened.
   Pakistan sent 5,000 troops to the 1991 Gulf War as part of a US led
   coalition and specifically for the defence of Saudi Arabia. Military
   tensions in the Kargil conflict with India in 1999 was followed by a
   military coup in which General Pervez Musharraf assumed executive
   powers. In 2001, Musharraf became President after the resignation of
   Rafiq Tarar. After the 2002 parliamentary elections, Musharraf
   transferred executive powers to newly elected Prime Minister Zafarullah
   Khan Jamali, who was succeeded in the 2004 Prime-Ministerial election
   by Shaukat Aziz.

Government and politics

   The Muslim League formed Pakistan's first government under the
   leadership of Muhammad Ali Jinnah and Liaquat Ali Khan. The Muslim
   League's leadership of Pakistani politics decreased significantly with
   the rise of other political parties, with the Pakistan People's Party
   in West Pakistan, and the Awami League in East Pakistan, which would
   ultimately lead to the creation of Bangladesh. The first Constitution
   of Pakistan was adopted in 1956, but was suspended in 1958 by Ayub
   Khan. The Constitution of 1973, suspended in 1977 by Zia-ul-Haq, was
   re-instated in 1991 and is the country's most important document,
   laying the foundations of government. Pakistan is a federal democratic
   republic with Islam as the state religion. The semi-presidential system
   includes a bicameral legislature consisting of a 100-member Senate and
   a 342-member National Assembly. The President is the Head of State and
   the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces and is elected by an
   electoral college. The prime minister is usually the leader of the
   largest party in the National Assembly. Each province has a similar
   system of government with a directly elected Provincial Assembly in
   which the leader of the largest party or alliance becomes Chief
   Minister. Provincial Governors are selected by the Provincial
   Assemblies on the advice of the Chief Minister.

   The Pakistani military has played an influential role in mainstream
   politics throughout Pakistan's history, with military presidents ruling
   from 1958–71, 1977–88 and from 1999 onwards. The leftist Pakistan
   People's Party (PPP), led by Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, emerged as a major
   political player during the 1970s. Under the military rule of Muhammad
   Zia-ul-Haq, Pakistan began a marked shift from the British-era secular
   politics and policies, to the adoption of Shariat and other laws based
   on Islam. During the 1980s, the anti- feudal, pro- Muhajir Muttahida
   Qaumi Movement (MQM) was started by unorthodox and educated urban
   dwellers of Sindh and particularly Karachi. The 1990s were
   characterized by coalition politics dominated by the PPP and a
   rejuvenated Muslim League.

   In the October 2002 general elections, the Pakistan Muslim League (Q)
   (PML-Q) won a plurality of National Assembly seats with the
   second-largest group being the Pakistan People's Party Parliamentarians
   (PPPP), a sub-party of the PPP. Zafarullah Khan Jamali of PML-Q emerged
   as Prime Minister but resigned on 26 June 2004 and was replaced by
   PML-Q leader Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain as interim Prime Minister. On 28
   August 2004 the National Assembly voted 191 to 151 to elect the Finance
   Minister and former Citibank Vice President Shaukat Aziz as Prime
   Minister. Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal, a coalition of Islamic religious
   parties, won elections in North-West Frontier Province, and increased
   their representation in the National Assembly.
   US President George W. Bush and President Musharraf answer reporters in
   the East Room of the White House in late 2006.
   Enlarge
   US President George W. Bush and President Musharraf answer reporters in
   the East Room of the White House in late 2006.

   Pakistan is an active member of the United Nations (UN) and the
   Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the latter of which
   Pakistan has used as a forum for Enlightened Moderation, a plan to
   promote a renaissance and enlightenment in the Muslim world. Pakistan
   is also a member of the major regional organisations of the South Asian
   Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) and the Economic
   Cooperation Organisation (ECO). In the past, Pakistan has had mixed
   relations with the United States especially in the early 1950s when
   Pakistan was the United States' "most allied ally in Asia" and a member
   of both the Central Treaty Organisation (CENTO) and the Southeast Asia
   Treaty Organisation (SEATO). During the Soviet-Afghan War in the 1980s
   Pakistan was a crucial US ally, but relations soured in the 1990s, when
   sanctions were applied by the US over suspicions of Pakistan's nuclear
   activities. The September 11 attacks and the subsequent War on
   Terrorism have seen an improvement in US–Pakistan ties, especially
   after Pakistan ended its support of the Taliban regime in Kabul. In
   January 2004, founder of Pakistani nuclear program A. Q. Khan confessed
   of nuclear proliferation to Libya, Iran and North Korea. On 5 February
   2004, the president Pervez Musharraf, announced that he had pardoned A.
   Q. Khan.

   Pakistan has long had troubled relations with neighbouring India. The
   long-running dispute over Kashmir resulted in full fledged wars in 1947
   and 1965. Civil war in 1971 flared into the simultaneous Bangladeshi
   Liberation War and the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971. Pakistan conducted
   nuclear weapon tests in 1998 to counterbalance India's nuclear tests
   and became the only Muslim nuclear weapons state. The relations with
   India are steadily improving following peace initiatives in 2002.
   Pakistan maintains close economic, military and political relationships
   with the People's Republic of China.

   Pakistan also faces instability in the Federally Administered Tribal
   Areas, where some tribal leaders support the Taliban. Pakistan has had
   to deploy the army in these regions to suppress the local unrest, in
   Waziristan. The Waziristan conflict ended with a recently declared
   peace agreement between the tribal leaders and the Pakistani
   government, that is expected to bring back stability to the region.
   Additionally, the country has long faced instability in its largest
   province, Balochistan. The army was deployed to fight a serious
   insurgency within the province from 1973–76. Social stability resumed
   after Rahimuddin Khan was appointed martial law administrator beginning
   in 1977. After relative peace throughout the 1980s and 1990s, some
   influential Baloch tribal leaders restarted a separatist movement after
   Pervez Musharraf took over in 1999. In a recent incident Nawab Akbar
   Bugti, the leader of Balochistan, was killed in August 2006 by
   Pakistani military forces.

Administrative divisions

   Provinces and territories of Pakistan
   Enlarge
   Provinces and territories of Pakistan

   Pakistan is a federation of four provinces, a capital territory and
   federally administered tribal areas. Pakistan exercises de facto
   jurisdiction over the western parts of the Kashmir region, organised as
   two separate political entities ( Azad Kashmir and Northern Areas),
   which are also claimed by India. In 2001 the federal government
   abolished the third tier of government ( administrative divisions) in
   favour of the former fourth tier districts. The provinces and the
   capital territory are subdivided into a total of 107 districts which
   contain numerous tehsils and local governments. The tribal areas
   comprise seven tribal agencies and six small frontier regions detached
   from neighbouring districts whilst Azad Kashmir comprises seven
   districts and Northern Areas comprises six districts.

   Provinces:
    1. Balochistan
    2. North-West Frontier Province (NWFP)
    3. Punjab
    4. Sindh

          + Balochistan and NWFP also have Provincially Administered
            Tribal Areas (FATA) which are being developed into regular
            districts.

   Territories:
    5. Islamabad Capital Territory
    6. Federally Administered Tribal Areas

   Pakistani-administered portions of the Kashmir:
    7. Azad Kashmir
    8. Northern Areas

Geography and climate

   The world's second-highest mountain, K2
   Enlarge
   The world's second-highest mountain, K2

   Pakistan covers 803,940 square kilometres (310,403 square miles),
   approximately the combined land areas of France and the United Kingdom,
   with its eastern regions located on the Indian tectonic plate and the
   western and northern regions on the Iranian plateau and Eurasian
   landplate. Apart from the 1,046 kilometre (650 mi) Arabian Sea
   coastline, Pakistan's land borders total
   6,774 kilometres—2,430 kilometres (1,509 mi) with Afghanistan to the
   northwest, 523 kilometres (325 mi) with China to the northeast,
   2,912 kilometres (1,809 mi) with India to the east and 909 kilometres
   (565 mi) with Iran to the southwest.

   The different types of natural features range from the sandy beaches,
   lagoons, and mangrove swamps of the southern coast to preserved
   beautiful moist temperate forests and the icy peaks of the Himalaya,
   Karakoram and Hindu Kush mountains in the north. There are an estimated
   108 peaks above 7,000 metres (23,000 ft) high that are covered in snow
   and glaciers. Five of the mountains in Pakistan (including K2 and Nanga
   Parbat) are over 8,000 metres (26,000 ft). Indian-controlled Kashmir to
   the Northern Areas of Pakistan and running the length of the country is
   the Indus River with its many tributaries. The northern parts of
   Pakistan attract a large number of foreign tourists. To the west of the
   Indus are the dry, hilly deserts of Balochistan; to the east are the
   rolling sand dunes of the Thar Desert. The Tharparkar desert in the
   southern province of Sindh, is the only fertile desert in the world.
   Most areas of Punjab and parts of Sindh are fertile plains where
   agriculture is of great importance.

   The climate varies as much as the scenery, with cold winters and hot
   summers in the north and a mild climate in the south, moderated by the
   influence of the ocean. The central parts have extremely hot summers
   with temperatures rising to 45 °C (113 °F), followed by very cold
   winters, often falling below freezing. There is very little rainfall
   ranging from less than 250 millimetres to more than 1,250 millimetres
   (9.8–49.2 in), mostly brought by the unreliable south-westerly monsoon
   winds during the late summer. The construction of dams on the rivers
   and the drilling of water wells in many drier areas have eased water
   shortages.

Flora and fauna

   The Hunza valley in northern Pakistan. — Agricultural and scenic
   Enlarge
   The Hunza valley in northern Pakistan. — Agricultural and scenic

   The wide variety of landscapes and climates in Pakistan allows for a
   wide variety of wild animals and birds. The forests range from
   coniferous alpine and subalpine trees such as spruce, pine, and deodar
   cedar in the northern mountains to deciduous trees such as the
   mulberry-type Shisham in the Sulaiman range in the south. The western
   hills have juniper and tamarisk as well as coarse grasses and scrub
   plants. Along the coast are mangrove forests which form much of the
   coastal wetlands.

   In the south, there are crocodiles in the murky waters at the mouth of
   the Indus River whilst on the banks of the river, there are boars,
   deer, porcupines, and small rodents. In the sandy scrublands of central
   Pakistan are found jackals, hyenas, wild cats, panthers, and leopards
   while the clear blue skies abound with hawks, falcons, and eagles. In
   the southwestern deserts are rare Asiatic cheetahs. In the northern
   mountains are a variety of endangered animals including Marco Polo
   sheep, Urial sheep, Markhor and Ibex goats, black and brown Himalayan
   bears, and the rare Snow Leopard. During August 2006, Pakistan donated
   an orphaned snow leopard cub called Leo to USA. Another rare species is
   the blind Indus River Dolphin of which there are believed to be about
   1,000 remaining, protected in two major sanctuaries. In recent years
   the number of wild animals being killed for fur and leather trading led
   to a new law banning the hunting of wild animals and birds and the
   establishment of several wildlife sanctuaries and game reserves.

Economy

   Karachi, the financial capital and the largest city of Pakistan
   Enlarge
   Karachi, the financial capital and the largest city of Pakistan

   Pakistan is an rapidly developing country which has faced a number of
   challenges on both political and economic fronts. Despite being a very
   poor country in 1947, Pakistan's economic growth rate was better than
   the global average during the subsequent four decades, but imprudent
   policies led to a slowdown in the late 1990's. Recently, wide-ranging
   economic reforms have resulted in a stronger economic outlook and
   accelerated growth especially in the manufacturing and financial
   services sectors. There has been great improvement in the foreign
   exchange position and rapid growth in hard currency reserves in recent
   years. The 2005 estimate of foreign debt was close to US$40 billion.
   However, this has decreased in recent years with assistance from the
   International Monetary Fund (IMF) and significant debt-relief from the
   United States. Pakistan's gross domestic product, as measured by
   purchasing power parity (PPP), is estimated to be US$439.7 billion
   while its per capita income (PCI) stands at $2,803. Despite clear
   progress, reports by the Asian Development Bank, the World Bank and the
   UN Development Program place the poverty rate in Pakistan between 23-28
   percent. Pakistan's GDP growth rates have seen a steady increase over
   the last 5 years. However, inflationary pressures and a below par
   savings rate, among other economic factors, could make it difficult to
   sustain a high growth rate according to some analysts.
   Faizabad interchange: Gateway to the capital Islamabad.
   Enlarge
   Faizabad interchange: Gateway to the capital Islamabad.

   The growth of non-agricultural sectors has changed the structure of the
   economy, and agriculture now only accounts for roughly 20% of the GDP.
   The service sector accounts for 53% of the country's GDP with wholesale
   and retail trade forming 30% of this sector. In recent times, the
   Karachi Stock Exchange has soared, along with most of the world's
   emerging markets. Large amounts of foreign investments have been made
   into several industries. The top industries in Pakistan are telecom,
   software, automotives, textiles, cement, fertilizer, steel, ship
   building, and more recently, aerospace.

   Pakistan has accomplished many engineering feats such as construction
   of the world’s largest earth filled dam Tarbela, the world's twelfth
   largest dam Mangla, as well as the world’s highest international road:
   the Karakoram Highway. There are also half a dozen additional dams
   planned such as Kalabagh Dam, Diamer-Bhasha Dam, Munda, Akhori and
   Skardu Katzara.

   In november 2006 China and Pakistan signed a Free Trade Agreement
   hoping to triple bilateral trade from $4.2 billion ( USD) to $15
   billion ( USD) within the next five years. Pakistan's annual exports in
   2005 ammounted to $15 billion ( USD), and is poised to cross $18
   billion ( USD) in 2006 and $20 billion ( USD) in 2007.. Pakistan is
   also home to a thriving arms industry which exports $200 million ( USD)
   annually, mostly defence equipment and arms to countries in the Middle
   East and South Asia, and its defence officials are hopeful that these
   exports will surpass $500 million ( USD) a year within the next five
   years.

Demographics

   Major Ethnic Groups in Pakistan and surrounding areas, 1980
   Enlarge
   Major Ethnic Groups in Pakistan and surrounding areas, 1980

   Pakistan has an estimated population of 165,803,560, as of April 2006.
   Pakistan has the world's sixth largest population, placing it higher
   than Russia, and lower than Brazil. Because of Pakistan's high growth
   rate, it is expected to surpass Brazil in population in the year 2020.
   Population projections for Pakistan are relatively difficult because of
   the apparent differences in the accuracy of each census and the
   inconsistencies between various surveys related to fertility rate, but
   it is likely that the rate of growth peaked in 1980s. The population
   was estimated at 162,400,000 on July 1, 2005, with a fertility rate of
   34 per thousand, a death rate of 10 per thousand, and the rate of
   natural increase at 2.4%. Pakistan also has a high infant mortality
   rate of 70 per thousand births.

   Urdu is the national language and lingua franca of Pakistan, and
   English is the official language used in the Constitution and widely
   used by corporate businesses, the educated urban elite, and most
   universities. Punjabi is spoken by over 60 million people, but has no
   official recognition in the country. These major ethnic groups are
   further broken down into several smaller ethnic groups - Punjabis
   (44.68)% of the population, Pashtuns (15.42%), Sindhis (14.1%),
   Seraikis (10.53%), Muhajirs (7.57%), Balochis (3.57%) and others
   (4.66%) such as Tajiks, Bengalis and many others.

   The demographics of religion in Pakistan were significantly influenced
   in 1947 by the movement of Muslims to Pakistan, and Hindus and Sikhs to
   India. Census data indicates that 96% of the population are Muslims, of
   whom nearly 80% are Sunni Muslims and 19% are Shi'a Muslims. The
   remainder comprises of Christians, Hindus, Jews, Sikhs, Parsis,
   Ahmadis, and Animists (mainly the Kalasha of Chitral). A few Buddhists
   are included in Pakistani statistics; however, these live in Indian
   administered Ladakh which Pakistan claims along with the rest of
   Kashmir. As of 2005, over three million refugees (approximately 81.5%
   being ethnic Pashtuns) remain in Pakistan as a result of the wars in
   Afghanistan, with 83% of these refugees reporting their intent to
   permanently settle in Pakistan.

Society and culture

   King Faisal Mosque in Islamabad, one of the largest in the world
   Enlarge
   King Faisal Mosque in Islamabad, one of the largest in the world
   Lahore is the 2nd largest city of Pakistan.
   Enlarge
   Lahore is the 2nd largest city of Pakistan.
   Shalimar Gardens of Lahore
   Enlarge
   Shalimar Gardens of Lahore

   Pakistan has a rich and unique culture that has preserved established
   traditions throughout history. Many cultural practices, foods,
   monuments, and shrines were inherited from the rule of Muslim Mughal
   and Afghan emperors including the national dress of Shalwar Qameez.
   Women wear brightly coloured shalwar qameez, while men often wear
   solid-coloured ones, usually with a sherwani or achkan (long coat) that
   is worn over the garment.

   The variety of Pakistani music ranges from diverse provincial folk
   music and traditional styles such as Qawwali and Ghazal Gayaki to
   modern forms fusing traditional and western music, such as the
   synchronisation of Qawwali and western music by the renowned Nusrat
   Fateh Ali Khan. Other major Ghazal singers include Mehdi Hassan, Ghulam
   Ali, Farida Khanum, Tahira Syed, Abida Parveen and Iqbal Bano. The
   arrival of Afghan refugees in the western provinces has rekindled
   Pashto and Persian music and established Peshawar as a hub for Afghan
   musicians and a distribution centre for Afghan music abroad. Until the
   1990s, the state-owned Pakistan Television Corporation (PTV) and
   Pakistan Broadcasting Corporation were the dominant media outlets, but
   there are now numerous private television channels such as Geo TV,
   Indus TV, Hum, ARY, KTN and others. Various American, European, and
   Asian television channels and movies are available to the majority of
   the Pakistani population via cable and satellite television. There are
   also small indigenous movie industries based in Lahore and Peshawar
   (often referred to as Lollywood and Pollywood). Although Bollywood
   movies are banned since 1965, Indian film stars are generally popular
   in Pakistan.

   Pakistani society is largely multilingual and predominantly Muslim,
   with high regard for traditional family values, although urban families
   have grown into a nuclear family system due to the socio-economic
   constraints imposed by the traditional joint family system. Recent
   decades have seen the emergence of a middle class in cities like
   Karachi, Lahore, Rawalpindi, Hyderabad, Faisalabad, Sukkur and Peshawar
   that wish to move in a more liberal direction, as opposed to the
   northwestern regions bordering Afghanistan that remain highly
   conservative and dominated by centuries-old regional tribal customs.
   Increasing globalization has increased the influence of "Western
   culture" with Pakistan ranking 46^th on the Kearney/FP Globalization
   Index. There are an approximated four million Pakistanis living abroad,
   with close to a half-million expatriates living in the United States
   and around a million living in Saudi Arabia.As well as nearly one
   million people of Pakistani descent in the United Kingdom, there are
   burgeoning cultural connections.

   Tourism is a growing industry in Pakistan, based on its diverse
   cultures, peoples and landscapes. The variety of attractions range from
   the ruins of ancient civilizations such as Mohenjo-daro, Harappa and
   Taxila, to the Himalayan hill stations, which attract those interested
   in field and winter sports. Pakistan is home to several mountain peaks
   over 7000m, which attracts adventurers and mountaineers from around the
   world, especially K2. The northern parts of Pakistan have many old
   fortresses, towers and other architecture as well as the Hunza and
   Chitral valleys, the latter being home to the small pre-Islamic Animist
   Kalasha community who claim descent from the army of Alexander the
   Great. In the Punjab is the site of Alexander's battle on the Jhelum
   River and the historic city Lahore, Pakistan's cultural capital with
   many examples of Mughal architecture such as the Badshahi Masjid,
   Shalimar Gardens, Tomb of Jahangir and the Lahore Fort. To promote
   Pakistan's unique and various cultural heritage, the prime minister
   launched "Visit Pakistan 2007".

Holidays

   Mughal-era Hazuri Bagh in Lahore, an example of Mughal era Islamic
   architecture.
   Enlarge
   Mughal-era Hazuri Bagh in Lahore, an example of Mughal era Islamic
   architecture.

   There are many holidays and festivals celebrated annually in Pakistan.
   While Pakistan is an Islamic nation, there are also several secular
   holidays including Pakistan Day ( 23 March), Independence Day ( 14
   August), Defence of Pakistan Day ( 6 September), Pakistan Air Force Day
   ( 7 September), the anniversaries of the birth ( 25 December) and death
   ( 11 September) of Quaid-e-Azam, Allama Iqbal ( 9 November) and the
   birth ( 30 July) and death ( 8 July) of Madar-e-Millat. Labour Day
   (also known as May Day) is also observed in Pakistan on 1 May.

   Several important festivals are celebrated by Pakistani Muslims during
   the year, dependent on the Islamic calendar. Ramadan, the ninth month
   of the calendar, is characterised by daytime fasting for 29 or 30 days
   and is followed by the festival of Eid ul-Fitr. In a second festival,
   Eid ul-Adha, an animal is sacrificed in remembrance of the actions of
   Abraham and the meat is shared with friends, family, and the less
   fortunate. Both Eid festivals are public holidays, serving as
   opportunities for people to visit family and friends, and for children
   to receive new clothes, presents, and sweets. Some Muslims celebrate
   Eid-e-Milad-un-Nabi, the birthday of the prophet Muhammad, in the third
   month of the calendar ( Rabi' al-Awwal). Shia Muslims mark the Day of
   Ashurah on the 9th and 10th days of the first month ( Muharram) to
   commemorate the martyrdom of Husayn bin Ali, (the grandson of the
   Prophet Muhammad).

   Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs, and Christians in Pakistan also celebrate
   their own festivals and holidays. Sikhs come from across the world to
   visit several holy sites in Punjab, including the shrine of Guru Nanak,
   the founder of Sikhism, at Hassan Abdal in the Attock District, and his
   birthplace, at Nankana Sahib. There are also several regional and local
   festivals, such as the Punjabi festival of Basant, which marks the
   start of spring and is celebrated by kite flying.

Sports

   Gaddafi cricket stadium, one of the largest in the world
   Enlarge
   Gaddafi cricket stadium, one of the largest in the world

   The official and national sport of Pakistan is field hockey, although
   squash and cricket are also very popular. The national cricket team has
   won the Cricket World Cup once (in 1992), were runners-up once (in
   1999) and co-hosted the games twice (in 1987 and 1996). The team has
   also won the Australasia Cup thrice (1986, 1990, 1994). Pakistan has
   also produced a number of successful world-class squash players such as
   Jahangir Khan and Jansher Khan. Muhammad Yousuf was remained world
   champion in game of snooker in 1990's. At an international level,
   Pakistan has competed many times at the Summer Olympics in field
   hockey, boxing, athletics, swimming, and shooting. Pakistan's medal
   tally remains at 10 medals (3 gold, 3 silver and 4 bronze) while at the
   Commonwealth games and Asian Games it stands at 61 medals and 182
   medals respectively. Hockey is the sport that Pakistan has been most
   successful at the Olympics, with three gold medals ( 1960, 1968, 1984).
   Pakistan has also won the Hockey World Cup a record four times (1971,
   1978, 1982, 1994). Pakistan has hosted several international
   competitions, including the SAF Games in 1989 and 2004.

   A1 Grand Prix racing is also becoming popular with the entry of a
   Pakistani team in the 2005 season. The Tour de Pakistan, modelled on
   the Tour de France, is an annual cycling competition that covers the
   length and breadth of Pakistan. Recently, football has grown in
   popularity across the country, where traditionally it had been played
   almost exclusively in the western province of Balochistan.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pakistan"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
