   #copyright

Palau

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Oceania
(Australasia)

                             Beluu er a Belau
   パラオ共和国　
   Republic of Palau

   Flag of Palau Coat of arms of Palau
   Flag          Coat of arms
   Motto: Rainbow's End
   Anthem: Belau loba klisiich er a kelulul
   Location of Palau
          Capital        Melekeok^1
                         7°21′N 134°28′E
       Largest city      Koror
    Official languages   English, Palauan, Japanese (in Angaur)
   Government            Constitutional government
                         in free association with the USA
    - President          Tommy Remengesau
       Independence      from UN Trust Territory
    - Date               October 1, 1994
                                   Area
    - Total              459 km² ( 195th)
                         177 sq mi
    - Water (%)          negligible
                                Population
    - July 2005 estimate 19,949 ( 217th)
    - Density            43/km² ( 155th)
                         111/sq mi
        GDP ( PPP)       2001 estimate
    - Total              $174 million^2 ( not ranked)
    - Per capita         $9,000 (2001 est.) ( not ranked)
        HDI  (2003)      n/a (unranked) ( n/a)
         Currency        US Dollar ( USD)
         Time zone       ( UTC+9)
       Internet TLD      .pw
       Calling code      +680
   ^1 On 7 October 2006, government officials moved their offices in the
   former capital of Koror to Melekeok, located 20 km northeast of Koror
   on Babelthaup Island.

   ^2 GDP estimate includes US subsidy (2001 est.)

   Palau, officially the Republic of Palau, is an island nation in the
   Pacific Ocean, some 500 miles (800  km) east of the Philippines. Having
   emerged from United Nations trusteeship (administered by the United
   States) in 1994, it is one of the world's youngest and smallest
   nations. It is sometimes referred to in English under its native name
   Belau.

History

Archeology

   Early Palauans may have come from Australia, Polynesia and Asia.
   Depending on the thread of the family, Palauans may indeed represent
   many parts of Melanesia, Micronesia and Polynesia. However, it is
   traditionally considered to be Melanesian. According to geneticists-
   there are two distinctive strains of Melanesian bloodlines: one is
   associated with indigenous Australians/Papua New Guineans and the other
   is known to have originated in Asia. There has not been any link
   established between the two.

   Until recently, Palau was not considered a part of Micronesia. In the
   European and Australian world Belau/Pelew is better known by the name
   of "The Black Islands". Vintage maps and village drawings can be found
   at the Australian library online. There you will see photos of the
   tattooed and pierced Ibedul of Koror and Ludee.

   Carbon dating and recent archeological discoveries have brought new
   attention to the archipelago. Cemeteries uncovered in islands have
   shown Palau has the oldest burial ceremony known to Oceania. Prior to
   this there has been much dispute as to whether Palau was established
   during 2500 BC or 1000 BC. New studies seem to dispute both of these
   findings. Moreover, Palau's ancient trading partner, Java, has also
   come under close scrutiny since homo floresiensis was found.

   Interestingly, Java is where traditional female Palaun money
   originated. Carrying on the family line, Palauan women have always been
   embellished with land, titles and money. For thousands of years,
   Palauans have had a well established matrilineal society.

European contact

   Historians take much interest in the navigational routes of European
   explorers. One such mystery has created much speculation as to whether
   Spanish explorer Ruy López de Villalobos spotted the islands in 1543.
   No conclusive evidence exists but there are some who think he could
   have seen the tip of a southern most island in the group.

   Palau was one of the last of the South Sea islands to be discovered -
   not only due to a lack of navigation skill but because neighboring
   islands knew nothing about Melanesia. Palau had limited relations -
   mainly with Yap and Java.

   Had it not have been for ship-wrecked islanders who accidentally took
   refuge in the Philippines, Europeans likely would not have found a
   route to Palau until much later. Palau's first Western contact took
   place when English Captain Henry Wilson also shipwrecked off the island
   of Ulong in 1783. Wilson dubbed Palau the “Pelew Islands”.

   The Spanish claimed Palau as part of the Spanish East Indies, and was
   governed from the Philippines, until the emergence of 1875 British
   protests.

   In 1885, after Germany occupied some of the islands, a dispute was
   brought to Pope Leo XIII, who made an attempt to legitimize Spanish
   claim to the islands (but with economic concessions for Britain and
   Germany). Spain in 1899, after defeat during the Spanish-American War,
   sold the islands to Germany.

   In 1914 Japan invaded the islands, then formally took over under the
   Treaty of Versailles after the WWI German defeat. Over three decades
   the Japanese enforced cultural change. Introduction of an exclusive
   market economy geared towards Japanese citizens temporarily revoked
   tribal ownership. Although some reparation was made, defeat did not
   restore complete order. US intervention only served to widen the legal
   semantics needed to recover from such an event spanning three different
   countries with three different tongues.
   Bombardment of Anguar in WWII
   Enlarge
   Bombardment of Anguar in WWII

   Peleliu was the scene of a costly battle between American and Japanese
   forces in 1944, resulting in an Allied victory, though the cost in
   human terms was high for both sides. After WWII the United Nations
   played a role and it was decided the US would administer Palau as part
   of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands. Eventually, in 1979
   Palauans voted against joining the Federated States of Micronesia based
   on language and cultural differences. After a long period of
   transition, including the violent deaths of two presidents ( Haruo
   Remeliik in 1985 and Lazarus Salii in 1988), Palau voted to freely
   associate with the United States in 1994 while opting to retain
   independence under the Compact of Free Association.

   There are still roughly 100 American service members listed as Missing
   In Action (MIA) in Palau since WWII. Since 1993, a small group of
   American volunteers called The BentProp Project have searched the
   waters and jungles of Palau to attempt to locate information that can
   lead to the identification and recovery of remains of these American
   MIAs.

Government

   Politics of Palau takes place in a framework of a presidential
   representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Palau is
   both head of state and head of government, and of a pluriform
   multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government.
   Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Palau
   National Congress. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and
   the legislature.

Foreign relations

   Palau gained its independence October 1, 1994 with the entry into force
   of the Compact of Free Association with the United States. Palau was
   the last Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands territories to gain its
   independence. Under the Compact, the U.S. remains responsible for
   Palau's defense for 50 years.

   Palau is a sovereign nation and conducts its own foreign relations.
   Since independence, Palau has established diplomatic relations with a
   number of nations, including many of its Pacific neighbors. Palau was
   admitted to the United Nations on December 15, 1994, and has since
   joined several other international organizations.

States

   The sixteen states of Palau
   Enlarge
   The sixteen states of Palau

   Palau is divided into sixteen states (until 1984 called
   municipalities):
     * Aimeliik
     * Airai
     * Angaur
     * Hatohobei
     * Kayangel
     * Koror
     * Melekeok
     * Ngaraard

                  * Ngarchelong
                  * Ngardmau
                  * Ngatpang
                  * Ngchesar
                  * Ngaremlengui
                  * Ngiwal
                  * Peleliu
                  * Sonsorol

   The uninhabited Rock Islands of Palau, next to Koror, are not part of
   any of the sixteen states. Although it lies between the state of Koror
   and the State of Peliliu, both states lay claim over its territorial
   boundaries.

Geography

   The Republic of Palau
   Enlarge
   The Republic of Palau

   Palau's most important islands are Angaur, Babeldaob, Koror, and
   Peleliu. The latter three lie together within the same barrier reef,
   while Angaur is an Oceanic Island several miles to the South. About
   two-thirds of the population lives on Koror. The coral atoll of
   Kayangel is situated north of these islands, while the uninhabited Rock
   Islands (about 70) are situated to the west of the main island group. A
   remote group of six islands, known as the Southwest Islands, some 375
   miles (600 km) from the main islands, are also part of the country.

Climate

   Palau enjoys a tropical climate all year round with an annual mean
   temperature of 82 ° F (27 ° C). Rainfall can occur throughout the year,
   averaging a total of 150 inches (3,800 mm). The average humidity over
   the course of the year is 82%, and although rain falls more frequently
   between July and October, there is still much sunshine. Typhoons are
   rare, as Palau is outside the main typhoon zone.

Environment

   While much of Palau's fragile natural environment remains free of
   environmental degradation, there are several areas of concern,
   including illegal fishing with the use of dynamite, inadequate
   facilities for disposal of solid waste in Koror, and extensive sand and
   coral dredging in the Palau lagoon. Like the other Pacific island
   nations, a major environmental problem is global warming and the
   related rising of sea level. Water coverage of low-lying areas is a
   threat to coastal vegetation, agriculture, and the purity of the
   nation's water supply. Palau also has a problem with inadequate water
   supply and limited agricultural areas to support the size of the
   population. The nation is also vulnerable to earthquakes, volcanic
   activity, and tropical storms. Sewage treatment is a problem, along
   with the handling of toxic waste from fertilizers and biocides.

Gallery

   Divers descending into the main cavern of Blue Hole.

   A Tridactna giant clam.

   Divers descending next to the mast of the Japanese tanker Iro.

   An Anenomefish on the wreck of the Japanese tanker Iro.

   Diver and large Moon jellyfish, Jellyfish Lake.

   Diver and jellyfish, Jellyfish Lake.

   Jellyfish in Jellyfish Lake.

   Diver and Nautilus, German Channel.

   Nudibranch on sea fan.

   Soft corals growing on vertical wall.

   Closeup of soft coral.

   Starfish on soft coral.

   Diver and large table coral.

   Divers on a vertical wall, Peleliu Island.

   One of the many Rock Islands.

   Channel between the Rock Islands.

Economy

   The economy consists primarily of tourism, subsistence agriculture, and
   fishing. Tourist activity focuses on scuba diving and snorkeling in the
   islands' rich marine environment, including the Floating Garden Islands
   to the west of Koror and the Rock Islands to the south. The government
   is the major employer of the work force, relying heavily on financial
   assistance from the US. Business and tourist arrivals numbered 50,000
   in the financial year 2000/2001. The population enjoys a per capita
   income twice that of the Philippines and much of Micronesia. Long-term
   prospects for the key tourist sector have been greatly bolstered by the
   expansion of air travel in the Pacific, the rising prosperity of
   leading East Asian countries, and the willingness of foreigners to
   finance infrastructure development.

   In July of 2004, Palau Micronesia Air was launched with service from
   Palau to Yap, Guam, Micronesia, Saipan, Australia, and the Philippines.
   It was thought of giving Continental Micronesia a run for its money due
   to the low fares which it offered to its passengers, however it has
   ceased operations in December of the same year and has not restarted
   operations since.

Demographics

   The population of Palau is approximately 19,000 of whom 70% are native
   Palauans, who are of mixed Melanesian, Micronesian, and Polynesian
   descent. Filipinos form the second largest ethnic group. Other Asians
   and Europeans account for the minority groups.

   Two thirds of the population are Christians (mainly Catholics and
   Seventh-day Adventists), but Modekngei (a combination of Christianity,
   traditional Palauan religion and fortune telling) and the ancient
   Palauan religion are still the most commonly observed household
   religions.

   The official languages of Palau are Palauan and English, except for two
   states (Sonsorol, Hatohobei) where the local language along with
   Palauan, is official.

Transportation

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Palau"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
