   #copyright

Paprika

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Food and agriculture

   Bell peppers come in various shapes and colors, and are used to make
   paprika.
   Enlarge
   Bell peppers come in various shapes and colors, and are used to make
   paprika.

Nomenclature

   According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the word comes from the
   Hungarian "paprika", which derives from the Serbian or Croatian
   "paprika", which is a diminutive of "papar", which in turn was derived
   from the Latin "piper", for "pepper."

   In the United States, the term paprika simply means any non pungent red
   chile, mostly New Mexican pod types that have had their pungency
   genetically removed. In Europe, however, paprika has much greater
   depth, having not only distinct pod types but also specific grades of
   the powders made from these sub types.
   Assorted paprika fruits from Mexico
   Enlarge
   Assorted paprika fruits from Mexico

Types of paprika

   Paprika is principally used as an ingredient in a broad variety of
   dishes throughout the world. Paprika (pimentón in Spain, colorau in
   Portugal) is principally used to season and colour rices, stews, and
   soups, such as goulash. In Spain, Germany, Hungary, Croatia, Serbia,
   Turkey and Portugal, paprika is also used in the preparation of
   sausages as an ingredient that is mixed with meats and other spices.
   Olives are also commonly stuffed with minced portions of these peppers.
   Instead of eating, paprika may be smoked for additional flavour. The
   Paprika pepper is indigenous to the Western Hemisphere. The pepper is
   grown widely and takes on a slightly different flavor depending on
   local soil and climatic conditions. Types of Hungarian Paprikas

   Note: The hottest paprikas are not the bright red ones, but rather the
   palest red and light brown colored ones.

   Special Quality (Különleges): The mildest and brightest red of all
   Hungarian paprikas, with excellent aroma. Delicate (Csípmentes
   Csemege): Ranging from light to dark red, a mild paprika with a rich
   flavor. Exquisite Delicate (Csemegepaprika): Similar to Delicate, but
   more pungent. Pungent Exquisite Delicae (Csípös Csemege, Pikant): A yet
   more pungent Delicate. Rose (Rózsa): Pale Red in color with strong
   aroma and mild pungency.. Noble Sweet (Édesnemes): The most commonly
   exported paprika; bright red and slightly pungent. Half-Sweet
   (Félédes): A blend of mild and pungent paprikas; medium pungency. Hot
   (Erös): Light brown in colour, this is the hottest of all the paprikas.

Nutritional value

   All varieties of capsicum including the bell peppers used to make
   paprika have a high vitamin C content (150–250 mg/100 g). In 1932, the
   Hungarian scientist Albert Szent-Györgyi, using Vitamin C from a red
   pepper, proved that scurvy was caused by Vitamin C deficiency.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paprika"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
