   #copyright

Papua New Guinea

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; Geography of
Oceania (Australasia)

   Papua Niugini
   The Independent State of Papua New Guinea

   Flag of Papua New Guinea Coat of arms of Papua New Guinea
   Flag                     Coat of arms
   Motto: Unity in diversity
   Anthem: O Arise, All You Sons
   Location of Papua New Guinea
   Capital
   (and largest city) Port Moresby
   9°30′S 147°07′E
   Official languages English, Tok Pisin, Hiri Motu
   Government Constitutional monarchy
    - Queen Elizabeth II
    - Governor-General Sir Paulias Matane
    - Prime Minister Sir Michael Somare
   Independence From Australia
    - Self-governing December 1, 1973
    - Independence September 16, 1975
   Area
    - Total 462,840 km² ( 54th)
   178,703 sq mi
    - Water (%) 2
   Population
    - July 2005 estimate 5,887,000 ( 104th)
    - Density 13/km² ( 201st)
   34/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total $14.363 billion ( 126th)
    - Per capita $2,418 ( 131st)
   HDI  (2003) 0.523 (medium) ( 137th)
   Currency Papua New Guinean kina ( PGK)
   Time zone AEST ( UTC+10)
    - Summer ( DST) not observed ( as of 2005) ( UTC+10)
   Internet TLD .pg
   Calling code +675

   Papua New Guinea (PNG), officially the Independent State of Papua New
   Guinea, is a country in Oceania, occupying the eastern half of the
   island of New Guinea and numerous offshore islands (the western portion
   of the island is occupied by the Indonesian provinces of Papua and West
   Irian Jaya). It is located in the southwestern Pacific Ocean, in a
   region defined since the early 19th century as Melanesia. Its capital,
   and one of its few major cities, is Port Moresby. It is one of the most
   diverse countries on Earth, with over 850 indigenous languages and at
   least as many traditional societies, out of a population of just under
   6 million. It is also one of the most rural, with only 18 per cent of
   its people living in urban centres. The country is also one of the
   world's least explored, culturally and geographically, and many
   undiscovered species of plants and animals are thought to exist in the
   interior of Papua New Guinea.

   The majority of the population live in traditional societies and
   practise subsistence-based agriculture. These societies and clans have
   some explicit acknowledgement within the nation's constitutional
   framework. The PNG Constitution (Preamble 5(4)) expresses the wish for
   traditional villages and communities to remain as viable units of Papua
   New Guinean society, and for active steps to be taken in their
   preservation. The PNG legislature has enacted various laws in which a
   type of tenure called " customary land title" is recognised, meaning
   that the traditional lands of the indigenous peoples have some legal
   basis to inalienable tenure. This customary land notionally covers most
   of the usable land in the country (some 97% of total land area);
   alienated land is either held privately under State Lease or is
   government land. Freehold Title (also known as fee simple) can only be
   held by Papua New Guinea citizens.

   The country's geography is similarly diverse and, in places, extremely
   rugged. A spine of mountains runs the length of the island of New
   Guinea, forming a populous highlands region. Dense rainforests can be
   found in the lowland and coastal areas. This terrain has made it
   difficult for the country to develop transportation infrastructure. In
   some areas, planes are the only mode of transport. After being
   colonised by three external powers since 1888, Papua New Guinea gained
   its independence from Australia in 1975.

History

   Human remains have been found on New Guinea which have been dated to
   ca. 50,000 years ago. These ancient inhabitants probably had their
   origins in Southeast Asia. Agriculture was independently developed in
   the New Guinea highlands around 9,000 years ago, making it one of the
   few areas of original plant domestication in the world. A major
   migration of Austronesian speaking peoples came to coastal regions
   roughly 2,500 years ago, and this is correlated with the introduction
   of pottery, pigs and certain fishing techniques. More recently, some
   300 years ago, sweet potato entered New Guinea having been introduced
   to the Moluccas from South America by the then-locally dominant
   colonial power, Portugal. The far higher crop yields from sweet potato
   gardens radically transformed traditional agriculture; sweet potato
   largely supplanted the previous staple, taro, and gave rise to a
   significant increase in population in the highlands.

   Little was known in the West about the island until the 19th Century,
   although traders from Southeast Asia had been visiting New Guinea as
   long as 5,000 years ago collecting bird of paradise plumes and European
   explorers had encountered it as early as the 16th century. The country
   was named in the 19th century: the word "Papua" is derived from a Malay
   word describing the frizzy Melanesian hair, and "New Guinea" (Nueva
   Guinea) was the name coined by the Spanish explorer Yñigo Ortiz de
   Retez, who in 1545 noted the resemblance of the people to those he had
   earlier seen along the Guinea coast of Africa.

   The northern half of the country came into German hands in 1884 as
   German New Guinea. During World War I, it was occupied by Australia,
   which had begun administering the southern part as Papua (from 1884,
   British New Guinea) in 1905. After World War I, Australia was given a
   mandate to administer the former German New Guinea by the League of
   Nations. Papua, by contrast, was deemed to be an External Territory of
   the Australian Commonwealth, though as a matter of law it remained a
   British possession, an issue which had significance for the country's
   post-Independence legal system after 1975. This difference in legal
   status meant that Papua and New Guinea had entirely separate
   administrations, both controlled by Australia.

   The two territories were combined into the Territory of Papua and New
   Guinea after World War II, and later simply referred to as "Papua New
   Guinea". The Administration of Papua was now also open to United
   Nations oversight. However, certain statutes continued (and continue)
   to have application only in one of the two Territories, a matter
   considerably complicated today by the adjustment of the former boundary
   among contiguous provinces with respect to road access and language
   groups, so that such statutes apply on one side only of a boundary
   which no longer exists.

   Independence from Australia occurred in September of 1975. A
   secessionist revolt which claimed 20,000 lives raged on the island of
   Bougainville from 1988 until it was resolved in 1997. Autonomous
   Bougainville recently elected Joseph Kabui as president.

Law

   The unicameral Parliament enacts legislation in the same manner as in
   other jurisdictions having “cabinet,” “responsible government,” or
   “parliamentary democracy”: it is introduced by the executive government
   to the legislature, debated and, if passed, becomes law when it
   receives royal assent by the Governor-General. Most legislation is
   actually regulation implemented by the bureaucracy under enabling
   legislation previously passed by Parliament.

   All ordinary statutes enacted by Parliament must be consistent with the
   Constitution and the courts have jurisdiction to rule on the
   constitutionality of statutes, both in disputes before them and on a
   reference where there is no dispute but only an abstract question of
   law. Unusually among developing countries, the judicial branch of
   government in Papua New Guinea has remained remarkably independent and
   successive executive governments have continued to respect its
   authority.

   The "underlying law" — that is, the common law of Papua New Guinea —
   consists of English common law as it stood at 16 September 1975 (the
   date of Independence), and thereafter the decisions of PNG’s own
   courts. The courts are directed by the Constitution and, latterly, the
   Underlying Law Act, to take note of the "custom" of traditional
   communities, with a view to determining which customs are common to the
   whole country and may be declared also to be part of the underlying
   law. In practice, this has proved extremely difficult and has been
   largely neglected. Statutes are largely adopted from overseas
   jurisdictions, primarily Australia and England. Advocacy in the courts
   follows the adversarial pattern of other common law countries.

Politics

   Papua New Guinea is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations and Queen
   Elizabeth II is the head of state, although always referred to as "the
   head of state" in the Constitution, rather than as "the Queen": it had
   been anticipated by the constitutional convention which prepared the
   draft constitution, as by Australia as the outgoing metropolitan power,
   that Papua New Guinea would choose not to retain the link with the
   British monarchy, as in other emerging former dependencies in the
   British Commonwealth. In the event, the founders considered that
   imperial honours had a cachet that the newly independent state would
   not be able to confer with a purely indigenous honours system and
   retaining the monarchy was for the time being useful if for no other
   reason. She is represented in Papua New Guinea by the Governor-General
   who is currently Sir Paulias Matane.

   Actual executive power lies with the Prime Minister, who heads the
   cabinet. The unicameral National Parliament has 109 seats, of which 20
   are occupied by the governors of the 20 provinces. Candidates for
   members of parliament are voted upon when the prime minister calls a
   national election, a maximum of five years after the previous national
   election. In the early years of independence, the instability of the
   party system led to frequent votes of no-confidence in Parliament with
   resulting falls of the government of the day and the need for national
   elections, in accordance with the conventions of parliamentary
   democracy. In recent years, successive governments have passed
   legislation preventing such votes sooner than 18 months after a
   national election. This has arguably resulted in greater stability
   though, perhaps, at a cost of reducing the accountability of the
   executive branch of government.

   Elections in PNG attract large numbers of candidates. Since
   independence in 1975, members have been elected by the first past the
   post system, with winners frequently gaining less than 15% of the vote.
   Electoral reforms in 2001 introduced the Limited Preferential Vote
   system (LPV), a version of the Alternative Vote. The first general
   election to be conducted using LPV will be held in 2007.

Administrative divisions

Provinces

   It was originally considered that Papua New Guinea should be a unitary,
   as opposed to federal, state. However, a rebellion in the District of
   Bougainville in 1975 immediately before the granting of independence
   raised the prospect of the richest District of the country departing.
   The Bougainville Copper Mine provided a major part of the Gross
   National Product, and Bougainville's departure would have left the
   newly independent country vastly more impoverished. As a concession to
   the Bougainville nationalists, a form of provincial government was
   offered; subsequently, this was also conferred on the other 18
   districts of the country — making a total of nineteen provinces plus
   the National Capital District. However, the state is not federal: the
   provinces are creatures of the central government, rather than the
   central government being the creature of the provinces as in a
   federation — their constitutional position is closer to that of the
   provinces of Pakistan and states of India than those of Canada,
   Australia and the United States — and provincial governments are
   subject to suspension by the central government.

   There have been numerous suspensions of provincial governments on the
   grounds of the corruption or incompetence of elected provincial
   leaders. As a means of countering the decentralising impetus of
   constitutional development from the time of Independence, and returning
   immediate control of the provinces to the central government, the
   separately elected provincial premierships were abolished and replaced
   by "governors" who are also members of the National Parliament. An
   exception is Bougainville, whose constitutional arrangements are unique
   (see above, "History").

   Several provincial governments have purported to change the names of
   their provinces; such changes remain unofficial as the names
   contemplated by the Constitution have not been altered through the
   procedures of constitutional amendment. The provinces are as follows:
    1. Central
    2. Chimbu ( Simbu)
    3. Eastern Highlands
    4. East New Britain
    5. East Sepik
    6. Enga
    7. Gulf
    8. Madang
    9. Manus
   10. Milne Bay

   11. Morobe
   12. New Ireland
   13. Northern ( Oro Province)
   14. Bougainville (North Solomons)
   15. Southern Highlands
   16. Western Province (Fly)
   17. Western Highlands
   18. West New Britain
   19. West Sepik (Sandaun)
   20. National Capital District

   Provinces of Papua New Guinea

Regions

   On a broader scale, the nation is divided into four regions. These
   regional groupings are quite significant in daily life, as they are
   often the basis for organisation of government services, corporate
   operations, sporting competitions, and even the machinations of
   politics. For instance, there has been much discussion over the years
   of how many Prime Ministers have come from each region, and whether a
   particular region is due to provide the next one. Ministers and
   departmental heads are often appointed with an eye to maintaining an
   overall balance between the regions.

   People generally identify quite strongly with their region, and
   inter-region rivalries can be intense. The four regions are:
     * Highlands Region: Simbu, Eastern Highlands, Enga, Southern
       Highlands, and Western Highlands.
     * Islands Region: East New Britain, Manus, New Ireland, North
       Solomons (Bougainville), and West New Britain.
     * Momase Region: East Sepik, Madang, Morobe, and West Sepik
       (Sandaun).
     * Papua Region: Central, Gulf, Milne Bay, Northern Province (Oro),
       Western (Fly), and the National Capital District.

Geography

   Map of Papua New Guinea
   Map of Papua New Guinea

   At 178,691 sq.mi (462,840 km²), Papua New Guinea is the world's
   54th-largest country (after Cameroon). It is comparable in size to
   Sweden, and somewhat larger than the US state of California.

   Papua New Guinea is mostly mountainous (highest peak: Mount Wilhelm at
   4,509  m; 14,793  ft) and mostly covered with rain forest, as well as
   very large wetland areas surrounding the Sepik River and Fly River.

   The country is situated on the Pacific Ring of Fire, at the point of
   collision of several tectonic plates. There are a number of active
   volcanoes and eruptions are frequent. Earthquakes are relatively
   common, sometimes accompanied by tsunamis.

   The mainland of the country is the eastern half of New Guinea island,
   where the largest towns are also located, including the capital Port
   Moresby and Lae; other major islands within Papua New Guinea include
   New Ireland, New Britain, and Bougainville.

   Papua New Guinea is one of the few regions close to the equator that
   experience snowfall, which occurs in the most elevated parts of the
   mainland.

Ecology

   Papua New Guinea is part of the Australasia ecozone, which also
   includes Australia, New Zealand, eastern Indonesia, and several Pacific
   island groups, including the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu.

   Geologically, the island of New Guinea is a northern extension of the
   Indo-Australian tectonic plate, forming part of a single landmass
   Australia-New Guinea (also called Sahul or Meganesia). It is connected
   to the Australian segment by a shallow continental shelf across the
   Torres Strait, which in former ages had lain exposed as a land bridge —
   particularly during ice ages when sea levels were lower than at
   present.

   Consequently, many species of birds and mammals found on New Guinea
   have close genetic links with corresponding species found in Australia.
   One notable feature in common for the two landmasses is the existence
   of several species of marsupial mammals, including some kangaroos and
   possums, which are not found elsewhere.

   Many of the other islands within PNG territory, including New Britain,
   New Ireland, Bougainville, the Admiralty Islands, the Trobriand
   Islands, and the Louisiade Archipelago, were never linked to New Guinea
   by land bridges, and they lack many of the land mammals and flightless
   birds that are common to New Guinea and Australia.

   Australia and New Guinea are portions of the ancient supercontinent of
   Gondwana, which started to break into smaller continents in the
   Cretaceous era, 130-65 million years ago. Australia finally broke free
   from Antarctica about 45 million years ago. All the Australasian lands
   are home to the Antarctic flora, descended from the flora of southern
   Gondwana, including the coniferous podocarps and Araucaria pines, and
   the broadleafed southern beech (Nothofagus). These plant families are
   still present in Papua New Guinea.

   As the Indo-Australian Plate (which includes landmasses of India,
   Australia, and the Indian Ocean floor in-between) drifts north, it
   collides with the Eurasian Plate, and the collision of the two plates
   pushed up the Himalayas, the Indonesian islands, and New Guinea's
   Central Range. The Central Range is much younger and higher than the
   mountains of Australia, so high that it is home to rare equatorial
   glaciers. New Guinea is part of the humid tropics, and many Indomalayan
   rainforest plants spread across the narrow straits from Asia, mixing
   together with the old Australian and Antarctic floras.
   Densely forested mountains in the Ekuti range of Central Papua
   Enlarge
   Densely forested mountains in the Ekuti range of Central Papua

   PNG includes a number of terrestrial ecoregions:
     * Admiralty Islands lowland rain forests
     * Central Range montane rain forests
     * Huon Peninsula montane rain forests
     * Louisiade Archipelago rain forests
     * New Britain-New Ireland lowland rain forests
     * New Britain-New Ireland montane rain forests
     * Northern New Guinea lowland rain and freshwater swamp forests
     * Northern New Guinea montane rain forests
     * Solomon Islands rain forests (includes Bougainville and Buka)
     * Southeastern Papuan rain forests
     * Southern New Guinea freshwater swamp forests
     * Southern New Guinea lowland rain forests
     * Trobriand Islands rain forests
     * Trans Fly savanna and grasslands
     * Central Range sub-alpine grasslands

Economy

   Port Moresby
   Enlarge
   Port Moresby

   Papua New Guinea is richly endowed with natural resources, but
   exploitation has been hampered by rugged terrain, the high cost of
   developing infrastructure, serious law and order problems and the
   system of land title, which makes identifying the owners of land for
   the purpose of negotiating appropriate agreements problematic.
   Agriculture provides a subsistence livelihood for 85% of the
   population. Mineral deposits, including oil, copper, and gold, account
   for 72% of export earnings. Former Prime Minister Sir Mekere Morauta
   tried to restore integrity to state institutions, stabilize the kina,
   restore stability to the national budget, privatize public enterprises
   where appropriate, and ensure ongoing peace on Bougainville. The
   Morauta government had considerable success in attracting international
   support, specifically gaining the backing of the IMF and the World Bank
   in securing development assistance loans. Significant challenges face
   the current Prime Minister Sir Michael Somare, including gaining
   further investor confidence, continuing efforts to privatize government
   assets, and maintaining the support of members of Parliament. The third
   quarter (September, 2004) Reserve Bank Report by the Governor of Bank
   of PNG showed positive economic stance by the Government, with
   inflation at zero. However, in March 2006 the United Nations Committee
   for Development Policy called for Papua New Guinea's designation of
   developing country to be downgraded to least-developed country because
   of protracted economic and social stagnation.

Land tenure

   Only some three per cent of the land of Papua New Guinea is alienated;
   it is privately held under 99 year State Lease, or it is held by the
   State. There is virtually no freehold title; the few existing freeholds
   are automatically converted to State Lease when they are transferred
   between vendor and purchaser. Unalienated land is owned under customary
   title by traditional landowners. The precise nature of the seisin
   varies from one culture to another, but generally title is communal and
   in the hands of traditional clans. This is a matter of vital importance
   because a problem of economic development is identifying who the
   membership of customary landowning groups is, and thus who the owners
   are. Disputes between mining and forestry companies and landowner
   groups often devolve on the issue of whether the companies entered into
   contractual relations for the use of land with the true owners.
   Customary property — usually land — cannot be devised by will; it can
   only be inherited according to the custom of the deceased's people.

Demographics

   Huli Wigman from the Southern Highlands
   Enlarge
   Huli Wigman from the Southern Highlands
   Resident of Bago-bago, an island in the southeast of Papua New Guinea
   Enlarge
   Resident of Bago-bago, an island in the southeast of Papua New Guinea

   There are hundreds of ethnic groups indigenous to Papua New Guinea, the
   majority being from the group known as Papuans, whose ancestors arrived
   in the New Guinea region tens of thousands of years ago. The others are
   Austronesians, their ancestors having arrived in the region less than
   four thousand years ago. There are also numerous people from other
   parts of the world resident, including Chinese, Europeans, Australians,
   Filipinos, Sri Lankans and Indians.

   There are three official languages for Papua New Guinea, in addition to
   over 850 indigenous non-Austronesian (or Papuan) and Austronesian
   languages (an incredible ten per cent of the world's total languages).
   English is an official language, although few people speak it. Many
   people — mostly on the "New Guinea side," that is, the northern half of
   mainland PNG and the New Guinea Islands — speak the creole language New
   Guinea Pidgin (" Tok Pisin" in Pidgin and referred to in English by
   linguists but not ordinary Pidgin speakers by that name) as a lingua
   franca. (Much of the debate in Parliament and many newspapers is
   conducted in Tok Pisin.) In the southern region of Papua, people may
   use the third official language, Hiri Motu, rather than Tok Pisin which
   is largely unknown outside Port Moresby, where it has become
   increasingly common with the influx in recent years of Pidgin-speaking
   highlanders. With an average of only 7000 speakers per language, Papua
   New Guinea has a greater density of languages than any other nation on
   earth except Vanuatu. See the SIL Ethnologue for more information on
   the diverse range of languages.

   About one third of the population adheres to indigenous beliefs. Many
   of these also claim to be Christian, while two thirds claim only to be
   Christians. About one third of Christians are Roman Catholic, while the
   remainder are divided among several Protestant denominations.

   PNG has the highest incidence of HIV and AIDS in the Pacific region and
   is the fourth country in the Asia Pacific region to fit the criteria
   for a generalised HIV/AIDS epidemic.

Culture

   The culture of Papua New Guinea is many-sided and complex. It is
   estimated that more than a thousand different cultural groups exist in
   PNG. Because of this diversity, many different styles of cultural
   expression have emerged; each group has created its own expressive
   forms in art, dance, weaponry, costumes, singing, music, architecture
   and much more.
   Children dressed up for sing sing in Yengisa, Papua New Guinea
   Enlarge
   Children dressed up for sing sing in Yengisa, Papua New Guinea

   Most of these different cultural groups have their own language. People
   typically live in villages that rely on subsistence farming. In some
   areas people hunt and collect wild plants (such as yam roots) to
   supplement their diets. Those who become skilled at hunting, farming
   and fishing earn a great deal of respect.

   On the Sepik River, there is a famous tradition of wood carving, often
   in the form of plants or animals, representing ancestor spirits.

   Sea shells are no longer the currency of Papua New Guinea, as they were
   in some regions — sea shells were abolished as currency in 1933.
   However, this heritage is still present in local customs; in some
   cultures, to get a bride, a groom must bring a certain number of
   golden-edged clam shells as a bride price. In other regions, bride
   price is paid in lengths of shell money, pigs, cassowaries or cash;
   elsewhere, bride price is unknown and it is brides who must pay dowry.

   People of the highlands engage in colourful local rituals that are
   called " sing sings". They paint themselves, and dress up with
   feathers, pearls and animal skins to represent birds, trees or mountain
   spirits. Sometimes an important event, such as a legendary battle, is
   enacted at such a musical festival. (See also Music of Papua New
   Guinea.)

Sport

   Sport is an important part of PNG culture. The national sport, although
   not official, is considered to be rugby league. In a nation where
   communities are far apart and many people live at a minimal subsistence
   level, rugby league has been described as a replacement for tribal
   warfare as a way of explaining the local enthusiasm for the game (a
   matter of life and death). Many Papua New Guineans have become instant
   celebrities by representing their country or playing in an overseas
   professional league. Even Australian rugby league players who have
   played in the annual (Australian) State of Origin clash, which is
   celebrated feverishly every year in PNG, are among the most well known
   identities throughout the nation.

   Australian Rules football (AFL) has experienced considerable growth
   over the past decade, now being Papua New Guinea's second most popular
   sport. They also boast the second highest number of players in the
   world. The Papua New Guinea national Australian rules football team
   competed at both the 2002 and 2005 International Cups and were
   runners-up both times (to Ireland and New Zealand respectively).
   AFL-PNG is the governing body of the sport in Papua New Guinea. Both
   their local leagues and the AFL receive substantial media coverage in
   the country and the sport is expected to match League in popularity in
   the next decade. Mal Michael is a famous Papua New Guinean footballer
   in the AFL, and his popularity has helped increase awareness of the
   game in his homeland.

   Other major sports which have a part in the PNG sporting landscape are
   soccer, rugby union and, in eastern Papua, cricket.

Religion

   The courts and government practice uphold the constitutional right to
   freedom of speech, thought, and belief, and no legislation to curb
   those rights has been adopted, though Sir Arnold Amet, the immediately
   previous Chief Justice of Papua New Guinea and an outspoken proponent
   of Pentecostal Christianity, frequently urged legislative and other
   curbs on the activities of Muslims in the country.

   The 2000 census showed 96 percent of citizens were members of a
   Christian church; however, many citizens combine their Christian faith
   with some pre-Christian traditional indigenous practices. The census
   percentages were as follows:
     * Roman Catholic Church (27.0%)
     * Evangelical Lutheran Church of Papua New Guinea (19.5%)
     * United Church (11.5%)
     * Seventh-day Adventist Church (10.0%)
     * Pentecostal (8.6%)
     * Evangelical Alliance (5.2%)
     * Anglican Church of Papua New Guinea (3.2%)
     * Baptist (2.5%)
     * Salvation Army (0.2%)
     * Other Christian (8.0%)

   Minority religions include the Jehovah's Witness (20,000 or 0.4%),
   Church of Christ (20,000 or 0.4%), Bahá'í Faith (15,000 or 0.3%) and
   Islam (1,000 to 2,000 Muslims or 0.04%, largely foreign residents of
   African and Southeast Asian origin, but with some Papua New Guinean
   converts in the towns). Non-traditional Christian churches and
   non-Christian religious groups are active throughout the country. The
   Papua New Guinea Council of Churches has stated that both Muslim and
   Confucian missionaries are active, and foreign missionary activity in
   general is high.

   Traditional religions were often animist and some also tended to have
   elements of ancestor worship though generalisations are invidious given
   the extreme heterogeneity of Melanesian societies. For a discussion of
   one (West Papuan) society's traditional religion by way of example, see
   the article on the Korowa of Papua.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Papua_New_Guinea"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
