   #copyright

Parsley

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Food and agriculture;
Plants

                  iParsley
   Parsley
   Parsley
         Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Plantae
   Division: Magnoliophyta
   Class:    Magnoliopsidana
   Order:    Apiales
   Family:   Apiaceae
   Genus:    Petroselinum

                                   Species

     * P. crispum
     * P. neapolitanum

            Parsley, raw
   Nutritional value per 100 g
      Energy 40 kcal   150 kJ

   Carbohydrates         6 g
   - Dietary fibre  3 g
   Fat                   1 g
   Protein               3 g
   Vitamin A  421 μg     47%
   Vitamin C  133 mg     222%
   Percentages are relative to US
   recommendations for adults.

   Parsley (Petroselinum crispum) is a bright green, biennial herb that is
   very common in Middle Eastern, European, and American cooking. It is
   used for its leaf in much the same way as coriander (which is also
   known as Chinese parsley or cilantro), although it has a milder flavor.

   Two forms of parsley are used as herbs: curly leaf and Italian or flat
   leaf (P. neapolitanum). Curly leaf parsley is often used as a garnish.
   Many people think flat leaf parsley has a stronger flavor, and this
   opinion is backed by chemical analysis which finds much higher levels
   of essential oil in the flat-leaved cultivars. One of the compounds of
   the essential oil is apiol. Another type of parsley is grown as a root
   vegetable.

   The use of curly leaf parsley is often favored, because it can not be
   confused with poison hemlock like flat leaf parsley or chervil.

   Parsley is used as a food plant by the larvae of some Lepidoptera
   species including the Mouse Moth and The Nutmeg.

   In parts of Europe, and particularly in West Asia, many foods are
   served with chopped parsley sprinkled on top. The fresh flavor of
   parsley goes extremely well with fish. Parsley is essential to several
   West Asian salads, e.g., tabbouleh which is the national dish of
   Lebanon. In Southern and Central Europe, parsley is part of bouquet
   garni, a bundle of fresh herbs used to flavor stocks, soups and sauces.
   Additionally, parsley is often used as a garnish. Persillade is mixture
   of chopped garlic and chopped parsley. Gremolata is a mixture of
   parsley, garlic, and lemon zest.

   Parsley is valued as a breath-freshener, due to its high concentration
   of chlorophyll. Adam Blackman, a nutritionist, claims parsley enhances
   mental alertness, and affects the immune system.

   Parsley has been proven to be the best counter for bad garlic breath.

Cultivation

   Parsley grows well in a deep pot, which helps accommodate the long
   taproot. Parsley grown indoors requires at least five hours of sunlight
   a day.

Medicinal Uses

   Parsley tea may be used as a diuretic. Chinese and German herbologists
   recommend parsley tea to help control high blood pressure, and Cherokee
   Indians use it as a tonic to strengthen the bladder. It is also often
   used as an emmenagogue.

   Parsley appears to increase diuresis by inhibiting the Na+/K+-ATPase
   pump in the kidney, thereby enhancing sodium and water excretion while
   increasing potassium reabsorption ( PMID 11849841).

Potential health concerns

   Parsley is high in oxalic acid, a compound involved in the formation of
   kidney stones and nutrient deficiencies.

   In the middle ages parsley was used to perform abortions. Many times it
   killed both the unborn child and the mother.

Gallery

   Parsley Bush

               Curled Parsley

                             Flat Parsley

                                         Flat Parsley flower

                              Herbs and spices
     Herbs Basil · Bay leaf · Boldo · Borage · Chervil · Chives ·
        Coriander leaf (cilantro) · Curry leaf · Dill · Epazote ·
   Eryngium foetidum (long coriander) · Fennel · Holy basil · Houttuynia
               cordata · Hyssop · Lavender · Lemon grass ·
   Limnophila aromatica (rice paddy herb) · Lovage · Marjoram · Mint ·
Oregano · Parsley · Perilla · Rosemary · Rue · Sage · Savory · Sorrel ·
        Stevia · Tarragon · Thyme · Vietnamese coriander (rau ram)
    Spices African pepper · Ajwain (bishop's weed) · Allspice · Amchur
  (mango powder) · Anise · Asafoetida · Caraway · Cardamom · Cardamom,
  black · Cassia · Celery seed · Chili · Cinnamon · Clove · Coriander
     seed · Cubeb · Cumin · Cumin, black · Dill seed · Fenugreek ·
 Galangal · Garlic · Ginger · Grains of paradise · Horseradish · Juniper
 berry · Liquorice · Mace · Mahlab · Mustard, black · Mustard, white ·
 Nigella (kalonji) · Nutmeg · Paprika · Pepper, black · Pepper, green ·
    Pepper, pink · Pepper, white · Pomegranate seed (anardana) · Poppy
 seed · Saffron · Sarsaparilla · Sassafras · Sesame · Sichuan pepper ·
      Star anise · Sumac · Tamarind · Turmeric · Wasabi · Zedoary

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parsley"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
