   #copyright

Parsnip

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Food and agriculture;
Plants

                   iParsnip
   A selection of parsnips
   A selection of parsnips
           Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Plantae
   Division: Magnoliophyta
   Class:    Magnoliopsida
   Order:    Apiales
   Family:   Apiaceae
   Genus:    Pastinaca
   Species:  P. sativa

                                Binomial name

   Pastinaca sativa
   L.

   The parsnip (Pastinaca sativa) is a root vegetable related to the
   carrot. Parsnips resemble carrots, but are paler and have a stronger
   flavor. Like carrots, parsnips are native to Eurasia and have been
   eaten there since ancient times. Until the potato arrived from the New
   World, its place in dishes was occupied by the parsnip. Parsnips can be
   boiled, roasted or used in stews, soups and casseroles.

Cultivation

   Parsnips are not grown in warm climates, since frost is necessary to
   develop their flavor. The parsnip is a favorite with gardeners in areas
   with short growing seasons. Sandy, loamy soil is preferred; silty,
   clay, and rocky soils are unsuitable as they produce short forked
   roots.

   Seeds can be planted in early spring, as soon as the ground can be
   worked. Harvesting can begin in late fall, after the first frost, and
   continue through winter, until the ground freezes over.

   More than almost any other vegetable seed, parsnip seed significantly
   deteriorates in viability if stored for long, so it is advisable to use
   fresh seed each year.

   In Roman times parsnips were believed to be an aphrodisiac.

   In the United States, most states have wild parsnip on their list of
   noxious weeds or invasive species.

   Parsnip is used as a food plant by the larvae of some Lepidoptera
   species including Common Swift, Garden Dart and Ghost Moth.

Nutritional properties

   The parsnip is richer in many vitamins and minerals than its close
   relative the carrot. It is particularly rich in potassium with 600 mg
   per 100 g. Parsnip is also a good source of dietary fibre. 100 g of
   parsnip contains 55 Calories (230 kJ) energy.

   Some people can get an allergic reaction from parsnip, and parsnip
   leaves may irritate the skin.

Danger

   When picking wild vegetables, it is easy to mistake poison hemlock (
   Conium maculatum) for parsnip, with deadly results.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parsnip"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
