   #copyright

Pedagogy

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Education

   Pedagogy, the art or science of being a teacher, generally refers to
   strategies of instruction, or a style of instruction. The word comes
   from the Ancient Greek παιδαγωγέω (paidagōgeō; from παῖς (child) and
   ἄγω (lead)): literally, "to lead the child”. In Ancient Greece,
   παιδαγωγός was (usually) a slave who supervised the education of his
   master’s son (girls were not publicly educated). This involved taking
   him to school (διδασκαλεῖον) or a gym (γυμνάσιον), looking after him
   and carrying his equipment (e.g. musical instruments).

   The Latin-derived word for pedagogy, education, is nowadays used in the
   English-speaking world to refer to the whole context of instruction,
   learning, and the actual operations involved with that, although both
   words have roughly the same original meaning. In the English-speaking
   world the term pedagogy refers to the science or theory of educating.

   Pedagogy is also sometimes referred to as the correct use of teaching
   strategies (see instructional theory). For example, Brazilian Paulo
   Freire, one of the most influential educators of the 20th century,
   referred to his method of teaching adults as " critical pedagogy". In
   correlation with those teaching strategies the instructor's own
   philosophical beliefs of teaching are harbored and governed by the
   pupil's background knowledge and experiences, personal situations and
   environment as well as learning goals set by the student as well as the
   teacher. For example, the Socratic schools of thought

   An academic degree, Ped.D., Doctor of Pedagogy, is awarded honorarily
   by some American universities to distinguished educators (in the US and
   UK earned degrees within the education field are classified as an
   Ed.D., Doctor of Education or a Ph.D. Doctor of Philosophy). The term
   is also used to denote an emphasis in education as a specialty in a
   field (for instance, a Doctor of Music degree "in piano pedagogy").

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pedagogy"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
