   #copyright

Pentateuch

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Religious texts

   Pentateuch (Πεντετεύχως) ("five rolls or cases") is the Greek name for
   the first 5 books of the Hebrew Bible: the name is derived from two
   Greek words: pente, meaning "five", and teuxos which roughly means
   "case", a reference to the cases containing the five scrolls of the
   Laws of Moses.
    1. Genesis
    2. Exodus
    3. Leviticus
    4. Numbers
    5. Deuteronomy

   In Christianity, these books are found in the Old Testament.

Contents

   This is a brief summary of the contents of the books of the Pentateuch.
   For details see the individual books.

   Genesis begins with the primeval history: the story of creation and the
   garden of Eden (Genesis 1-3), the account of the descendants of Adam to
   the rise of Noah who survives a great flood (Genesis 3-9), and the
   account of the descendants of Noah through the tower of Babel to the
   rise of Abram ( Abraham) (Genesis 10-11). Next follows the story of the
   patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the life of Joseph (Genesis
   12-50). God gives to the patriarchs a promise of the land of Canaan,
   but at the end of Genesis the clan of Jacob ends up leaving Canaan for
   Egypt because of a famine.

   Exodus describes the rise of Moses who leads Israelites out of
   Pharaoh's Egypt (Exodus 1-18) to Mount Sinai/Horeb where he mediates to
   them God's covenant and laws (Exodus 19-24), deals with the violation
   of the law when Israel makes the Golden Calf (Exodus 32-34) and
   instructs them on building the tabernacle (Exodus 25-31; 35-40).

   Leviticus begins with instructions about how to use the tabernacle that
   they had just built. (Leviticus 1-10) This is followed by rules of
   clean and unclean (Leviticus 11-15), the Day of Atonement (Leviticus
   16), and various moral and ritual laws sometimes called the Holiness
   Code (Leviticus 17-26).

   Numbers takes two censuses where the number of Israelites are counted
   (Numbers 1-3, 26), and has many laws mixed among the narratives. The
   narratives tell how Israel consolidated itself as a community at Sinai
   (Numbers 1-9), set out from Sinai to move towards Canaan and spied out
   the land (Numbers 10-13). Because of unbelief at various points, but
   especially at Kadesh Barnea (Numbers 14), the Israelites were condemned
   to wander for forty years in the desert in the vicinity of Kadesh
   instead of immediately entering the land of promise. Even Moses sins
   and is told he would not live to enter the land (Numbers 20). At the
   end of Numbers (Numbers 26-35) Israel moves from the area of Kadesh
   towards the promised land. They leave the Sinai desert and go around
   Edom and through Moab where Balak and Balaam oppose them (Numbers
   22-24; 31:8, 15-16). They defeat two Transjordan kings, Og and Sihon
   (Numbers 21), and so come to occupy some territory outside of Canaan.
   At the end of the book they are on the plains of Moab opposite Jericho
   ready to enter the Promised Land.

   Deuteronomy consists primarily of a series of speeches by Moses on the
   plains of Moab opposite Jericho exhorting Israel to obey God and giving
   further instruction on the laws. At the end of the book (Deuteronomy
   34) Moses is allowed to see the promised land from a mountain, but dies
   and is buried by God before Israel begins the conquest of Canaan.

Composition

   The Pentateuch was traditionally believed to have been written down by
   Moses. Hence Genesis is sometimes called the first book of Moses,
   Exodus the second book of Moses, and so forth. In its current form,
   each successive book of the Pentateuch picks up and continues the story
   of the previous book to form a continuous story. Hence Genesis tells
   how the Israelites went to Egypt while Exodus tells how they came to
   leave Egypt. Exodus describes the building of the tabernacle at Sinai
   while in Leviticus Moses is given rules while at Sinai for offering
   sacrifice and worship at that tabernacle. In Numbers the Israelites
   leave Sinai and travel eventually to the plains of Moab, while in
   Deuteronomy Moses gives speeches about the law on the plains of Moab.

   The Pentateuch can be contrasted with the Hexateuch, a term for the
   first six books of the Bible. The traditional view is that Joshua wrote
   the sixth book of the Hexateuch, namely the Book of Joshua and so it
   was separated from the five books of the Pentateuch ascribed to Moses.
   But as a story the Pentateuch seems incomplete without Joshua's account
   of the conquest of the promised land. The Book of Joshua completes the
   story, continuing directly from the events of Deuteronomy, and
   documents the conquest of Canaan predicted in the Pentateuch. This has
   led some scholars to propose that the proper literary unit is that of
   the Hexateuch rather than the Pentateuch. Still others think that
   Deuteronomy stands apart from the first four books of the Pentateuch,
   and so speak of the first four as the Tetrateuch (Genesis through
   Numbers). This view sees Deuteronomy as the book that introduces a
   series of books influenced by Deuteronomy called the Deteronomistic
   History consisting of the books of Joshua, Judges, 1 & 2 Samuel, and 1
   & 2 Kings. This view was expounded by Martin Noth.

Documentary Hypothesis

   In classical Documentary Hypothesis, as most popularly proposed by
   Julius Wellhausen (1844-1918), the Pentateuch is composed of four
   separate and identifiable texts, dating roughly from the period of
   Solomon up until exilic priests and scribes. These various texts were
   brought together as one document (the Pentateuch, or Torah) by scribes
   after the exile. The traditional names are:
     * The Jahwist (or J) - written circa 850 BCE. The southern kingdom's
       (i.e. Judah) interpretation. It is named according to the prolific
       use of the name "Yahweh" (or Jaweh, in German, the divine name or
       Tetragrammaton) in its text.
     * The Elohist (or E) - written circa 750 BCE. The northern kingdom's
       (i.e. Israel) interpretation. As above, it is named because of its
       preferred use of "Elohim" (Generic name for "god" in Hebrew).
     * The Deuteronomist (or D) - written circa 621 BCE. Dating
       specifically from the time of King Josiah of Judah and responsible
       for the book of Deuteronomy as well as Joshua and most of the
       subsequent books up to 2 Kings.
     * The Priestly source (or P) - written during or after the exile. So
       named because of its focus on levitical laws.

   There is debate amongst scholars as to exactly how many different
   documents compose the corpus of the Pentateuch, and as to what sections
   of text are included in the different documents.

   A number of smaller independent texts have also been identified,
   including the Song of the Sea and other works, mainly in verse, most of
   them older than the four main texts. The individual books were edited
   and combined into their present form by the Redactor, frequently
   identified with the scribe Ezra, in the post-Babylonian exile period.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pentateuch"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
