   #copyright

Peter I of Russia

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Historical figures

   Peter was a tall figure, with an extremely striking build of 2.03
   meters (6 feet 8 inches), and large, green eyes.
   Enlarge
   Peter was a tall figure, with an extremely striking build of 2.03
   meters (6 feet 8 inches), and large, green eyes.

   suffered his first loss after Peter crushed a group of Swedish
   reinforcements marching from Riga. Deprived of this aid, Charles was
   forced to abandon his proposed march on Moscow.
   Peter I in the Battle of Poltava (a mosaic by Mikhail Lomonosov)
   Enlarge
   Peter I in the Battle of Poltava (a mosaic by Mikhail Lomonosov)

   Charles XII refused to retreat to Poland or back to Sweden, instead
   invading Ukraine. Peter withdrew his army southward, destroying any
   property that could assist the Swedes along the way. Deprived of local
   supplies, the Swedish army was forced to halt its advance in the winter
   of 1708– 1709. In the summer of 1709, they nevertheless resumed their
   efforts to capture Ukraine, culminating in the Battle of Poltava on 27
   June. The battle was a decisive defeat for Swedish forces, ending
   Charles' campaign in Ukraine and forcing him into exile in the Ottoman
   Empire. In Poland, August II was restored as King.

   Peter foolishly attacked the Ottomans in 1711. Normally, the Boyar Duma
   would have exercised power during his absence. Peter, however,
   mistrusted the Boyars; he abolished the Duma and created a Senate of
   ten members. Peter's campaign in the Ottoman Empire was disastrous; in
   the ensuing peace treaty, Peter was forced to return the Black Sea
   ports he had seized in 1697. In return, the Sultan expelled Charles XII
   from his territory.

   Peter's northern armies took the Swedish province of Livonia (the
   northern half of modern Latvia, and the southern half of modern
   Estonia), driving the Swedes back into Finland. Most of Finland was
   occupied by the Russians in 1714. The Tsar's navy was so powerful that
   the Russians could penetrate Sweden. Peter also obtained the assistance
   of Hanover and the Kingdom of Prussia. Still, Charles refused to yield,
   and not until his death in battle in 1718 did peace become feasible.
   Sweden made peace with all powers but Russia by 1720. In 1721, the
   Treaty of Nystad ended what became known as the Great Northern War.
   Russia acquired Ingria, Estonia, Livonia and a substantial portion of
   Karelia. In turn, Russia paid two million Riksdaler and surrendered
   most of Finland. The Tsar was, however, permitted to retain some
   Finnish lands close to Saint Petersburg, which he had made his capital
   in 1712.

Later years

   Peter I's last years were marked by further reform in Russia. On 22
   October 1721, soon after peace was made with Sweden, he was acclaimed
   Emperor of All Russia. Some proposed that he take the title Emperor of
   the East, but he refused. Gavrila Golovkin, the State Chancellor, was
   the first to add "the Great, Father of His Country, Emperor of All the
   Russias" to Peter's traditional title Tsar following a speech by the
   archbishop of Pskov in 1721.

   Peter's imperial title was recognized by Augustus II of Poland,
   Frederick William I of Prussia and Frederick I of Sweden, but not by
   the other European monarchs. In the minds of many, the word emperor
   connoted superiority or pre-eminence over "mere" kings. Several rulers
   feared that Peter would claim authority over them, just as the Holy
   Roman Emperor had once claimed suzerainty over all Christian nations.

   Peter also reformed the government of the Orthodox Church. The
   traditional leader of the Church was the Patriarch of Moscow. In 1700,
   when the office fell vacant, Peter had refused to name a replacement,
   allowing the Patriarch's Coadjutor (or deputy) to discharge the duties
   of the office. Twenty-one years later, in 1721, Peter followed the
   advice of Feofan Prokopovich and erected the Holy Synod, a council of
   ten clergymen, to take the place of the Patriarch and Coadjutor.

   In 1722, Peter created a new order of precedence, known as the Table of
   Ranks. Formerly, precedence had been determined by birth. In order to
   deprive the Boyars of their high positions, Peter directed that
   precedence should be determined by merit and service to the Emperor.
   The Table of Ranks continued to remain in effect until the Russian
   monarchy was overthrown in 1917.

   Peter also introduced new taxes to fund improvements in Saint
   Petersburg. He abolished the land tax and household tax, and replaced
   them with a capitation. The taxes on land on households were payable
   only by individuals who owned property or maintained families; the new
   head taxes, however, were payable by serfs and paupers.

   In 1724, Peter had his second wife, Catherine, crowned as Empress,
   although he remained Russia's actual ruler. All of Peter's male
   children had died—the eldest son, Alexei, had been tortured and killed
   on Peter's orders in 1718 because he had disobeyed his father and
   opposed official policies. Alexei's mother Eudoxia had also been
   punished; she was dragged from her home and tried on false charges of
   adultery. A similar fate befell Peter's beautiful mistress, Anna Mons,
   in 1704.

   In 1725, construction of Peterhof, a palace near St Petersburg, was
   completed. Peterhof (Dutch for "Peter's Court") was a grand residence,
   becoming known as the "Russian Versailles" (after the great French
   Palace of Versailles).

Death

   Peter the Great on his deathbed.
   Enlarge
   Peter the Great on his deathbed.

   In the winter of 1723, Peter, whose over all health was never robust,
   began having problems with his urinary tract and bladder. In the summer
   of 1724 a team of doctors performed the necessary surgery releasing
   upwards of four pounds of blocked urine. Peter remained bedridden till
   late autumn. Then in the first week of October, restless and certain he
   was cured, Peter began a lengthy inspection tour of various projects.
   According to tradition, it was in November, while at Lakhta along the
   Finnish Gulf to inspect some ironworks, that Peter saw a group of
   soldiers drowning not far from shore and, wading out into near-waist
   deep water, came to their rescue.

   This icy water rescue is said to have exacerbated Peter's bladder
   problems and caused his death on January 28, 1725. The story, however,
   has been viewed with skepticism by some historians, pointing out that
   the German chronicler Jacob von Stählin is the only source for the
   story, and it seems unlikely that no one else would have documented
   such an act of heroism. This, plus the interval of time between these
   actions and Peter's death seems to precludes any direct link. However,
   the story may still, in part, contain some grain of truth.

   In early January 1725 Peter was struck once again with uremia. Legend
   has it that before lasping into unconsciousness Peter asked for a paper
   and pen and scrawled an unfinished note that read: "Leave all to...."
   and then, exhausted by the effort, asked for his daughter Anna to be
   summoned..

   Peter died between four and five in the morning January 28, 1725. An
   autopsy revealed his bladder to be infected with gangrene. He was
   fifty-two years, seven months old when he died, having reigned
   forty-two years.
   The most famous (1782) statue of Peter I in St. Petersburg, informally
   known as the Bronze Horseman
   Enlarge
   The most famous (1782) statue of Peter I in St. Petersburg, informally
   known as the Bronze Horseman
   The tomb of Peter the Great in Peter and Paul Fortress.
   Enlarge
   The tomb of Peter the Great in Peter and Paul Fortress.

   Many emotions swept through Russia, indeed throughout all of Europe, on
   the news of Peter's death, but geniune grief was not shared by all. In
   the words of Russian historian P. Kovalevsky:

     "We could enthuse forever about the greatness of Peter's actions and
     still not deplict in all its fullness, brilliance and worth
     everything that he accomplished...But in creating, he destroyed. He
     caused pain to all in whom he came into contact. He disturbed the
     safety, peace, prosperity, interests, strength, well-being, rights
     and dignity of everyone he touched. He made things unpleasant for
     everyone. He did harm to everyone. He touched intellectual,
     political, social, financial, family, moral and spiritual interests.
     Is it possible to love such a statesman? In no way. Such men are
     hated."

Legitimate issue

   Name Birth Death Notes
   By Eudoxia Lopukhina
   HIH Alexei Petrovich, Tsarevich of Russia 18 February 1690 26 June 1718
   married 1711, Princess Charlotte of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel; had issue
   HIH Alexander Petrovich, Grand Duke of Russia 13 October 1691 14 May
   1692
   HIH Pavel Petrovich, Grand Duke of Russia 1693 1693
   By Catherine I
   HIH Anna Petrovna, Tsesarevna of Russia 7 February 1708 15 May 1728
   married 1725, Karl Friedrich, Duke of Holstein-Gottorp; had issue
   HIM Empress Elizabeth 29 December 1709 5 January 1762 reputedly married
   1742, Alexei Grigorievich, Count Razumovsky; no issue
   HIH Natalia Petrovna, Grand Duchess of Russia 20 March 1713 27 May 1715

   HIH Margarita Petrovna, Grand Duchess of Russia 19 September 1714 7
   June 1715
   HIH Peter Petrovich, Grand Duke of Russia 15 November 1715 19 April
   1719
   HIH Pavel Petrovich, Grand Duke of Russia 13 January 1717 14 January
   1717
   HIH Natalia Petrovna, Grand Duchess of Russia 31 August 1718 15 March
   1725

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_I_of_Russia"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
