   #copyright

Pheidippides

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Ancient History,
Classical History and Mythology

   Pheidippides ( Greek: Φειδιππιδης, sometimes given as Phidippides or
   Philippides), hero of Ancient Greece, is the central figure in a story
   which was the inspiration for the modern sporting event, the marathon.

   The traditional story relates that Pheidippides(530bc-490bc), an
   Athenian herald, was sent to Sparta to request help when the Persians
   landed at Marathon, Greece. He ran 150 miles in two days. He then ran
   the 42 km (26.2 miles) from the battlefield by the town of Marathon to
   Athens to announce the Greek victory over Persia in the Battle of
   Marathon ( 490 BC) with the word "Νενικήκαμεν!" (Nenikékamen, We were
   victorious!) and died on the spot. Most accounts incorrectly attribute
   this story to the historian Herodotus, who wrote the history of the
   Persian Wars in his Histories (composed about 440 BC).

   Robert Browning gave a version of the traditional story in his 1879
   poem Pheidippides.

     So, when Persia was dust, all cried, "To Acropolis!
     Run, Pheidippides, one race more! the meed is thy due!
     Athens is saved, thank Pan, go shout!" He flung down his shield
     Ran like fire once more: and the space 'twixt the fennel-field
     And Athens was stubble again, a field which a fire runs through,
     Till in he broke: "Rejoice, we conquer!" Like wine through clay,
     Joy in his blood bursting his heart, - the bliss!

   ("Fennel-field" is a reference to the Greek word for fennel, marathon,
   the origin of the name of the battlefield.)

   It was this poem which inspired Baron Pierre de Coubertin and other
   founders of the modern Olympic Games to invent a running race of 42 km
   called the Marathon.

   Sadly for historical romance, the story is probably not true. It is
   inherently improbable, since if the Athenians wanted to send an urgent
   message to Athens there was no reason why they could not have sent a
   messenger on horseback. However, they might have really used a runner
   as, due to the rocky and mountainous terrain of Greece, a horse's
   movement would have been hindered. In any case, no such story appears
   in Herodotus. The relevant passage of Herodotus (Histories, 105...106 [
   1 ])(The mountains in this area are too steep for horses to move with
   speed) is:

     Before they left the city, the Athenian generals sent off a message
     to Sparta. The messenger was an Athenian named Pheidippides, a
     professional long-distance runner. According to the account he gave
     the Athenians on his return, Pheidippides met the god Pan on Mount
     Parthenium, above Tegea. Pan, he said, called him by name and told
     him to ask the Athenians why they paid him no attention, in spite of
     his friendliness towards them and the fact that he had often been
     useful to them in the past, and would be so again in the future. The
     Athenians believed Pheidippides's story, and when their affairs were
     once more in a prosperous state, they built a shrine to Pan under
     the Acropolis, and from the time his message was received they held
     an annual ceremony, with a torch-race and sacrifices, to court his
     protection.
     On the occasion of which I speak - when Pheidippides, that is, was
     sent on his mission by the Athenian commanders and said that he saw
     Pan - he reached Sparta the day after he left Athens and delivered
     his message to the Spartan government. "Men of Sparta" (the message
     ran), "the Athenians ask you to help them, and not to stand by while
     the most ancient city of Greece is crushed and subdued by a foreign
     invader; for even now Eretria has been enslaved, and Greece is the
     weaker by the loss of one fine city." The Spartans, though moved by
     the appeal, and willing to send help to Athens, were unable to send
     it promptly because they did not wish to break their law. It was the
     ninth day of the month, and they said they could not take the field
     until the moon was full. So they waited for the full moon, and
     meanwhile Hippias, the son of Pisistratus, guided the Persians to
     Marathon.

   The significance of this story is only understood in the light of the
   legend that the god Pan returned the favour by fighting with the
   Athenian troops and against the Persians at Marathon. This was
   important because Pan, in addition to his other powers, had the
   capacity to instill the most extreme sort of fear, an irrational, blind
   fear that paralysed the mind and suspended all sense of judgment -
   panic.

   Herodotus was writing about 50 years after the events he describes, so
   it is reasonably likely that Pheidippides is a historical figure. If he
   ran the 246 km over rough roads from Athens to Sparta within two days,
   it would be an achievement worthy of remembrance. Whether the story is
   true or not, it has no connection with the Battle of Marathon itself,
   and Herodotus's silence on the subject of a herald running from
   Marathon to Athens suggests strongly that no such event occurred.

   The first known written account of a run from Marathon to Athens occurs
   in the works of the Greek writer Plutarch ( 46- 120), in his essay On
   the Glory of Athens. Plutarch attributes the run to a herald called
   either Thersippus or Eukles. Lucian, a century later, credits one
   "Philippides." It seems likely that in the 500 years between
   Herodotus's time and Plutarch's, the story of Pheidippides had become
   muddled with that of the Battle of Marathon, and some fanciful writer
   had invented the story of the run from Marathon to Athens.

   While the marathon celebrates the mythical run from Marathon to Athens,
   since 1982 an annual footrace from Athens to Sparta, known as the
   Spartathlon, celebrates Pheiddipides's at least semi-historical run
   across 250 km of Greek countryside.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pheidippides"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
