   #copyright

Philately

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Recreation

   Close examination of the Penny Red, left, reveals a "148" in the
   margin, indicating that it was printed with plate #148. Stamps printed
   from plate #77 are extremely rare.
   Close examination of the Penny Red, left, reveals a "148" in the
   margin, indicating that it was printed with plate #148. Stamps printed
   from plate #77 are extremely rare.

   Philately is the study of revenue or postage stamps. This includes the
   design, production and uses of stamps after they are issued by postal
   authorities. Although many equate it with stamp collecting, it is a
   distinct activity. For instance, philatelists will study extremely rare
   stamps without expecting to own copies of them, whether because of
   cost, or because the sole survivors are in museums. Conversely, a stamp
   collector may choose to acquire and arrange the little pictures without
   being much troubled about their origin or usage. In practice, a basic
   knowledge of philately will save the collector from spending a great
   deal of money on a stamp that is really almost worthless.
   The Penny Red was used in the UK for many years, and comes in hundreds
   of variations.
   Enlarge
   The Penny Red was used in the UK for many years, and comes in hundreds
   of variations.

   The coining of the word "philately" in its French form has been
   circumstantially attributed to Georges Herpin in the publication Le
   Collectioneur de timbres-postes, Vol. 1, November 15, 1864. It is
   formed from the Greek words philos (friend) and ateleia (exempt from
   charge, or "franked"), which is a stretch to relate to the study of
   stamps, but the alternatives of "timbrophily" & "timbrology" or
   "timbrologist" never caught on.

   The origin of philately is in the observation that in a pile of stamps
   all appearing to be the same type, closer examination reveals different
   kinds of paper, different watermarks embedded in the paper, variations
   in colour shades, different perforations, and other kinds of
   differences. Comparison with records of postal authorities may or may
   not show that the variations were intentional, which leads to further
   inquiry as to how the changes could have happened, and why. To make
   things more interesting, thousands of forgeries have been produced over
   the years, some of them very good, and only a thorough knowledge of
   philately gives any hope of detecting the fakes.
   The Inverted Jenny is a famous error; philatelic study explains exactly
   how it happened.
   Enlarge
   The Inverted Jenny is a famous error; philatelic study explains exactly
   how it happened.

   One explanation for all the variation is that stamp printing was among
   the early attempts at large-scale mass production activity by postal
   authorities. Even in the 19th century, stamps were being issued by the
   billions, more than any other kind of manufactured object at the time.

Types of philately

   Basic or technical philately, then, is the study of the technical
   aspects of stamp production and stamp identification. It includes the
   study of
     * The initial stamp design process
     * Paper (wove, laid, etc, and including watermarks)
     * Printing methods (engraving, typography, etc)
     * Gum
     * Separation (perforation, rouletting)
     * Overprints on existing stamps
     * Philatelic fakes and forgeries, especially the identification of
       forgeries

   A topical philatelist might be interested in which subspecies of
   giraffe is represented on this 1925 stamp of Tanganyika.
   Enlarge
   A topical philatelist might be interested in which subspecies of
   giraffe is represented on this 1925 stamp of Tanganyika.

   Topical philately is the study of what is depicted on the stamps. There
   are hundreds of popular subjects, such as
     * People on stamps
     * Maps on stamps
     * Birds on stamps
     * Insects on stamps
     * Ships on stamps
     * Stamps on stamps
     * Chess on stamps

   Interesting aspects of topical philately include design mistakes (such
   as use of the wrong picture on a US stamp honoring Bill Pickett),
   design alterations (for instance, the recent editing out of cigarettes
   from the pictures used for US stamps), and the stories of how
   particular images came to be used (one US stamp from the 1920s shows a
   Viking ship apparently flying an American flag, but this was not a
   mistake).
   One of many covers flown on the Hindenburg zeppelin, featuring a
   variety of postal markings.
   Enlarge
   One of many covers flown on the Hindenburg zeppelin, featuring a
   variety of postal markings.

   Postal history concentrates on the use of stamps on mail. It includes
   the study of postmarks, post offices, postal authorities and the
   process by which letters are moved from sender to recipient, including
   routes and choice of conveyance. A classic example is the Pony Express,
   which was the fastest way to send letters across the United States
   during the few months that it operated. Covers that can be proved to
   have been sent by the Pony Express are highly prized by collectors.

   Cinderella philately is the study of objects that look like stamps but
   aren't stamps. Examples include Easter Seals, propaganda labels, and so
   forth.

   The results of philatelic study have been extensively documented by the
   philatelic literature, which includes many books and nearly 15,000
   different periodical titles.

   Philately is basically an activity of reading and study, but the human
   senses typically need augmentation. The stamps themselves are handled
   with stamp tongs so as to preserve them from large, clumsy, and
   possibly greasy fingers. A strong magnifier reveals details of paper
   and printing, while the odontometer or perforation gauge helps
   distinguish a " perf 12" from a "perf 13".
   Early stamps of India were watermarked with an elephant's head.
   Early stamps of India were watermarked with an elephant's head.

   While many watermarks can be detected merely by turning the stamp over,
   or holding it up to the light, others require the services of watermark
   fluid, such as benzine (not to be confused with benzene, which is
   toxic), carbon tetrachloride or trichloro-trifluoro-ethane that "wets"
   the stamp without dissolving gum or ink. Other techniques, such as
   using coloured light filters have been attempted in an effort to avoid
   the use of toxic substances.
   An oddball philatelic cover that mixes the stamps of several places
   together.
   Enlarge
   An oddball philatelic cover that mixes the stamps of several places
   together.

   Experts evaluating the authenticity of the rarest stamps use additional
   equipment such as fluoroscopes. Some stamps are printed with ink which
   fluoresces when exposed to ultraviolet light. Ultraviolet light sources
   are also used to examine stamps and postal history for signs of repairs
   or various types of faults.

Organizations

     * Académie Européenne de Philatélie
     * American First Day Cover Society
     * American Philatelic Society
     * American Topical Association
     * Australian Philatelic Federation
     * Fédération Internationale de Philatélie
     * Féderación Argentina de Entidades Filatélicas
     * National Philatelic Society UK
     * Royal Philatelic Society London
     * The Rossica Society of Russian Philately
     * Royal Philatelic Society of New Zealand Inc
     * Scouts on Stamps Society International
     * Welsh Philatelic Society
     * Odessa City Collectors' Society
     * GEOPHILA Association of collectors of stamp territories around the
       world

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philately"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
