   #copyright

Pig

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Food and agriculture;
Mammals

    How to read a taxoboxPig and piglet
   A sow and her piglet.
   A sow and her piglet.
         Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Mammalia
   Order:   Artiodactyla
   Family:  Suidae
   Genus:   Sus
            Linnaeus, 1758

                                   Species

   Sus barbatus
   Sus bucculentus†
   Sus cebifrons
   Sus celebensis
   Sus domestica
   Sus falconeri†
   Sus heureni
   Sus hysudricus†
   Sus philippensis
   Sus salvanius
   Sus scrofa
   Sus strozzi†
   Sus timoriensis
   Sus verrucosus

   Pigs, also called hogs or swine, are ungulates native to Eurasia
   collectively grouped under the genus Sus within the Suidae family. The
   nearest living relatives of the swine family are the peccaries and
   hippopotamuses.

Description and behaviour

   A pig has a snout for a nose, small eyes, and a small tail, which may
   be curly, kinked, or straight. It has a thick body and short legs.
   There are four toes on each foot, with the two large middle toes used
   for walking.

   Pigs are omnivores, which means that they consume both plants and small
   animals. Pigs will scavenge and have been known to eat any kind of
   food, including dead insects, worms, tree bark, rotting carcasses,
   excreta (including their own), garbage, and other pigs. In the wild,
   they are foraging animals, primarily eating leaves and grasses, roots,
   fruits and flowers. Occasionally, in captivity, pigs may eat their own
   young, often if they become severely stressed.

   A typical pig has a large head with a long snout which is strengthened
   by a special bone called the prenasal bone and by a disk of cartilage
   in the tip. The snout is used to dig into the soil to find food and is
   a very sensitive sense organ. Pigs have a full set of 44 teeth. The
   canine teeth, called tusks, grow continually and are sharpened by the
   lowers and uppers rubbing against each other.

   Pigs that are allowed to forage may be watched by swineherds. Because
   of their foraging abilities and excellent sense of smell, they are used
   to find truffles in many European countries. Domesticated pigs are
   commonly raised as livestock by farmers for meat (called pork), as well
   as for leather. Their bristly hairs are also used for brushes. Some
   breeds of pigs, such as the Asian pot-bellied pig, are kept as pets.

   A female pig can become pregnant at around 8-18 months of age. She will
   then go into heat every 21 days. Male pigs become sexually active at
   8-10 months of age. A litter of piglets typically contains between 6
   and 12 piglets.

   Pigs do not have functional sweat glands, so pigs cool themselves using
   water or mud during hot weather. They also use mud as a form of
   sunscreen to protect their skin from sunburn. Mud also provides
   protection against flies and parasites.

Species

     * Sus barbatus
     * Sus bucculentus † (extinct).
     * Sus cebifrons
     * Sus celebensis
     * Sus falconeri † (extinct).
     * Sus heureni
     * Sus hysudricus † (extinct).
     * Sus philippensis
     * Sus salvanius
     * Sus scrofa
     * Sus strozzi † (extinct).
     * Sus timoriensis
     * Sus verrucosus

Pigs in religion

   Painting of Saint Anthony with pig in background by Piero di Cosimo c.
   1480
   Painting of Saint Anthony with pig in background by Piero di Cosimo c.
   1480
     * In ancient Egypt pigs were associated with Set, the rival to the
       sun god Horus. When Set fell into disfavor with the Egyptians
       swineherds were forbidden to enter temples.
     * In Hinduism the god Vishnu took the form of a boar in order to save
       the earth from a demon who had dragged it to the bottom of the sea.
     * In ancient Greece, a sow was an appropriate sacrifice to Demeter
       and had been her favorite animal since she had been the Great
       Goddess of archaic times. Initiates at the Eleusinian Mysteries
       began by sacrificing a pig.
     * The pig is one of the 12-year cycle of animals which appear in the
       Chinese zodiac related to the Chinese calendar. Believers in
       Chinese astrology associate each animal with certain personality
       traits. See: Pig (Zodiac).
     * The dietary laws of Judaism ( Kashrut, adj. Kosher) and Islam (
       Halal) forbid the eating of flesh of swine or pork in any form,
       considering the pig to be an unclean animal (see taboo food and
       drink). Seventh-day Adventists and some other fundamental Christian
       denominations also consider pork unclean as food.
     * In Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy and other older Christian groups,
       pigs are associated with Saint Anthony, the patron saint of
       swineherds.

Environmental impacts

   Feral pigs in Florida, United States
   Feral pigs in Florida, United States

   Domestic pigs which escaped from farms or were allowed to forage in the
   wild, and in some cases wild boars which were introduced as prey for
   hunting, have given rise to large populations of feral pigs in North
   and South America, Australia, New Zealand, Hawaii and other areas where
   pigs are not native. Accidental or deliberate releases of pigs into
   countries or environments where they are an alien species have caused
   extensive environmental change. Their omnivorous diet, aggressive
   behaviour and their feeding method of rooting in the ground all combine
   to severely alter ecosystems unused to pigs. Pigs will even eat small
   animals and destroy nests of ground nesting birds. The Invasive Species
   Specialist Group lists feral pigs as number 90 on the list of the
   world's 100 worst invasive species and says about them:

   “    Feral pigs like other introduced mammals are major drivers of
      extinction and ecosystem change. They have been introduced into many
      parts of the world, and will damage crops and home gardens as well as
         potentially spreading disease. They uproot large areas of land,
       eliminating native vegetation and spreading weeds. This results in
     habitat alteration, a change in plant succession and composition and a
          decrease in native fauna dependent on the original habitat.      ”

Health issues

   Unlike most other "domestic" animals used as food for humans (cows,
   sheep, goats, chickens, etc...), pigs harbour a range of parasites and
   diseases that can be easily transmitted to humans. These include
   trichinosis, cysticercosis, and brucellosis. Very commonly, pigs are
   also known to host large concentrations of parasitic ascarid worms in
   their digestive tract. The presence of these diseases and parasites is
   one of the main reasons why pork meat should always be well cooked or
   cured before eating. Religious groups who consider pork unclean may
   refer to these issues as support for their views.

   Pigs are extremely susceptible to pneumonia, usually caused by weather.
   Pigs have small lungs; for this reason, bronchitis or pneumonia can
   kill a pig quickly.

   Pigs can be aggressive and pig-induced injuries are relatively common
   in areas where pigs are reared or where they form part of the wild or
   feral fauna.

   Domestic pigs are often inbred, leading to the expression of recessive
   traits. Congenital malformations are common. One such malformation is
   the duplication of a pig's head.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pig"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
