   #copyright

Pinworm

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Health and medicine;
Organisms

                                 iPinworm
   Two pinworms, captured on emergence from the anus. Markings are 1 mm
   apart
   Two pinworms, captured on emergence from the anus. Markings are 1 mm
   apart
                        Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Nematoda
   Class:   Secernentea
   Order:   Rhabditida
   Family:  Oxyuridae
   Genus:   Enterobius

   The pinworm (Genus Enterobius) is a parasitic roundworm of the phylum
   Nematoda.

Forms of worm

   The best known is the human pinworm, also known as the threadworms
   Enterobius vermicularis and the more recently discovered Enterobius
   gregorii. The adult pinworm male is 1–4  mm in length, while the adult
   female is 8–13 mm and possess the long, pin-shaped posterior end for
   which the worm is named. The human pinworm is commonly found in
   children.

Habitat

   The pinworm lives in the lower part of the small intestine, and the
   upper part of the colon. It is found worldwide and causes the common
   infection enterobiasis in humans. Unlike many other intestinal
   parasites, the pinworm does not usually enter the bloodstream or any
   other organs besides the intestines. Only in rare cases disoriented
   pinworms can be found in the vagina, and even more rarely in the
   uterus, fallopian tubes, liver and peritoneum; but the worms cannot
   survive long in these places.

Reproduction

   Pinworm eggs are easily seen under the microscope.
   Enlarge
   Pinworm eggs are easily seen under the microscope.

   After mating, the male dies. The female migrates to the anus and
   emerges, usually during the night, to deposit about 10,000 to 20,000
   eggs in the perianal area (around the anus). It then secretes a
   substance that causes a very strong itching sensation, inciting the
   host to scratch the area and thus transfer some of the eggs to the
   fingers. Eggs can also be transferred to cloth, toys and the bathtub.
   Once ingested orally, the larvae hatch and migrate back to the
   intestine, growing to maturity in 30-45 days. The eggs can survive from
   2 to 3 weeks on their own outside of the human body. It is also in some
   cases where the larva will hatch around the skin of the anus and travel
   back inside the anus, up the rectum and back into the intestines where
   it matures. (SOURCES: Rudolph's Pediatrics - 21st Ed. 2003; Current
   Medical Diagnosis & Treatment - 45th Ed. 2006)

Effects

   Except for itching, pinworm infestation does not usually cause any
   damage to the body. Sleep disturbance may arise from the itching or
   crawling sensations. Some case reports suggest that severe infestation
   may be associated with an increased risk for appendicitis. There is
   also some evidence of an association between enterobiasis and
   diminished zinc levels.

Diagnosis

   Diagnosis is often made clinically by observing the female worm (or
   many worms) in the peri-anal region, but can also be made using the
   "scotch-tape" test, in the course of which the sticky side of a strip
   of cellophane tape is pressed against the peri-anal skin, then examined
   under a microscope for pinworm eggs.

Treatment

   Anti-pinworm drugs such as Albenza ( albendazole) or Vermox (
   mebendazole) are commonly used to treat pinworms. It is not a necessity
   to visit a doctor to get these drugs, as they are commonly available as
   over the counter medications; ask a pharmacist for medicines to treat
   pinworms (or threadworms as they are known in the UK). These medicines
   kill the pinworms 95% of the time, but do not kill the eggs. The person
   being treated may have to return after a time of two weeks to be
   retreated. Another precaution towards treating the eradication of
   pinworms is to wash hands before eating (to prevent any pinworm eggs
   under fingernails from being ingested) and to wash any area or clothes
   that have touched or been in the vicinity of the infected areas.
   Treating the entire family is often necessary for cure.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pinworm"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
