   #copyright

Pony

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mammals

   A Shetland Pony
   Enlarge
   A Shetland Pony

   A pony is most commonly a certain breed of small horse, generally of
   northern European origin, that usually measures less than 14.2 hh (
   hands high) at the withers.

   The term "pony" can be used in general(or affectionately) for any small
   horse, regardless of its actual measurements, or breed. However, some
   equine breeds are not considered ponies, even if they are under 14.2
   hh. One such breed is the Egyptian Arabian. Although they are often
   taller than 14.2 hh, they can sometimes be shorter, but are not
   considered a true "pony" breed. The Icelandic Horse and Fjord Horse can
   also be pony-sized, and of northern European breeding, but they are
   generally considered horses. The small horses used for polo are called
   " polo ponies", though they can be a mixture of both "horse" and "pony"
   breeds.

   When in doubt, simply refer to the "under 14.2 hh" rule. Ponies are
   14.2 hands (abbreviated hh) (1.47 m) at the withers or less, while a
   horse is generally taller than 14.2 hh at the withers. A hand is about
   4 inches, or 10cm tall. But be warned, to refer to a member of a breed
   usually considered a horse breed, as a "pony" can sometimes be taken as
   an insult by the animal's owner.

   For showing purposes, ponies are further grouped into small, medium,
   and large sizes. Small ponies are 12.2 hh and under, medium ponies are
   over 12.2 but no taller than 13.2 hh (1.27 to 1.37 m), and large ponies
   are over 13.2 hh but no taller than 14.2 hh (1.37 to 1.47 m). Note,
   however, that miniature horses are not the same as ponies. A miniature
   horse is in fact much smaller, required to be no taller than 8.2 hh
   (86cm) at the withers. There are also miniature pony breeds.

   There are several wild breeds of pony, and these have often been
   captured and bred for various purposes, especially in Britain and
   Ireland. These wild breeds along with domestic breeds were used as "pit
   ponies" hauling loads of coal up from the mines, for freight transport,
   as children's mounts and for entertainment, and later as competitors
   and performers in their own right. They were also ridden (and continue
   to be ridden) by adults, as ponies are usually very strong.

   Ponies are often said to be mean, contemptuous, untrustworthy, spooky
   or devious. The situation likely results from the individual pony's
   lack of proper training. (When citing the reasons for such behaviour,
   it is often beneficial to prepare a "general description" for analysis
   by a veterinarian.) Ponies trained by children, rather than by
   experienced horse trainers, usually turn out to be spoiled because
   children typically lack the skill to correct bad habits. The pony may
   learn to kick or bite when its desires are not met. Properly trained
   ponies can be gentle, and are appropriate mounts for children who are
   learning to ride.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pony"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
