   #copyright

Port Louis

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography

   CAPTION: Port Louis

   View of Port Louis and harbour looking west from the Citadel.
      Coat of arms             Location of Port Louis
   Mayor             Reza Issack
   Area
     –Land
     –Water
                     42.7  km²
                     0  km²
   Population
     –Total ( 2003)
     – Density
                     147,688
                     3,458.73/  km²
   Latitude
   Longitude         20°10' S
                     57°31' E
             Official website: mpl.intnet.mu/home.htm

   Port Louis (pronounced locally as paw-louee) is the capital of
   Mauritius. It is a port on the Indian Ocean, and the nation's largest
   city and main port. It is located in the Port Louis District. The
   population is 147,688 ( 2003 census).

History

   Port Louis was founded by the French in circa 1735 as a revictualling
   halt for their ships travelling around the Cape of Good Hope, and was
   named in honour of King Louis XV. The first Governor was Count
   Bertrand-François Mahé de La Bourdonnais.

Geography

   The City of Port Louis is located at 20°10' South, 57°31'30" East
   (-20.1667, 57.525). . Its localities include Plaine Verte, Chinatown,
   Ward IV, Valle Pitot, Tranqebard and city centre. Port Louis is capital
   of the District of Port Louis.

Sights

   The Port Louis theatre from 1900 to 1910.
   Enlarge
   The Port Louis theatre from 1900 to 1910.

   Port Louis has conserved many historic and colonial buildings through
   the years. One of them is a fortification named Fort Adelaide or La
   Citadelle, built by the British in 1835. The latter dominates the city.
   From there, one can observe most of the city's architecture. Port Louis
   is surrounded by a mountain range, called the Port Louis Moka Range.
   Among its most famous mountains are Le Pouce and Pieter Both which
   stand about 800 metres from sea level. One of the most popular spot, is
   the country's national derby called Champ de Mars, the latter is the
   oldest race course (1812) in the Indian Ocean and the second oldest in
   the southern Hemisphere. Other famous spots are the Police Barracks
   known as Les Casernes and the Port Louis Waterfront.
   Aerial view of Port Louis and harbour.
   Enlarge
   Aerial view of Port Louis and harbour.

   But the feature that probably strikes the most is the city's skyline
   which is by far the best in the country. The skyline of Port Louis has
   completely changed in the last fifteen years mainly due to construction
   booms in the 1990s and 2000s, where many of the tallest high-rise
   buildings have been built. The city centre has the tallest buildings in
   Mauritius, including some skyscrapers.

   The Mauritius Institute, dedicated to the study of the island's flora
   and fauna, is in Port Louis. Citizens often climb up the Signaux
   mountain, which is a 3 km track, that leads to over 300 metres high.
   From there, one can appreciate the landscape of the city.

   Attractions include the Caudan Waterfront, Port Louis Bazaar, the
   Mauritian Chinatown and the old Port Louis theatre. The capital has
   also three museums which are: the Mauritius Natural History Museum, the
   Blue Penny Museum and the Mauritius Stamp Museum. The biggest and
   oldest post office in Mauritius is found near the Caudan Waterfront.
   Situated in the heart of the city, the Place d'Armes is easily
   recognizable by its tall palm trees. It is the main entrance to and out
   of Port Louis.
   Port Louis' banking district, and the main avenue leading to the
   Government House (seen in the background)
   Enlarge
   Port Louis' banking district, and the main avenue leading to the
   Government House (seen in the background)

   Port Louis is the busiest city of the country. It faces heavy traffic
   congestion as there is only one motorway which leads in and out of the
   city. The busiest hours are 8am and 5pm, which roughly correspond to
   the working hours for the majority of enterprises. Parking is another
   big problem the city faces. The financial centre is also located there,
   with the Bank of Mauritius, the Mauritius Commercial Bank Ltd and the
   State Bank of Mauritius, all having their headquarters there.

   The busiest street is probably Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam Street,
   formerly known as Rue Desforges. It leads directly to the Municipality
   of Port Louis, the Jummah Mosque and Kadafi Square, which is a hot
   place for local food.

   There is also a Chinese Burial ground where elaborate memorials have
   been erected. Dead bodies are kept in the Kit Lock which is located in
   the centre of the city.

   Port Louis also harbours some major schools. The Royal College of Port
   Louis and the Loreto College of Port Louis are two of the best
   secondary schools of the country. Bell Village SSS and Moneron SSS
   schools are also found in the capital of Mauritius.

Economy

   The Citadel of Port Louis.
   Enlarge
   The Citadel of Port Louis.

   The economy is dominated by its port, which handles Mauritius'
   international trade. The port was founded by the French who preferred
   Port Louis as the City is shielded by the Port Louis/Moka mountain
   range. Manufacturing is dominated by clothing and textiles, but also
   includes chemicals, plastics, and pharmaceuticals. Tourism is also
   important. The development of the Caudan Waterfront, central to Port
   Louis, with shopping and cinema facilities, appeals to tourists
   visiting the city. Port Louis is the second most important financial
   centre in Africa after Johannesburg. It is the city with the highest
   per capita income in Africa.

Demographics

   The population of the city is now largely made up of the descendants of
   laborers who were hired for labor from India in the 19th century.
   Slaves were previously introduced by the British and French who
   colonized the island in the 18th century. After the abolition of
   slavery in 1835, many Indian and Chinese workers were brought to work
   the land, and cultivate sugar cane, at that time used to produce rum.
   The Immigration Depot in Port Louis is a World Heritage Site
   commemorating this great migration.

   Currently, the majority of the population, more than 75 percent, are
   Indians of mixed origins (a significant percentage being followers of
   the Hindu and Muslim faith), with the rest from Africa and a minority
   of Chinese and Eurasian.

   Coordinates: 20°10′S 57°30′E
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Port_Louis"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
