   #copyright

PRR M1

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Railway transport

   PRR M1a on display at the 1939 World's Fair. Pipe on the smokebox and
   box behind stack are components of the feedwater heater.
   Enlarge
   PRR M1a on display at the 1939 World's Fair. Pipe on the smokebox and
   box behind stack are components of the feedwater heater.
   PRR M1 #6891 in 1933. Note the outside steam delivery pipes from
   smokebox to cylinders, absent on the M1a/M1b, the single air
   compressor, and the smaller tender.
   Enlarge
   PRR M1 #6891 in 1933. Note the outside steam delivery pipes from
   smokebox to cylinders, absent on the M1a/M1b, the single air
   compressor, and the smaller tender.

   The Pennsylvania Railroad's class M1 steam locomotives were a class of
   heavy mixed-traffic locomotives of the 4-8-2 "Mountain" arrangement,
   which uses four pairs of driving wheels with a four-wheel guiding truck
   in front for stability at speed and a two-wheel trailing truck to
   support the large firebox needed for sustained power. Although built
   for both passenger and freight work, they spent most of their service
   lives hauling heavy high-speed freight trains. Many PRR men counted the
   M1 class locomotives as the best steam locomotives the railroad ever
   owned.

   A single prototype, #6699, was built in 1923 at the railroad's own
   Altoona Works. It spent three years in intensive testing, including all
   kinds of main-line service as well as a session on the railroad's
   static locomotive test plant. Having received very favorable reports, a
   further 200 were ordered from commercial locomotive builders; 175 from
   the Baldwin Locomotive Works and 25 from Lima Locomotive Works.
   Breaking with the PRR tradition of random locomotive numbering, these
   were numbered in a solid block from #6800-#6999.

   In 1930, a further 100 locomotives were ordered. These, classified as
   M1a, featured several improvements from the previous locomotives.
   Instead of separate cylinder block and smokebox saddle castings, the
   M1a featured a one-piece casting (first seen on the K5 Pacific) which
   included inside steam delivery pipes, instead of the outside, visible
   pipes of the M1. A Worthington feedwater heater was installed, with a
   boxlike mixing chamber fitted behind the stack. Twin cross-compound air
   compressors were hung next to each other on the left hand side of the
   locomotives, instead of the single compressor of the M1. The M1a
   locomotives were fitted as standard with larger tenders than the
   previous locomotives.

   The M1a locomotives in particular were intended for passenger as well
   as freight service, and some bore decorative gold-leaf lining on tender
   and cab sides, but they proved better suited to freight work, and
   extensive electrification saw a surplus of K4s locomotives available
   for passenger trains.
   The twin cross-compound air compressors on the side of the M1a.
   Enlarge
   The twin cross-compound air compressors on the side of the M1a.

   Like most PRR steam locomotives, the M1 and M1a featured the
   square-shouldered Belpaire firebox. The square-topped section continued
   ahead of the firebox proper, revealing the presence of a combustion
   chamber - an extended firebox, giving more room for complete combustion
   of burning gases. The standard M1/M1a boiler used a working pressure of
   250 pounds per square inch (1.7 MPa). 38 locomotives were later
   converted into class M1b; the differences were all in the boiler, those
   being the addition of firebox circulators—large tubes carrying water
   passing through the firebox space, increasing water circulation and
   heating area, and thus steam generation—and an increase in boiler
   pressure to 270 lb/in² (1.9 MPa). The only externally visible
   difference was extra cleaning plugs in the firebox sides, for washing
   out the circulators. The M1b had greater tractive effort, thanks to the
   greater pressure, and more power at speed, thanks to the increased
   steam-generating ability.

   All were fitted with intermediate-size 72 inch (1.8 m) driving wheels,
   two 27 × 30 inch (762 mm) cylinders, and cast-steel KW pattern trailing
   trucks, similar to those fitted to K4s Pacifics. M1 and M1a tractive
   effort was 64,550 pounds force (287 kN) while that of the M1b was
   69,700 pounds force (310 kN). The locomotive weight was 385,000 pounds
   (175 t). PRR standard small steel cabs were used. A distinctive
   spotting feature was a large cross-mounted air tank at the front of the
   locomotive above the pilot. There was a distinctive family resemblance
   with other PRR locomotives. After World War II, the M1 locomotives
   underwent similar front-end changes to those made to the K4s, including
   sheet steel drop-coupler pilots, the moving of the headlight to the
   smokebox top in front of the stack, the moving of the steam-driven
   generator to the smokebox front for easier maintenance, and the
   addition of a wide step above the air tank to service the air
   compressor.

   A wide variety of tenders were fitted to M1 locomotives, of steadily
   increasing size. During later years, some hauled sixteen-wheel
   210-F-75B tenders almost as long as the locomotives themselves. All
   were fitted with scoops to pick up water from track pans. On the rear
   tender decks, all were later fitted with "doghouses" to house the
   head-end brakeman on freight trains, giving him a view backward over
   the train and placing him out of the way of the engineer and fireman.
   Many had railing-like trainphone antennas added during the 1940s.

   As dieselization progressed, the M1 locomotives were assigned heavier
   trains, while the diesels were assigned the high-speed freight trains
   previously the M1s' preserve. Their final years of service saw them
   hauling heavier trains than ever. Many remained in service until the
   withdrawal of steam from the PRR in mid 1957.

   One locomotive, M1b #6755, was saved from the scrapper's torch for the
   PRR's historical collection housed at Northumberland, Pennsylvania. It
   is now in the possession of the Railroad Museum of Pennsylvania.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PRR_M1"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
