   #copyright

Ragtime

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Musical genres, styles,
eras and events

   Second edition cover of "Maple Leaf Rag", perhaps the most famous rag
   of all
   Enlarge
   Second edition cover of "Maple Leaf Rag", perhaps the most famous rag
   of all

   Ragtime is an American musical genre enjoying its peak popularity
   between 1899 and 1918. It has had several periods of revival in
   popularity and is still being composed today. Ragtime was the first
   truly American musical genre, preceding jazz. It began as dance music
   in popular music settings years before being published as popular sheet
   music for piano. Being a modification of the then popular march, it was
   usually written in 2/4 or 4/4 time (meter), frequently with a
   predominant left hand pattern of bass notes on odd-numbered beats and
   chords on even-numbered beats accompanying a syncopated melody in the
   right hand. A composition in this style is called a "rag". It is also
   written in 3/4 time, being called "ragtime waltz".

   Ragtime is not a "time" ( meter) in the same sense that march time is
   2/4 meter and waltz time is 3/4 meter, but rather it uses an effect
   that can be applied to music in any meter. The defining characteristic
   of ragtime music is a specific type of syncopation in which melodic
   accents fall between metrical beats. This results in a melody that
   seems to be avoiding some metrical beats of the accompaniment by
   emphasizing notes that either anticipate or follow the beat. The
   ultimate (and intended) effect on the listener is actually to
   accentuate the beat, thereby inducing the listener to move to the
   music. Scott Joplin, the composer/pianist known as the "King of
   Ragtime", called the effect "weird and intoxicating". He also used the
   term "swing" in describing how to play ragtime music: "Play slowly
   until you catch the swing ...". (Joplin, School of Ragtime, 1908). The
   name swing later came to be applied to an early genre of jazz that
   developed from ragtime. Converting a non-ragtime piece of music into
   ragtime by changing the time values of melody notes is known as
   "ragging" the piece. Original ragtime pieces usually contain several
   distinct themes, four being most common number.

   According to the New Grove Dictionary of Jazz the musical form was
   originally called "ragged time" which later became corrupted to
   "ragtime".

Historical context

   Ragtime originated in African American musical communities, in the late
   19th century, and descended from the jigs and marches played by
   all-black bands common in all Northern cities with black populations
   (van der Merwe 1989, p.63). By the start of the 20th century it became
   widely popular throughout North America and was listened and danced to,
   performed, and written by people of many different subcultures. A
   distinctly American musical style, ragtime may be considered a
   synthesis of African-American syncopation and European classical music,
   though this description is oversimplified.
   Joseph Lamb's 1916 "The Top Liner Rag", a classic rag.
   Enlarge
   Joseph Lamb's 1916 "The Top Liner Rag", a classic rag.

   Some early piano rags are entitled marches, and "jig" and "rag" were
   used interchangeably in the mid-1890s (ibid.) and ragtime was also
   preceded by its close relative the cakewalk. However, the emergence of
   mature ragtime is usually dated to 1897, the year in which several
   important early rags were published. In 1899, Scott Joplin's Maple Leaf
   Rag was published, which became a great hit and demonstrated more depth
   and sophistication than earlier ragtime. Ragtime was one of the main
   influences on the early development of jazz (along with the blues).
   Some artists, like Jelly Roll Morton, were present and performed both
   ragtime and jazz styles during the period the two genres overlapped.
   Jazz largely surpassed ragtime in mainstream popularity in the early
   1920s, although ragtime compositions continue to be written up to the
   present, and periodic revivals of popular interest in ragtime occurred
   in the 1950s and the 1970s.

   Some authorities consider ragtime to be a form of classical music. The
   heyday of ragtime predated the widespread availability of sound
   recording. Like classical music, and unlike jazz, classical ragtime was
   and is primarily a written tradition, being distributed in sheet music
   rather than through recordings or by imitation of live performances.
   Ragtime music was also distributed via piano rolls for player pianos. A
   folk ragtime tradition also existed before and during the period of
   classical ragtime (a designation largely created by Scott Joplin's
   publisher John Stark), manifesting itself mostly through string bands,
   banjo and mandolin clubs (which experienced a burst of popularity
   during the early 20th Century), and the like.

   A form known as novelty piano (or novelty ragtime) emerged as the
   traditional rag was fading in popularity. Where traditional ragtime
   depended on amateur pianists and sheet music sales, the novelty rag
   took advantage of new advances in piano-roll technology and the
   phonograph record to permit a more complex, pyrotechnic,
   performance-oriented style of rag to be heard. Chief among the novelty
   rag composers is Zez Confrey, whose "Kitten on the Keys" popularized
   the style in 1921.

   Ragtime also served as the roots for stride piano, a more
   improvisational piano style popular in the 1920s and 1930s. Elements of
   ragtime found their way into much of the American popular music of the
   early 20th century.

   Although most ragtime was composed for piano, transcriptions for other
   instruments and ensembles are common, notably including Gunther
   Schuller's arrangements of Joplin's rags. Occasionally ragtime was
   originally scored for ensembles (particlularly dance bands and brass
   bands), or as songs. Joplin had long-standing ambitions for a synthesis
   of the worlds of ragtime and opera, to which end the ragtime opera
   Treemonisha was written; but it was never performed in his lifetime. In
   fact the score was lost for decades, then redicovered in 1970; it has
   been performed in numerous productions since then. An earlier opera by
   Joplin, A Guest of Honour, has been lost.

Styles of ragtime

   Ragtime pieces came in a number of different styles during the years of
   its popularity and appeared under a number of different descriptive
   names. It is related to several earlier styles of music, has close ties
   with later styles of music, and was associated with a few musical
   "fads" of the period such as the foxtrot. Many of the terms associated
   with ragtime have inexact definitions, and are defined differently by
   different experts; the definitions are muddled further by the fact that
   publishers often labelled pieces for the fad of the moment rather than
   the true style of the composition. There is even disagreement about the
   term "ragtime" itself; experts such as David Jasen and Trebor Tichenor
   choose to exclude ragtime songs from the definition but include novelty
   piano and stride piano (a modern perspective), while Edward A. Berlin
   includes ragtime songs and excludes the later styles (which is closer
   to how ragtime was viewed originally). Many ragtime pianists, Eubie
   Blake and Mark Birnbaum among them, include the songs and the later
   styles as ragtime. The terms below should not be considered exact, but
   merely an attempt to pin down the general meaning of the concept.
     * Cakewalk - A pre-ragtime dance form popular until about 1904. The
       music is intended to be representative of an African-American dance
       contest in which the prize is a cake. Many early rags are
       cakewalks.
     * Characteristic March - A pre-ragtime dance form popular until about
       1908. A march incorporating idiomatic touches (such as syncopation)
       supposedly characteristic of the race of their subject, which is
       usually African-Americans. Many early rags are characteristic
       marches.
     * Two-Step - A pre-ragtime dance form popular until about 1911. A
       large number of rags are two-steps.
     * Slow Drag - Another dance form associated with early ragtime. A
       modest number of rags are slow drags.
     * Coon Song - A pre-ragtime vocal form popular until about 1901. A
       song with crude, racist lyrics often sung by white performers in
       blackface. Gradually died out in favour of the ragtime song.
       Strongly associated with ragtime in its day, it is one of the
       things that gave ragtime a bad name.
     * Ragtime Song - The vocal form of ragtime, more generic in theme
       than the coon song. Though this was the form of music most commonly
       considered "ragtime" in its day, many people today prefer to put it
       in the "popular music" category. Irving Berlin was the most
       commercially successful composer of ragtime songs, and his "
       Alexander's Ragtime Band" (1911) was the single most widely
       performed and recorded piece of this sort, even though it contains
       virtually no ragtime syncopation. Gene Greene was a famous singer
       in this style.
     * Folk Rag - A name often used to describe ragtime that originated
       from small towns or assembled from folk strains, or at least
       sounded as if they did. Folk rags often have unusual chromatic
       features typical of composers with non-standard training.
     * Classic Rag - A name used to describe the Missouri-style ragtime
       popularized by Scott Joplin, Tom Turpin, and others.
     * Fox-Trot - A dance fad which began in 1913. Fox-trots contain a
       dotted-note rhythm different from that of ragtime, but which
       nonetheless was incorporated into many late rags.
     * Novelty Piano - A piano composition emphasizing speed and
       complexity which emerged after World War I. It is almost
       exclusively the domain of white composers.
     * Stride Piano - A style of piano which emerged after World War I,
       developed by and dominated by black East coast pianists ( James P.
       Johnson, Fats Waller and Willie 'The Lion' Smith). Together with
       novelty piano, it may be considered a successor to ragtime, but is
       not considered by all to be "genuine" ragtime.

   James Scott's 1904 "On the Pike", which refers to the midway of the St.
   Louis World's Fair of 1904.
   Enlarge
   James Scott's 1904 "On the Pike", which refers to the midway of the St.
   Louis World's Fair of 1904.

Ragtime revivals

   In the early 1940s many jazz bands began to include ragtime in their
   repertoire and put out ragtime recordings on 78 RPM records. Old
   numbers written for piano were rescored for jazz instruments by jazz
   musicians, which gave the old style a new sound. The most famous
   recording of this period is Pee Wee Hunt's version of Euday L. Bowman's
   Twelfth Street Rag.

   A more significant revival occurred in the 1950s. A wider variety of
   ragtime styles of the past were made available on records, and new rags
   were composed, published, and recorded. Much of the ragtime recorded in
   this period is presented in a light-hearted novelty style, looked to
   with nostalgia as the product of a supposedly more innocent time. A
   number of popular recordings featured "prepared pianos," playing rags
   on pianos with tacks on the keys and the instrument deliberately
   somewhat out of tune, supposedly to simulate the sound of a piano in an
   old honky tonk.

   Three events brought forward a different kind of ragtime revival in the
   1970s. First, pianist Joshua Rifkin brought out a compilation of Scott
   Joplin's work on Nonesuch records, which was nominated for a Grammy in
   the "Best Classical Performance - Instrumental Soloist(s) without
   Orchestra" category in 1971. This recording reintroduced Joplin's music
   to the public in the manner the composer had intended, not as a
   nostalgic stereotype but as serious, respectable music. Second, the New
   York Public Library released a two-volume set of "The Collected Works
   of Scott Joplin," which renewed interest in Joplin among musicians and
   prompted new stagings of Joplin's opera Treemonisha. Finally, with the
   release of the motion picture The Sting in 1974, which had a Marvin
   Hamlisch soundtrack of Joplin tunes, ragtime was brought to a wide
   audience. Hamlisch's rendering of Joplin's 1902 rag The Entertainer was
   a top 40 hit in 1974.

Ragtime composers

   Scott Joplin
   Enlarge
   Scott Joplin

   The most famous ragtime composer was Scott Joplin. Joseph Lamb and
   James Scott are, together with Joplin, acknowledged as the three most
   sophisticated ragtime composers. Some rank Artie Matthews as belonging
   with this distinguished company. Other notable ragtime composers
   included May Aufderheide, Eubie Blake, George Botsford, Zez Confrey,
   Ben Harney, Charles L. Johnson, Luckey Roberts, Paul Sarebresole,
   Wilber Sweatman, and Tom Turpin. Modern ragtime composers include
   William Bolcom, David Thomas Roberts, Frank French, Trebor Tichenor,
   Mark Birnbaum and Reginald R. Robinson.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ragtime"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
