   #copyright

Rail transport in India

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Railway transport

          This article is about the technical workings and operations of
          railways in India which is run by the Indian Railways.

   Map showing the Indian rail network and travelling times between major
   stations
   Enlarge
   Map showing the Indian rail network and travelling times between major
   stations

   Rail transport is the most commonly used mode of long-distance
   transportation in India. Rail operations throughout the country are run
   by the state-owned company, Indian Railways. The rail network traverses
   the length and width of the country, covering a total length of 63,140
   km (39,200  miles). It is one of the largest and busiest rail networks
   in the world, transporting over 5  billion passengers and over 350
   million tonnes of freight annually. Its operations covers twenty-eight
   states and three Union territories and also links the neighbouring
   countries of Nepal, Bangladesh and Pakistan.

   Railways were first introduced to India in 1853, and by 1947, the year
   of India's independence, they had grown to forty-two rail systems. In
   1951 the systems were nationalised as one unit, to become one of the
   largest networks in the world.

History

   A photo of India's first passenger train between Bombay and Thana in
   1853.
   A photo of India's first passenger train between Bombay and Thana in
   1853.

   A plan for a rail system in India was first put forward in 1832, but no
   further steps were taken for more than a decade. In 1844, the
   Governor-General of India Lord Hardinge allowed private entrepreneurs
   to set up a rail system in India. Two new railway companies were
   created and the East India Company was asked to assist them. Interest
   from a lot of investors in the UK led to the rapid creation of a rail
   system over the next few years. The first train in India became
   operational on 1851- 12-22, and was used for the hauling of
   construction material in Roorkee. A few years later, on 1853- 04-16,
   the first passenger train between Bori Bunder, Bombay and Thana
   covering a distance of 34 km (21 miles) was inaugurated, formally
   heralding the birth of railways in India.

   The British government encouraged the setting up of railway companies
   by private investors under a scheme that would guarantee an annual
   return of five percent during the initial years of operation. Once
   completed, the company would then be transferred to the government, but
   the original company would retain operational control. This network had
   a route mileage of about 14,500 km (9,000 miles) by 1880, mostly
   radiating inward from the three major port cities of Bombay, Madras and
   Calcutta. By 1895, India had started building its own locomotives, and
   in 1896 sent engineers and locomotives to help build the Uganda
   Railways.
   Extent of Great Indian Peninsular Railway network in 1870. The GIPR was
   one of the largest rail companies at that time.
   Enlarge
   Extent of Great Indian Peninsular Railway network in 1870. The GIPR was
   one of the largest rail companies at that time.

   Soon various independent kingdoms began to have their own rail systems
   and the network spread to the regions that became the modern-day states
   of Assam, Rajasthan and Andhra Pradesh. A Railway Board was constituted
   in 1901, but the powers were still formally held by the Viceroy, Lord
   Curzon. The Railway Board operated under aegis of the Department of
   Commerce and Industry and had three members: a government railway
   official serving as chairman, a railway manager from England and an
   agent of one of the company railways. For the first time in its
   history, the Railways began to make a tidy profit. In 1907, almost all
   the rail companies were taken over by the government.

   The following year, the first electric locomotive made its appearance.
   With the arrival of First World War, the railways were used to meet the
   needs of the British outside India. By the end of the First World War,
   the railways had suffered immensely, and were in a poor state. The
   government took over the management of the Railways and removed the
   link between the finances of the Railways and other governmental
   revenues in 1920.

   The Second World War severely crippled the railways as trains were
   diverted to the Middle East, and the railway workshops converted into
   munitions workshops. At the time of independence in 1947, a big chunk
   of the railways went to the then newly formed Pakistan. A total of
   forty-two separate railway systems, including thirty-two lines owned by
   the former Indian princely states were amalgamated as a single unit
   which was christened as the Indian Railways.

   The existing rail networks were abandoned in favour of zones in 1951
   and a total of six zones came into being in 1952. As the economy of
   India improved, almost all railway production units were indigenised.
   By 1985, steam locomotives were phased out in favour of diesel and
   electric locomotives. The entire railway reservation system was
   streamlined with Computerisation in 1995.

Track

   Broad gauge is the most predominant gauge used by the Indian railway.
   Enlarge
   Broad gauge is the most predominant gauge used by the Indian railway.

   The total length of track used by Indian Railways is about 108,706 km
   (67,547 miles). Track sections are rated for speeds ranging from 75 to
   160  km/h (47 to 99  mph). Indian railways uses three gauges, the Broad
   gauge (wider than the standard gauge – 4  ft 8½  in (1,435  mm)); the
   metre gauge; and the Narrow gauge (narrower than the standard gauge).

   Broad gauge – 1,676 mm (5.5 ft) – is the most widely used gauge in
   India with 86,526 km (53,765 miles) of track. In some regions with less
   traffic, the metre gauge – 1,000 mm (3.28 ft) – is common, although the
   Unigauge project is in progress to convert all track to broad gauge.
   Narrow Gauge is present on a few routes, lying in hilly terrains and in
   some erstwhile private railways (on cost considerations), which are
   usually difficult to convert to broad gauge. Narrow gauge covers a
   total of 3,651 km (2,269 miles). The Nilgiri Mountain Railway and the
   Darjeeling Himalayan Railway are two famous hill lines that use narrow
   gauge. This gauge is also used by zoos in India, whose tracks are
   sometimes maintained by the railways.

   Sleepers used in most places are made of prestressed concrete, steel
   and cast iron pots, though teak sleepers are still in use on few older
   lines. The prestressed concrete sleeper which is in wide use today is
   based on RDSO Drawing No. RDSO=T-2496. Metal sleepers were also
   extensively used before the advent of concrete sleepers. Indian
   Railways divides the country into four zones on the basis of the range
   of track temperature. The greatest temperature variations occur in
   Rajasthan, where the difference may exceed 70 ° C (158 ° F).

Locomotives

   Indian Railways use a specialised classification code for identifying
   its locomotives. The code is usually three or four letters, followed by
   a digit identifying the model (either assigned chronologically or
   encoding the power rating of the locomotive). This could be followed by
   other codes for minor variations in the base model.

   The three (or four) letters are, from left to right, the gauge of
   tracks on which the locomotive operates, the type of power source or
   fuel for the locomotive, and the kind of operation the locomotive can
   be used for. The gauge is coded as 'W' for broad gauge, 'Y' for metre
   gauge, 'Z' for the 762 mm narrow gauge and 'N' for the 610 mm narrow
   gauge. The power source code is 'D' for diesel, 'A' for AC traction,
   'C' for DC traction and 'CA' for dual traction (AC/DC). The operation
   letter is 'G' for freight-only operation, 'P' for passenger trains-only
   operation, 'M' for mixed operation (both passenger and freight) and 'S'
   for shunting operation. A number alongside it indicates the power
   rating of the engine. For example '4' would indicate a power rating of
   above 4,000 hp (2,980  kW) but below 5,000 hp (3,730 kW). An alphabet
   following the number is used to give an exact rating. For instance 'A'
   would be an additional 100 horsepower; 'B' 200 hp and so on.

   Thus,a WDM-3D is a broad-gauge, diesel-powered, mixed mode (suitable
   for both freight and passenger duties) and has a power rating of 3400
   hp (2.5  MW).

   The most common diesel engine used is the WDM-2, which entered
   production in 1962. This 2,600 hp (1.9 MW) locomotive was designed by
   Alco and manufactured by the Diesel Locomotive Works, Varanasi, and is
   used as a standard workhorse. It is being replaced by more modern
   engines, ranging in power up to 4000 hp (3 MW).
   The Darjeeling Himalayan Railway is a World Heritage Site, and one of
   the few steam engines in operation in India.
   Enlarge
   The Darjeeling Himalayan Railway is a World Heritage Site, and one of
   the few steam engines in operation in India.

   The first electric locomotives were manufactured by Indian Railways in
   1970. There is a wide variety of electric locomotives used, ranging
   between 2800 to 6350 hp (2.1 to 4.7 MW). They also accommodate the
   different track voltages in use. Most electrified sections in the
   country use 25,000 volt AC, but railway lines around Mumbai use the
   older 1,500 V DC system. Thus, Mumbai and surrounding areas are the
   only places where one can find AC/DC dual locomotives of the WCAM and
   WCAG series. All other electric locomotives are pure AC ones from the
   WAP, WAG and WAM series. Some specialized electric multiple units on
   the Western Railway also use dual-power systems. These dual rakes and
   locomotives switch power systems on-the-fly between Virar and Vaitarna
   using an unelectrified section of catenary called a dead zone. There
   are also some very rare battery-powered locomotives, primarily used for
   shunting and yard work.

   The only steam engines still in service in India operate on two
   heritage lines ( Darjeeling and Ooty) and on the tourist train Palace
   on Wheels. Plans are afoot to re-convert the Neral- Matheran to steam.

Traction

   About 16,000 km of the total 63,028 km route length is electrified.
   Most places use 25,000 V AC through overhead catenary delivery. A major
   exception is the entire Mumbai section, which uses 1,500 V DC. This is
   currently undergoing change to the 25,000 V system, and is scheduled
   for completion by 2008. Another exception is the Kolkata Metro, which
   uses 750 V DC delivered through a third rail.

   Traction voltages need to be changed at two places in the vicinity of
   Mumbai. Central Railway trains approaching through Igatpuri switch from
   AC to DC using a neutral section that may be switched to either voltage
   while the locomotives are decoupled and swapped. Western Railway trains
   switch power on the fly, in a section between Virar (DC) and Vaitarna
   (AC), where the train continues on its own momentum for about 30 m
   through an un-electrified dead zone. All electric engines and EMUs
   operating in this section are necessarily AC/DC dual system type
   (classified "WCAM" by Indian Railways).

Signalling systems

   Four aspect signalling
   Enlarge
   Four aspect signalling
   Semaphore signalling
   Enlarge
   Semaphore signalling

   The Indian Railways makes use of colour signal lights, but in some
   remote areas of operation, the older semaphores and discs-based
   signalling (depending on the position or colour) are still in use.
   Except for some high-traffic sections around large cities and
   junctions, the network does not use automatic block systems. Safety
   therefore depends completely on the skill and vigilance of the
   personnel operating the individual signals and the drivers.

   Coloured signalling makes use of multi-coloured lighting and in many
   places is automatically controlled. There are three modes:
     * Two aspect signalling which makes use of a red (bottom) and green
       (top) lamp
     * Three aspect signalling which makes use of an additional amber lamp
       in the centre
     * Four (multiple) aspect signalling makes use of four lamps, the
       fourth is amber and is placed above the other three.

   Multiple aspect signals, by providing several intermediate speed stages
   between 'clear' and 'on', allow high-speed trains sufficient time to
   brake safely if required. This becomes very important as train speeds
   rise. Without multiple-aspect signals, the stop signals have to be
   placed very far apart to allow sufficient braking distance and this
   reduces track utilization. At the same time, slower trains can also be
   run closer together on track with multiple aspect signals.

   Semaphores make use of a mechanical arm to indicate the line condition.
   Several subtypes are used:
     * Two aspect lower quadrant
     * Three aspect modified lower quadrant
     * Multiple aspect upper quadrant
     * Disc-based: These signals are located close to levers used to
       operate points. They are all two-aspect signals.

Production units

   Locomotives and coaches are produced in the following locations in
   India.
     * CLW: The Chittaranjan Locomotive Works in Chittaranjan makes
       electric locomotives.
     * DLW: The Diesel Locomotive Works in Varanasi makes diesel
       locomotives.
     * ICF: The Integral Coach Factory in Perambur makes integral coaches.
       These have a monocoque construction, and the floor is an integral
       unit with the undercarriage.
     * RCF: The Rail Coach Factory in Kapurthala also makes coaches for
       the Indian Railways.
     * RWF: The Rail Wheel Factory at Yelahanka manufactures wheels and
       axles.
     * Others: Some electric locomotives have been supplied by BHEL, and
       locomotive components are manufactured in several other plants
       around the country.

Accommodation classes

   A standard passenger rake contains many coaches of different classes.
   The following table lists the classes in operation. Not all classes may
   be attached to a rake though.
   Class                               Description
   1A    The First Class AC: This is the most expensive class, with fares
         which can be on par with airlines. Bedding is included with the fare in
         IR. This air conditioned coach is present only on popular routes
         between metropolitan cities and can carry 18 passengers. The coaches
         are carpeted, have sleeping accommodation and have privacy features
         like personal coupes.
   2A    AC-Two tier: Air conditioned coaches with sleeping berths, ample leg
         room, curtains and individual reading lamps. Berths are usually
         arranged in two tiers in bays of six, four across the width of the
         coach then the gangway then two berths longways, with curtains provided
         to give some privicy from those walking up and down. Bedding is
         included with the fare. A broad gauge coach can carry 48 passengers.
   FC    First Class: Same as 1AC, without the air conditioning. Such coaches
         are not very common.
   3A    AC Three tier: Air conditioned coaches with sleeping berths. Berths
         are usually arranged as in 2AC but with three tiers across the width
         and two longways as before giving eight bays of eight. They are
         slightly less well appointed, usually no reading lights or curtained
         off gangways. Bedding is included with fare. It carries 64 passengers
         in broad gauge.
   CC    AC Chair Car: An air-conditioned seater coach with a total of five
         five seats in a row used for day travel between cities.
   EC    Executive Class Chair Car: An air-conditioned seater coach with a
         total of four seats in a row used for day travel between cities.
   SL    Sleeper Class: The sleeper class is the most common coach, and
         usually up to ten coaches could be attached. These are regular sleeping
         coaches with three berths vertically stacked. In broad gauge, it
         carries 72 passengers per coach.
   2S    Seater class: same as AC Chair car, but without the
         air-conditioning.
   G     General: The cheapest accommodation, with seats made of pressed wood.
         A seat may not be guaranteed and tickets are issued usually two hours
         before the scheduled departure of the train. These coaches are usually
         heavily crowded.

   At the rear of the train is a special compartment known as the guard's
   cabin. It is fitted with a transceiver and the guard usually gives the
   all clear signal before the train departs. A standard passenger rake
   generally has four general compartments, two at the front and two
   behind, of which one is exclusively for ladies. The exact number varies
   according to the demand and the route. A luggage compartment is also
   added to the front or the back. In some trains a separate mail
   compartment is present. In long-distance trains a pantry car is usually
   included in the centre.

Nomenclature

   Trains are sorted into various categories which dictate the number of
   stops along their route, the priority they enjoy on the network, and
   the fare structure. Each express train is identified by a four-digit
   number – the first digit indicates the zone that operates the train,
   the second the division within the zone that controls the train and is
   responsible for its regular maintenance and cleanliness, and the last
   two digits are the train's serial number.

   For super-fast trains, the first digit is always '2', the second digit
   is the zone, the third is the division and only the last digit is the
   serial number within the division. Trains travelling in opposite
   directions along the same route are usually labelled with consecutive
   numbers. Most express trains also have a unique name attached to them
   which are usually exotic and are taken from landmarks, famous people,
   rivers and so on. Some notable examples are:
    1. Charminar Express between Hyderabad and Chennai, after the
       Charminar monument in Hyderabad.
    2. Ashram Express between Ahmedabad and New Delhi, after Mahatma
       Gandhi's Sabarmati Ashram
    3. Gitanjali Express between Mumbai CST and Howrah (Kolkata), after
       Rabindranath Tagore's famous work.
    4. Parasuram Express between Mangalore and Thiruvananthapuram, after
       Parasuram, a mythological character.
    5. Prayag Raj Express between Allahabad and New Delhi, after Prayag, a
       sacred pilgrimage spot and the ancient name of Allahabad.
    6. Lal Bagh Express between Bangalore and Chennai, after the famous
       Lal Bagh botanical gardens.
    7. Godavari Express between Hyderabad and Visakhapatnam after the
       river Godavari in South India.

   For some more Train Names (Only of South Central Railway) refer to
   Trains of SCR

Hierarchy of trains

   Trains are classified by their average speed. A faster train has less
   halts than a slower one and usually caters to long-distance travel.
   Rank Train Description
   1 Rajdhani Expresses These are all air-conditioned trains linking major
   cities to New Delhi. The Rajdhani have the highest priority and are the
   fastest trains in India, travelling at about 140 km/h (74.5 mph). There
   are only a few stops on a Rajdhani route.
   2 Shatabdi and Jan Shatabdi Expresses The Shatabdi trains are AC
   intercity seater-type trains similar to the Rajdhani. Jan-Shatabdi
   trains are generally non-AC and thus cheaper.
   3 Super-fast Expresses or Mail These are trains that have an average
   speed greater than 55 km/h (34 mph). Tickets for these trains have an
   additional super-fast surcharge.
   4 Express These are the most common kind of trains in India. They have
   more stops than their super-fast counterparts, but they stop only at
   relatively important intermediate stations.
   5 Passenger and Fast Passenger These are slow trains that stop at every
   single station, and are the cheapest trains. The entire train consists
   of the General-type compartments.
   6 Suburban trains Trains that operate in urban areas, usually stop at
   all stations. They have the lowest priority.

Ticketing

   An Indian Railway Ticket from Chennai to Vijayawada by Howrah Mail.
   Enlarge
   An Indian Railway Ticket from Chennai to Vijayawada by Howrah Mail.

   Until the late 1980s, Indian Railway ticket reservations were done
   manually. In late 1987, the Railways started using a computerised
   ticketing system. The entire ticketing system went online in 1995 to
   provide up to date information on status and availability. Today the
   ticketing network is computerised to a large extent, with the exception
   of some remote places. In large cities tickets can be booked for any
   two points in the country, which may not be available in smaller
   stations. Tickets can also be booked through the internet and via
   mobile phones, though this method carries an additional surcharge.

   Discounted tickets are available for senior citizens (above sixty
   years) and for various other passengers including the disabled,
   students and high ranking government officials. Season tickets
   permitting unlimited travel on specific sections or specific trains for
   a specific time period may also be available. Foreign tourists can buy
   an Indrail Pass, which is modelled on the lines of the Eurail Pass,
   permitting unlimited travel in India for a specific time period.

   For long-distance travel, reservation of a berth can be done for
   comfortable travel up to two months prior to the date of intended
   travel. Details such as the name, age and concession (if eligible) are
   required and are recorded on the ticket. The ticket price usually
   includes the base fare which depends on the classification of the train
   (example: super fast surcharge if the train is classified as a
   super-fast), the class in which one wishes to travel and the
   reservation charge for overnight journeys.

   If a seat is not available, then the ticket is given a wait listed
   number; else the ticket is confirmed, and a berth number is printed on
   the ticket. A person receiving a wait listed ticket will have to wait
   until there are enough cancellations to enable him to move up the list
   and obtain a confirmed ticket. If his ticket is not confirmed on the
   day of departure, he may not board the train. Some of the tickets are
   assigned to the RAC or Reservation against Cancellation which is
   between the waiting list and the confirmed list. These allow the ticket
   holder to board the train and obtain an allotted seat decided by a
   ticket collector, after the ticket collector has ascertained that there
   is a vacant (absentee) seat.

   Reserved Railway Tickets can also be booked through
   http://www.irctc.co.in, and also through Mobile Phones and SMS. More
   details are available at http://www.irctc.co.in. Tickets booked through
   this site, are categorised in to iTickets and eTickets. iTickets are
   those, which are booked by a passenger and then printed and delivered
   to the passenger for carrying during journey. eTickets are those, which
   the passenger can print himself at his end and carry while travelling.
   For booking an eTicket, one needs one of the authorised valid Photo
   Identity Card. Cancellation of eTickets are also done online, without
   the requirement for the passenger to go to any counter for this
   purpose.

   Non-reserved tickets are available for purchase on the platform at any
   time before departure. A non-reserved ticket holder may only board the
   general compartment class. All suburban networks issue non-reserved
   tickets valid for a limited time period. For frequent commuters, a
   season pass (monthly or quarterly) guarantees unlimited travel between
   two stops. Suburban Season Tickets for Mumbai area can also be booked
   through http://www.irctc.co.in online and delivered at doorstep.

International links

   India has rail links with Pakistan, Nepal and Bangladesh. It also plans
   to install a rail system in southern Bhutan. Before the Partition of
   India there were eight rail links between Indian and Pakistan. However
   currently there are only two actively maintained rail links between
   India and Pakistan. The first one is at Wagah in Punjab. The Samjhauta
   Express used to plies on this route from [Amritsar] in India to Lahore
   in Pakistan . The second one, opened in February 2006 runs between Luni
   – Munabao — Khokropar (MG) (Rajasthan—Sindh). Other disused links are:
     * Ferozepur – Fazilka – Bahawalnagar – Samasata (through Anupgarh
       (India) / Amruka & Fort Abbas (Pakistan) near the border). (Punjab)
     * Ferozepur — Kasur – Raiwind – Lahore (Punjab)
     * Amritsar — Attari – Lahore (Punjab)
     * Amritsar – Dera Baba Nanak – Narowal – Sialkot (Punjab)
     * Jammu — Sialkot (Jammu and Kashmir — Punjab)

   After the creation of East Pakistan (later Bangladesh), many trains
   that used to run between Assam and Bengal had to be rerouted through
   the Chicken's Neck. However as of 2005 there are no passenger links
   between India and Bangladesh. A MG link exists between Mahisasan
   (Mohishashon) and Shahbazpur. Another link is between Radhikapur and
   Birol. These last two links are used occasionally for freight.
     * Sealdah – Bongaon – Petrapol – Benapol – Jessore
     * Sealdah – Banpur – Gede – Abdulpur – Parbatipur – Haldibari –
       Siliguri
     * Katihar – Radhikapur – Biral – Parbatipur – Tista – Eetaldaha –
       Golakganj – Fakiragram
     * Geetaldaha – Alipur duar
     * Mogalhat – Changrabandha – Domohani
     * Badarpur – Kalaura (Sylhet)

   There are two links between India and Nepal: Raxaul Jn., Bihar
   –Sirsiya, Parsa and Jaynagar, Bihar – Khajuri, Dhanusa. The former is
   broad gauge, while the latter is narrow gauge. A move to link the
   Indian and Sri Lankan railways never materialised. A ferry service
   however connects the closest railheads between Indian and Sri Lanka.

Private Railways

   Though the Indian Railways enjoys a near monopoly in India, a few
   private railways do exist, left over from the days of the Raj, usually
   small sections on private estates, etc. There are also some railway
   lines owned and operated by companies for their own purposes, by
   plantations, sugar mills, collieries, mines, dams, harbours and ports,
   etc. The Bombay Port Trust ran BG railway of its own, as does the
   Madras Port Trust. The Calcutta Port Commission Railway is a BG
   railway. The Vishakhapatnam Port Trust has BG and NG (2 ft 6 in)
   railways.

   The Bhilai Steel Plant has a BG railway network. The Tatas (a private
   concern) operate funicular railways at Bhira and at Bhivpuri Road (as
   well as the Kamshet — Shirawta Dam railway line which is not a public
   line). These are not common carriers, so the general public cannot
   travel using these. The Pipavav Rail Corporation holds a 33-year
   concession for building and operating a railway line from Pipavav to
   Surendranagar. The Kutch Railway Company, a joint venture of the
   Gujarat state government and private parties, is involved (along with
   the Kandla Port Trust and the Gujarat Adani Port) to build a
   Gandhidham-Palanpur railway line. These railway lines are principally
   used to carry freight and not for passenger traffic.

   Although generally IR has decided the freight tariffs on these lines,
   recently (Feb 2005) there have been proposals to allow the operating
   companies freedom to set freight tariffs and generally run the lines
   without reference to IR.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rail_transport_in_India"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
