   #copyright

Ramsgate

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

                  Ramsgate

   Image:dot4gb.svg
                 Statistics
   Population:          37,967
              Ordnance Survey
   OS grid reference:   TR385645
               Administration
   District:            Thanet
   Shire county:        Kent
   Region:              South East England
   Constituent country: England
   Sovereign state:     United Kingdom
                   Other
   Ceremonial county:   Kent
   Historic county:     Kent
                  Services
   Police force:        Kent Police
   Fire and rescue:     {{{Fire}}}
   Ambulance:           South East Coast
         Post office and telephone
   Post town:           RAMSGATE
   Postal district:     CT11
   Dialling code:       01843
                  Politics
   UK Parliament:       Thanet South
   European Parliament: South East England

   Ramsgate is an English seaside town on the Isle of Thanet in East Kent.
   It was one of the great English seaside towns of the 19th century and
   is a member of the ancient confederation of Cinque ports. Population:
   2001 census 37,967.

   Ramsgate's main attraction is its coastline and its main industries are
   tourism and fishing. The town has one of the largest marinas on the
   English south coast and Port Ramsgate has provided cross channel
   ferries for many years.

History

   Ramsgate as a name has its earliest reference as Hraefn's ate, or cliff
   gap, later to be rendered 'Ramisgate' or 'Remmesgate' around 1225 and
   'Ramesgate' from 1357.

Ramsgate's Royal Harbour

   Arial photo showing two out of three harbour compartments
   Enlarge
   Arial photo showing two out of three harbour compartments
   A map of Ramsgate from 1945
   Enlarge
   A map of Ramsgate from 1945

   The construction of Ramsgate Harbour was begun in 1749 but not finally
   completed until about 1850.

   The two most influential architects of the Harbour were John Shaw
   Senior and John Shaw Junior. They designed the clockhouse, the obelisk,
   the lighthouse and the Jacobs Ladder steps . It has the unique
   distinction of being the only Royal Harbour in the United Kingdom, King
   George IV having awarded the title following his successful visit with
   the Royal Yacht Squadron in 1821.

   It is evident from many accounts of local sea rescues that the Ramsgate
   tugboats, whilst undertaking salvage work were also able to assist with
   the saving of lives. The Tugmen performed many a noteworthy task in
   this regard, either alone or by co-operation with the Lifeboats, which
   they would regularly tow to the scene of an imminent disaster to stand
   off whilst the smaller craft would attend.

   A Lifeboat station was established at Ramsgate as early as 1802, its
   first Lifeboat having been built for the Trustees of the Harbour by the
   lifeboat pioneer Henry Greathead. Half a century later however, during
   which time the station had been closed for 28 years, a new Ramsgate
   Lifeboat, the 'Northumberland' appeared there in 1851. The lifeboat was
   named in honour of the lifeboat sponsor, the Duke of Northumberland.
   The new and prized boat had been built in accordance with the plans of
   a model that had been the prize-winner in the 1851 national competition
   for the best design for such a craft.

   It was in the summer of 1824 that Captain K. Martin, then the Harbour
   Master at Ramsgate, instituted the proceedings of the first known
   cricket match on the Goodwin Sands, at low water. Such was the tenacity
   of local mariners, a tradition sprung up that survives to this day,
   whereby those so inclined make the journey to the Sands for a leisurely
   few hours in pursuit of this very English past-time.

   In 1859 Jerimiah Walker (having previously distinguished himself by his
   humane, zealous and successful efforts in rescuing the Master and the
   crew of the Northern Belle), as a seaman of the lugger "Petrel"
   assisted in the rescue of the crew of the Spanish vessel "Julia", which
   had become stranded off Ramsgate. For this assistance he was awarded a
   medal struck on the Authority of Queen Donna Isabella II of Spain, thus
   Walker is believed to be one of the few men to have received two
   separate medals issued by different Heads of State.

   On New Year's Day 1861 an event at sea of considerable loss of life
   occurred with the wreck of the " Guttenburg". Then, as now, without a
   doubt, by far the most hazardous area around the Kent coastline to any
   navigator was the most notorious Goodwin Sands.

Electric Tramways & Lighting Co. Ltd.

   At the turn of the 20th century, the Isle of Thanet saw the
   introduction of about 11 miles of track, laid down for the use of the
   Electric Tramways & Lighting Co. Ltd, which began its service with
   electric trams on 4 April 1901, linking the towns of Ramsgate, Margate
   and Broadstairs. On 3 August 1905, an unseasonably wet summer's day,
   Car No. 41, during a routine descent of the precipitous, and adverse
   camber leading down Madeira Walk hill into Ramsgate harbour, suddenly
   careered out of control, jumping the tracks, causing it to crash
   straight through the railings, so that it then dropped over the 30-foot
   cliff edge adjacent. Providentially, only a few passengers were
   travelling on Car No. 41 that day, and they came out of the ordeal
   unscathed, but the driver, who was new to the job, sustained some
   injury. The Electric Tramways & Lighting Co. Ltd. continued to operate
   with no further significant incidents recorded until its services were
   replaced with the buses of the East Kent Road Car Co, which began on 27
   March 1937.

   This was one of the few inter-urban tramways in Britain, owned by a
   private company and running through open countyside between the three
   towns (most of it built over now}. Much of the route was on its own
   right of way, and this only became public roads when the tramway was
   abandoned.

   The line started in Westbrook west of Margate, at the junction of
   Canterbury and Walton roads. A little tram-shed survived there until
   recently, and the tram-tracks were to be preserved in the housing
   development replacing it. Along Canterbury Road and the sea-front, then
   dividing in two. In the Broadstairs direction, up Paradise Street (now
   incorporated into Fort Hill dual carriageway); from Broadstairs, down
   Fort Hill and along King Street. Then Fort Crescent, Athelstan Road,
   Northdown Road to private track connecting to Lower Northdown Road.
   This bit is now a public footpath. Lower Northdown Road eastwards to
   the Wheatsheaf, then cuts across country to Northdown Hill. This bit is
   a rough track now. Past the main tramshed on the corner, still there
   and used as factory units, into Westover Road. Church Street (over
   railway) to St Peters, Albion Road to crossroads, left under railway
   bridge by Broadstairs station, along Broadstairs High Street to Queens
   Road, Oscott Road and the seafront. Then along private right of way to
   Ramsgate, now Dumpton Park Drive. Bellevue Road, Plains of Waterloo,
   Nelson Crescent, down Madeira Walk to Ramsgate Harbour. Up Royal
   Parade, Paragon, St Augustines Road, all the way along Grange Road,
   right at Park Road, to the old South Eastern Ry station where it had
   its own approach to the south of the station.This was the terminus.

   There was also a short-cut between Ramsgate and St Peters called the
   Top Road, which ran from the crossroads by Broadstairs station, south
   along Osborne Road, Gladstone Road, across Ramsgate Road and on private
   right of way (now Salisbury Avenue) to the main line. This was very
   lightly used and no-one is sure why it was built. Broadstairs town
   wanted to build a proper town centre at the station crossroads before
   WWI but could not find the money, and this may have had something to do
   with it.

   The company wanted to extend to Birchington, but was defeated by the
   landowners of housing estates at Westgate who wanted to keep the
   riff-raff away. Perhaps as a result, Westgate was refused its
   application to become a separate urban district because it lacked
   "civic character" before WWI (it became part of Margate).A line to
   Pegwell village was also proposed.

   The trams were double-decker, but never had roofs on the upper deck,
   even in winter. This was because the track was narrow-gauge and there
   were many right-angle bends. Twelve could squeeze into the lower deck,
   where there were two wooden benches facing each other, but in bad
   weather the top deck was extremely unpleasant. The service could not
   hope to compete with buses all year round, even if the trams were
   fondly remembered on hot summer days.

Ramsgate at war

   Because of its proximity to mainland Europe, Ramsgate was a chief
   embarkation point both for the Dunkirk evacuation and during the
   Napoleonic Wars. 4,200 ships left Ramsgate Harbour to rescue men from
   the Dunkirk beaches during World War 2.

   On 24 May 1990, the 50th anniversary of the evacuation of Dunkirk was
   remembered when some 80 of the original 'little ships' gathered at
   Dover and Ramsgate to repeat the now historic crossing of the channel.
   Only six out of this fleet had any difficulties, but were assisted by
   others in the flotilla.

   One of these little ships was the first Motor lifeboat stationed of
   Ramsgate which was named the 'Prudential' and had arrived on station by
   1926. During World War II the Ramsgate lifeboat and crew were called
   out 60 times, greatly distinguishing themselves with the saving of 170
   lives, in addition to the men brought back from Dunkirk: (Jeff Morris).

   One of the Dunkirk 'little ships' still moored at Ramsgate and open to
   the public is the Motor Yacht Sundowner, (built 1912) once the private
   yacht of the second officer of the Titanic, C.H. Lightoller, whom
   surviving that fatal wreck later insisted personally at being at the
   helm during the evacuation of Dunkirk. He succeeded in bringing home
   127 members of the 'Expeditionary Forces' in just one trip.

   After these events 42,783 soldiers were transported from Ramsgate
   railway station, carried by 82 southern rail special trains, the second
   busiest station during the evacuation, next to Dover, which carried
   over 180,000 men moved by 327 trains.

   Shortly before the outbreak of World War II the local council, thanks
   in large part to the town Mayor Alderman Kempe , decided to enlarge the
   existing tunnels under the town as a public air-raid shelter - and
   after the war started the national government finally gave permission
   to spend the money - it was built and used a lot during the raids. See
   the Subterranea Britannica website for mote details.

Geography

   Ramsgate is located 78 miles from central London in an East South
   Easterly direction at one of the most Easterly points of the country
   (the furthest point east being North Foreland in nearby Broadstairs).
   Infact, Ramsgate even has its own meridian line and Mean Time which is
   5 mins 41 secs ahead of Greenwich Mean Time.

   The town is now the amalgamation of two settlements. One being the
   fishing community based on the coast in the shallow valley between two
   chalk cliffs and the other a farming community inland that is now the
   Parish of St. Lawrence. The cliffs are now known as the East Cliff and
   the West Cliff and are predominantly residential areas. There are
   promenades along both cliff tops with parks at either end and sand
   beaches on the coast.

Politics

   Ramsgate falls in the Thanet South constituency, a seat won by Labour
   Member of Parliament Dr Stephen Ladyman. The seat was won after
   digraced Conservative MP for Thanet South, Jonathan Aitken, was
   convicted of perjury and sentenced to 18 months in prison.

   The town is currently an unparished area, and does not have a town
   council, but a movement called 'Ramsgate First' is campaigning to form
   one.

Political History

   Something almost amounting to a tradition for industrial militancy may
   be found in the history pages of Ramsgate. Such an occasion happened in
   August 1920 when following a decision by the Ramsgate corporation to
   sell 1000 tons of locally produced coke to Denmark, set of what became
   known as the 'coke riot'. It was unfortunate perhaps that these
   shipments were to be transported by two German ships, the first world
   war still fresh in local minds. Massive police protection of the
   harbour was required, but this did not prevent local people from
   venting their displeasure upon the local authorities.

   During the 1984 National Union of Mineworkers Strike, Ramsgate became
   the focus of media attention with several blockades of the Harbour by
   the coalmen of the nearby colleries, which had until then supported a
   sizable workforce throughout Thanet.

   Ramsgate was also the original location of the pressure group Critical
   Mass, which began its days in opposition to the government of Margaret
   Thatcher, often in support of the NUM. Critical Mass was founded in
   1984 as a result of regulations that prevented local inhabitants out of
   work from living in the then-numerous empty hotels desperate for trade.
   The BBC made a documentary about these events, which was named Red
   Herrings, and broadcast on BBC2 in 1985.

Economy

   Ramsgate marina, location of many popular bars and pubs
   Enlarge
   Ramsgate marina, location of many popular bars and pubs

   Ramsgate's main industries are tourism and fishing. The town has a
   thriving marina with over 800 moorings and a range of marine-related
   businesses that operate in premises in the renovated arches under Royal
   Parade. The town caters extensively for students of EFL (English as a
   foreign language) at its colleges.

   Port Ramsgate has provided cross channel ferries for many years.
   Previously Sally Ferries provided a service of passenger and car
   ferries to Dunkirk. Currently a service of prodominantly freight is
   provided to Oostende.

   There is some light industry in the town. A possible future industry is
   power generation, with a potential 800 jobs being created by the
   projected London Array, a wind farm just off the coast.

Demographics

     * Population: 1989 census estimate 38,200.
     * Population: 2001 census 37,967

Culture

Tourism

   Ramsgate Main Sands
   Enlarge
   Ramsgate Main Sands

   Ramsgate's main attraction is its coastline, particularly Ramsgate Main
   Sands, which has been awarded a 2006 Blue Flag, assuring high standards
   of cleanliness and general beach management.

   There is an annual Powerboat Grand Prix event based out of the harbour
   of Ramsgate during the summer.

Sports

   Ramsgate Football Club plays its home games at The Southwood Stadium
   (capacity: 5,000) and wears an all red outfit at home and yellow and
   green away from home. Ramsgate had previously been called Ramsgate
   Athletic and it is not since these days that Ramsgate had qualified for
   the First Round Proper of the FA Cup, until the 2005/06 season.
   Ramsgate played in the Isthmian League (formerly Ryman League) Division
   One during the 2005/06 season, after gaining promotion from the Kent
   League and went on to win the league (joint on points with Horsham).
   They have therefore been promoted to the Isthmian League Premier
   Division for the 2006/07 season.

Notable Residents

   Townley House in the 1950s
   Enlarge
   Townley House in the 1950s
     * Gary Pallister, a Footballer who played for Manchester United F.C.
       and Middlesbrough F.C. was born in Ramsgate.
     * During a period of increased religious emotion, Vincent Van Gogh
       taught french amongst other things as a supply teacher at a school
       at 6 Royal Road and boarded at 11 Spencer Square for a period in
       1876. He made some sketches of the view from his lodgings
       overlooking the harbour. The proprietor of the school relocated to
       Isleworth, Middlesex. Vincent decided to walk to the new location,
       which took 3 days via Canterbury and Chatham. This new position did
       not work out, and Vincent became a nearby Methodist minister's
       assistant in wanting to "preach the gospel everywhere".
     * Karl Marx is known to have stayed in the town around 9 times, as
       did his commrade Friedrich Engels. One known spot is on Hardres
       Street.
     * Whilst still a princess, Queen Victoria spent holidays in Ramsgate
       and stayed at Townley House, near what is now Farleys Furniture
       Store.
     * Former British Prime Minister Edward Heath was schooled at Chatham
       House Grammar School.
     * Comedian Frank Muir was born in Ramsgate and also schooled at
       Chatham House.
     * Olympic gold medalist for hockey, Sean Kerly, was another attendee
       of Chatham House.
     * Architect, Moses Montefiore was heavily involved in the affairs of
       Ramsgate and owned East Cliff Lodge. His tomb is adjacent to the
       synagogue in Ramsgate.
     * Mathematician Alfred North Whitehead was born in Ramsgate

Architecture

   The town has three notable churches. The first building used for
   worship in the Thanet parish of 'St Lawrence' was at St
   Laurence-in-Thanet, built in 1062 and rebuilt during the following
   centuries with the most significant changes being in the 16th century.
   Note the difference in spelling between that of the Village of St
   Lawrence and the church, which is dedicated to the Roman Martyr,
   Laurence.

   The second notable church is St Augustines, which is situated on the
   towns westcliff. Considered one of the most august and distinct
   surviving St Augustine's, it was designed by Augustus Pugin in 1847 in
   the neo-Gothic style. Its dedication commemorates Augustine, the first
   Archbishop of Canterbury, who landed at Ramsgate in AD 596 and brought
   Christianity to Britain.

   Thirdly, the town's Parish Church of St George is situated just off the
   towns highstreet and provides a striking view over the town and a trip
   to view its lantern tower is well worth a visit. The ground was
   concecrated on 23 October 1827. Its latern tower was added at the
   request of Trinity House as a navigational aid to passing ships

   St Augustine' serves its own abbey and the town's Catholic community,
   whilst St Laurence and St George are both Church of England, and serve
   the anglican community as part of the Diocese of Canterbury.

   Ramsgate library was original built and paid for by Andrew Carnegie in
   1904. On the evening of Friday 13th August 2004 a fire destroyed
   Ramsgate library just two months short of its 100th anniversary. Though
   suspicions were raised as to what started the fire due to a similarily
   timed fire at the towns registry office, an inquest concluded that the
   blaze was too intense to pinpoint where and how the fire started. Plans
   for a new library are now in place and it is hoped a new one will be
   built by 2007.

Transportation

By Sea

   The harbour provides shelter from the effect of storms and is close to
   the Goodwin Sands. It is now the site of one of the largest and most
   thriving marinas on the English south coast (there were 12,000 visiting
   boats in 2005) with 800 moorings.

   The town has had a long and chequered relationship with cross channel
   ferries. Passenger ferries to Dunkirk were operated for many years by
   Sally Ferries who eventually were forced to close due to stiff
   competition from Dover-Calais ferries and the Channel Tunnel. Trans
   Europa Ferries passenger and freight ferries now frequently sail to
   Ostend in Belgium.

By Road

   The main route to Ramsgate from London is to follow the M2 motorway to
   its bitter end and to get onto the A299. At St Nicolas-At-Wade
   roundabout take the 3rd exit onto the A299 (signposted Ramsgate). At
   Monkton Roundabout take the 2nd exit onto the A253 (signposted
   Ramsgate, Broadstairs). At Minster Roundabout take the 2nd exit onto
   the A253 (signposted Ramsgate, Broadstairs). Continue forward onto
   Canterbury Road West - A253. At Lord Of The Manor roundabout (a double
   roundabout) take the 2nd exit and then the first exit onto Canterbury
   Road East - A299 (signposted Ramsgate).

By Rail

   Ramsgate railway station is operated by Southeastern (train operating
   company) and is situated at the top of the town near the parish of St
   Lawrence.

   Trains from the station run to London Charing Cross and London Victoria
   via Margate, Chatham and Bromley South, or via Canterbury West or Dover
   Priory and Ashford International.

By Air

   The town is situated directly under the flight path of Kent
   International Airport at Manston. From September 2004 to August 2005 a
   low-cost airline EUjet operated frequent flights to many European
   destinations, replacing a large freight operator. However, flights were
   suspended after the collapse of its parent company, PlaneStation Group
   plc.

   The sale of Manston to Infratil (owner of Glasgow Prestwick
   International Airport) was completed on 26 August 2005. Charter
   operator Kent Escapes will use the Manston site to run weekly passenger
   flights to Barcelona, Spain and Faro, Portugal from summer 2006.
   Infratil are in negotiations with other airlines to add further
   destinations.

Education

   St Lawrence College private school in Ramsgate
   Enlarge
   St Lawrence College private school in Ramsgate

   Infant Schools
     * Dame Janet Infant School
     * Ellington Infants School
     * Newington Infants School
     * Priory Infants School

   Junior Schools
     * Christ Church C Of E Junior School
     * Dame Janet Junior School
     * St Ethelbert's R C Junior Mixed & Infants School
     * Newington Junior School
     * St Laurence C Of E Junior School

   Primary Schools
     * Newlands County Primary School
     * Chilton County Primary School

   Secondary Schools
     * Chatham House Grammar School
     * Clarendon House Grammar School
     * Ellington High School
     * St Lawrence College

   Colleges and further education
     * Ramsgate's nearest college is Thanet College. This is situated in
       the nearby town of Broadstairs. There is also a new campus for
       Canterbury Christ Church University which is situated in
       Broadstairs which is within very easy reach of Ramsgate.

Affiliations

   'Twin cities/towns
     * France - Conflans-Sainte-Honorine, France
     * Belgium - Chimay, Belgium
     * Denmark - Frederikssund, Denmark

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ramsgate"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
