   #copyright

Reggaeton

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Musical genres, styles,
eras and events

                                  Reggaeton
   Stylistic origins:     Dancehall, Techno, Hip Hop, Latin American Music,
                          House
   Cultural origins:      1980s onwards, Puerto Rico, Panama
   Typical instruments:   Sampler - Dembow - Bass -
   Mainstream popularity: 1990s onwards, worldwide
                                  Subgenres
    Bachateo - Spanish Dancehall- Salsaton- Bhangraton- Dembow Industrial
                               Regional scenes
    Puerto Rico - Dominican Republic - New York - Panama - Cuba - Japan -
   Los Angeles - Miami
                                Other topics
                        Puerto Rico - Tempo (artist)

   Reggaeton (also spelled with the Spanish accent as Reggaetón, and
   sometimes as Reguetón in Spanish) is a form of dance music which became
   popular with Latin American (Latino) youth during the early 1990s and
   spread to North American, European, Asian, and Australian audiences
   during the first few years of the 21st century. Reggaeton blends
   Jamaican music influences of reggae and dancehall with those of Latin
   America, such as bomba and plena, as well as that of hip hop. The music
   is also combined with rapping (generally) in Spanish. Reggaeton has
   given the Hispanic youth, starting with those of Panama and Puerto
   Rico, a musical genre that they can consider their own. The influence
   of this genre has spread to the wider Latino communities in the United
   States, as well as the Latin American and Central American audience.

   While it takes influences from hip hop and Jamaican dancehall, it would
   be wrong to define reggaeton as the 'Hispanic'- or 'Latino'- version of
   either of these genres; reggaeton has its own specific beat and rhythm,
   whereas Latino hip hop is simply hip hop recorded by artists of Latino
   descent. The specific rhythm that characterizes Reggaeton is referred
   to as "Dem Bow". The name is a reference to the title of the dancehall
   song that first popularized the beat in the early 1990s. An
   overwhelming majority of reggaeton songs share the same beat and for
   the most part, are indistinguishable from one another aside from their
   lyrics.

   Reggaeton's origins represents a hybrid of many different musical
   genres and influences from various countries in the Caribbean, Latin
   America and the United States. The genre of Reggaeton however is most
   closely associated with Puerto Rico, as this is where the musical style
   later popularized and became most famous, and where the vast majority
   of its stars originate from.

   Reggaeton lyrics tend to be more derived from hip hop than dancehall.
   Like hip hop, reggaeton has caused some controversy, albeit much less,
   due to a few of the songs' explicit lyrics and alleged exploitation of
   women ; supporters claim this criticism is misplaced due to most
   reggaeton songs having completely clean lyrics, as well as non-violent
   lyrics. Further controversy surrounds perreo, a dance with explicit
   sexual overtones which is associated with reggaeton music.

History

Early History and Origins

   Reggaeton's roots are from Panama with the music evolving and coming to
   prominence in Puerto Rico. Reggaeton starts as an adaptation of
   Jamaican reggae (and later Jamaican dancehall) to the Spanish-language
   culture in Panama .

   The origins of reggaeton begin with the, first Latin-American reggae
   recordings being made in Panama during the 1970s. Reportedly, the
   Jamaican reggae influence on Panamanian music has been strong since the
   early 20th century, when Jamaican laborers were used to help build the
   Panama Canal.

   Artists such as El General, Chicho Man, Nando Boom, Renato, Black
   Apache are considered the first raggamuffin DJs from Panama. El General
   has been identified as one of the fathers of reggaeton, blending
   Jamaican reggae into a Latin-ised version. It was common practice to
   translate the lyrics of Jamaican reggae song into Spanish and sing them
   over the original melodies, a form termed Spanish reggae or Reggae en
   Español. Meanwhile, during the 1980s the Puerto Rican rapper Vico C
   released Spanish-language hip hop records in his native island. His
   production of cassettes throughout the 1980s, mixing reggae and hip
   hop, also helped spread the early reggaeton sound, and he is widely
   credited with this achievement . The widespread movement of Spanish
   reggae in the Latin-American communities of the Caribbean and the urban
   centres of the United States help increase its popularity .

   During the 1990s reggae production took off seriously in Panama; this
   also occurred separately in Puerto Rico due to the increased popularity
   of Jamaican ragga imports. Towards the middle of the decade, Puerto
   Ricans were producing their own " riddims" with clear influences from
   hip hop and other styles. These are considered the first proper
   reggaeton tracks, initially called "under", a short form of
   "Underground". DJ Playero was one of the most famous producers at the
   time, releasing several "underground" cassettes that featured early
   performances of some soon-to-be-famous artists like Daddy Yankee. The
   basis for reggaeton was laid in Puerto Rico at this time, with the
   melding of Panamanian Spanish reggae, with influences from dancehall,
   hip-hop and various other Latin American musical genres .

   The genre morphed through the years, at various points being termed
   Melaza, musica underground, reggae de Puerto Rico, and Dem Bow. This
   last name originated from reggaeton's distinguishing rhythmic feature:
   the Dem Bow (alternately spelled Dembow) beat. This beat was
   constructed by Jamaican record producer Bobby "Digital" Dixon, and
   first became popular in the song "Dem Bow" (They Bow) performed by
   Jamaican dancehall artist Shabba Ranks in 1991. The song and beat
   achieved greater popularity among Spanish-speaking Latin Americans when
   Panamanian artist El General released the song "Son Bow" in 1991, a
   Spanish language cover of "Dem Bow" using the same musical track. It
   should be pointed out that neither Shabba or El General sang
   "Reggaeton" as neither the genre nor its title were as yet formed.
   Additionally "Dem Bow" was just a single song in Shabba's catalog, with
   Ranks not singing another significant song using the "Dem Bow" beat.
   However the influence of the original Bobby Digital beat is undeniable,
   and modern Reggaeton often still reflects the original instrumentation,
   as well as the original rhythmic structure.

Rise to popularity

   The name reggaeton only gained prominence in the mid-1990s (from the
   1994 to 1995 period), with the Dem Bow beat characterizing the genre;
   this is in contrast to the more reggae, dancehall and hip hop-derived
   tracks previously created. The name was created in Puerto Rico to
   signify the hybrid sound, and distinguish it from the previous Spanish
   reggae, created from the years of mixing the different genres. Today,
   the music flourishes throughout Latin America.

   Reggaeton soon increased in popularity with Latino youth in the United
   States when DJ Blass worked with artists such as Plan B and Speedy in
   albums such as Reggaeton Sex. The first song which introduced Reggaeton
   to a big amount of fans is the song "Tra Tra" by Don Chezina. From
   there on reggaeton gained fans with songs such as "Amor Con La Ropa" by
   Speedy, "No Puedo Estar Sin Sexo" by Plan B, and "Dembow" by Wisin and
   Yandel.

   Reggaeton expanded and became known when other producers followed the
   steps of DJ Playero, like DJ Nelson and DJ Eric. In the mid 90s albums
   like Playero 37 (In which Daddy Yankee became known) and The Noise 5
   and The Noise 6 were very popular in Puerto Rico and the Dominican
   Republic. Singers like Don Chezina, O.G. Black & Master Joe, Baby Rasta
   & Gringo, and Lito & Polaco among others were very popular.

   Many now popular producers, such as the Dominican duo Luny Tunes,
   Noriega and Eliel, first appeared in the reggaeton scene in 2003.
   Albums such as Mas Flow, The Last Don, and Las Gargolas 4 expanded
   reggaeton's popularity among Latinos in the United States.

   2004 was the year that reggaeton gained widespread popularity in the
   United States, eventually gaining attention in many "Western"
   countries. This was due to N.O.R.E. introducing the genre to mainstream
   America with the song " Oye Mi Canto", followed by Daddy Yankee who
   came out with his album Barrio Fino and his mega hit single "
   Gasolina". Another important artist that contributed to gain popularity
   to reggaeton, especially in Europe, is Don Omar, with singles like
   "Pobre Diabla" and "Dale Don Dale". Other very popular Reggaeton
   artists include Alexis Y Fido, Khriz Y Angel, Nina Sky, Nicky Jam, Zion
   y Lennox, Voltio, Calle 13, Héctor El Father, Ivy Queen, Wisin &
   Yandel, Tito El Bambino and Tego Calderon.

   Don Omar's May 2006 album, King of Kings, became history's highest
   ranking reggaeton LP in the top 10 US charts, with its debut at #1 on
   the Latin sales charts and the #1 spot on the Billboard Latin Rhythm
   Radio Chart with the single "Angelito". Don Omar was also able to beat
   the in-store appearance sales record at Downtown Disney's Virgin music
   store previously set by pop star Britney Spears, further demonstrating
   Reggaeton's massive rise to popularity in the United States.

Reggaeton beats

   Reggaeton's most notably unique feature is a driving drum-machine
   track, which sounds almost identical in virtually all reggaeton songs,
   and was derived from a popular Jamaican dancehall rhythm. As stated
   previously this beat is called "Dem Bow", from the Bobby Dixon-produced
   Shabba Ranks song of the same title.

   Many of the sounds found in a typical reggaeton beat are electronically
   synthesized. Simple melodies may be produced with keyboards, electric
   guitars, and other electronic instruments. Other forms of electronic
   dance music have significantly influenced reggaeton beats, such as
   techno, house, and genres such as the merengue hip hop (also called
   merenhouse) of groups such as Proyecto Uno and Zona 7.

   Reggaeton beats are highly versatile. The great variety and flexibility
   of reggaeton beats can be illustrated by Luny Tunes' CD The Kings of
   the Beats, which is a collection of purely instrumental beats.
   Reggaeton beats can be based on merengue, bachata, bolero, and
   especially hip-hop beats.

Reggaeton and hip-hop

   Reggaeton bears many resemblances to hip-hop. The most notable
   resemblance to hip-hop is that reggaeton, in most cases, is recited
   instead of being sung. Another feature is that reggaeton CD's are laid
   out like hip-hop CD's, including intro's, occasional interludes, and
   hidden bonus tracks. Reggaeton also has hooks throughout a song that
   may include a chorus of singers. Reggaeton artists also adopt
   pseudonyms comparable to those of hip-hop artists. Overall, reggaeton
   and hip-hop are both thought of as street-styled music popular among
   urban youth.

   Despite the similarities, reggaeton only roughly fits into the Latin
   hip-hop category but is not synonymous with hip-hop. True Latin hip-hop
   has beats that almost exactly resemble mainstream hip-hop beats. These
   "hardcore" Latin hip-hop artists include Big Pun, Fat Joe, Akwid, and
   Jae-P. Reggaeton, though, has rap-styled lyrics but has a very
   different beat that is influenced not by hip-hop, but by reggae,
   dancehall, merengue and techno. Although reggaeton has been highly
   influenced by American hip-hop, it has also borrowed features from many
   other genres as well and is not strictly considered to be Latin
   hip-hop.

   Reggaeton and hip-hop are often remixed together, and reggaeton songs
   and live concerts may feature hip-hop artists such as Lil Jon, 50 Cent,
   and Eminem. Hip-hop songs such as Usher's Yeah and Snoop Dogg's Drop It
   Like It's Hot have been remixed by replacing the original beat with a
   reggaeton beat. In other remixes, reggaeton DJs may rap out an English
   song in Spanish. Reggaeton and hip-hop are accepting influences from
   each other today, and these musical blends also signify a cultural
   melting pot in today's urban scene.

   Reggaeton and hip hop artists are often mixed together to create hit
   singles. Snoop Dogg was featured on Daddy Yankee's Gangsta Zone in his
   album Barrio Fino En Directo ; as was Paul Wall on remix to Yankee’s
   earlier hit song entitled Machete. The remix of Daddy Yankee's song
   Rompe featured Lloyd Banks and Young Buck of G-Unit. And Yankee’s first
   U.S. hit Gasolina was remixed, adding Miami rapper Pitbull, and Crunk
   music producer Lil Jon to the track. Sean Paul collaborated with him on
   the song ‘Oh Man’ on his most recent album, The Trinity. Hip hop
   producer Pharrell Williams produced and sang on the track ‘Mamacita’
   with Daddy Yankee as well. American rapper Juelz Santana was featured
   on Don Omar's song Conteo on Omar’s album King of Kings which was
   featured in the movie The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift. Luny Tunes
   produced the R.Kelly song ‘Burn it up’ with Wisin Y Yandel on his album
   TP3 Reloaded as well as producing the remix to Paris Hilton’s song
   Stars are Blind again featuring Wisin y Yandel, which has sold over
   300,000 songs on I-Tunes. Popular Reggaeton producer Héctor "El
   Bambino" produced the hit song ‘Here We Go Yo’ with Jay-Z, whom he
   collaborated with to produce his most recent album “Los Rompe
   Discotekas” (The Club Bangers) which came out earlier this summer.
   Reggaeton artist Voltio raps alongside with R&B group Jagged Edge on
   the song ‘So Amazing'. The song ‘Wanna Ride’ was recited and sung by
   distinguished Reggaeton artists Wisin y Yandel together with veteran
   rap group Bone Thugs N'Harmony, and which was featured in the movie
   Take the Lead starring Antonio Banderas. Both genres are accepting
   influences from each other today, and these musical blends also signify
   a cultural blending pot in today’s urban scene.

Lyrics and themes

   Reggaeton lyrical structure highly resembles hip-hop lyrics. Like
   hip-hop, reggaeton artists recite their lyrics rap-fashion rather than
   sing it melodically. Like hip-hop music, reggaeton songs have hooks
   that are repeated throughout the song. Reggaeton also started as a
   genre composed of mostly male artists, with a slowly increasing number
   of female artists debuting over the years. Notable female reggaeton
   artists include Ivy Queen and Glory.

   Reggaeton lyrical themes are versatile. Typical themes may include
   dancing, love stories, partying, short anecdotes of the rapper's life,
   and problems in life. Popular reggaeton songs are mainly intended to be
   danceable, rhythmic, party-like songs for young people. Reggaeton may
   or may not be objectionable depending on the artists, song, and the
   listener's interpretation, as one reggaeton song may have many
   interpretations because a song's meaning may not be very clear and
   direct. For example, the song Gasolina is often considered appropriate
   for children and has made it into the Reggaeton Niños series. However,
   because of the various possible connotations and literal
   interpretations of the song, some people criticize Gasolina as having
   possibly inappropriate sexual content .

   Usually, reggaeton CDs are not labeled "explicit" like many hip-hop CDs
   are. One exception is that Daddy Yankee's Barrio Fino en Directo
   (Barrio Fino Live) was labeled explicit for objectionable content in
   the live concerts (and for explicit language by Snoop Dogg in Gangsta
   Zone), even though the regular studio version of Barrio Fino was not
   labeled explicit. Most reggaeton songs have completely clean lyrics (as
   in no profanity); very few songs have cursing/swearing in the lyrics.
   Some reggaeton artists are able to circumvent radio and television
   censorship by using sexual inuendo and lyrics with double meanings in
   their music.

Reggaeton across the world

Puerto Rico

   Reggaeton is most commonly thought of as originating from Puerto Rico,
   where it has flourished and spread across Latin America and the
   international stage. The Puerto Rican influence in reggaeton has
   involved the addition of hip-hop to the Panamanian reggae style. Puerto
   Ricans have claimed reggaeton as their own partly due to the fact that
   the movement was originally anti-establishment, with the government
   attempting to ban the perreo ("doggystyle") dance. Reggaeton is now
   more accepted within the commonwealth.

   Reggaeton derives from the post-Salsa music youth generation of the 80s
   and early 90s in Puerto Rico. Before reggaeton exploded in the
   mid-nineties, young street artists, heavyly influenced by East Coast
   hip hop and turntablism, rapped over cassette tracks easily acquired
   within their Commonwealth (United States insular area) status.

   This new genre was simply called "underground". It contained very
   explicit lyrics about drugs, violence, poverty, homophobia, friendship,
   love, and sex. These common themes still predominate today in reggaeton
   music. "Underground" music was recorded in "marquesinas" (or Puerto
   Rican open garage) and distributed in the streets via cassettes. By the
   early 90s "underground" cassettes were being sold in commercial music
   stores. The genre caught up with the middle class youth and inevitably
   found its way to the media.

   By this time Puerto Rico had a few clubs dedicated to the "underground"
   scene. Club Rappers in Carolina, and club PlayMakers in Puerto Nuevo
   were the most notable. Bobby "Digital" Dixon's dembow track was
   exploited in order to appeal in the context of the club. "Underground"
   music wasn't intended originally to be club music.

   The Puerto Rican chapter of Morality in Media asked the local
   authorities to intervene and ban selling "underground" music, which
   subsequently required that all local productions being sold displayed a
   Parental Advisory label. By 1993 Dj Negro released The Noise 3 with a
   mock up label that read Non-Explicit Lyrics. The album contained no
   cursing until the last song. The album was a hit and "underground"
   music further crept into the mainstream. Senator Velda González of the
   Popular Democratic Party and the media continued to view the movement
   as a social nuisance.

Latin America

   Reggaeton has been a huge hit all across the globe, especially in Latin
   American countries like in the Dominican Republic, Central America, and
   Mexico. Reggaeton has become staple music in most parties and events,
   complementing the common mix of merengue, salsa and electronic music
   and has paved a huge fan base. In some countries (such as Venezuela,
   with Calle Ciega, Doble Impakto and Mr. Brian and Pescozada and Heavy
   Clan from El Salvador), domestic "reggaetoneros" have arisen, expanding
   the Pan-Latin feel of the genre.

United States

   In the United States, reggaeton is highly popular among Hispanic youth.
   Reggaeton is now popular in cities all over the United States,
   including Los Angeles, Chicago, New York City, Boston, Washington,
   D.C., Houston, Miami, and almost every city with a large Hispanic
   population.

Europe

   Reggaetón has become popular in Spain because of its appeal to Latin
   American immigrants, particularly those from Ecuador. A Spanish concept
   called "La Canción del Verano" (The Summer Song), under which a
   particular song or two define the mood for the season and are regarded
   unofficially as such by Spanish media, served as the basis for the
   extreme popularity of reggaetón songs such as the late Panamanian
   rapper Lorna's "Papi Chulo (Te traigo el Mmm)" in 2003, and Daddy
   Yankee's Gasolina in 2005. Puerto Rican and Panamanian reggaetón
   artists have toured the country, and Spain is developing a cadre of
   local reggaetón artists of its own.

   Reggaetón is also experiencing a boom in Italy, thanks in big part to
   artists like Don Omar who filmed the video for his song Angelito in
   Rome, featuring many of the city's historic landmarks.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reggaeton"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
