   #copyright

Riesling

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Drink

   Ripe Riesling grapes
   Ripe Riesling grapes

   Riesling is a white grape variety and varietal appellation of wines
   grown historically in Germany (see German wine), Alsace (France),
   Austria, and northern Italy. It is a very old grape, first documented
   in 1435, in which year the storage inventory of the Counts of
   Katzenelnbogen (a small principality on the Rhine) lists the purchase
   of six barrels of riesslingen from a Rüsselsheim vintner. The modern
   word Riesling was first documented in 1552 when it was mentioned in
   Hieronymus Bock's Latin herbal.

   The most expensive wines made from Riesling are late harvest dessert
   wines, produced by letting the grapes hang on the vines well past
   normal picking time. Through evaporation caused by the fungus Botrytis
   cinerea ("noble rot") or by freezing, as in the case of ice wine (in
   German, Eiswein), water is removed and the resulting wine offers richer
   layers on the palate. These concentrated wines have more sugar (in
   extreme cases hundreds of grams per liter), more acid (to give balance
   to all the sugar), more flavor, and more complexity. These elements
   combine to make wines which are amongst the most long lived of all
   white wines. The beneficial use of "noble rot" was discovered in the
   late 18th century at Schloss Johannisberg. Permission from the Abbey of
   Fulda, which owned the vineyard, to start picking the grapes arrived
   too late and the grapes had begun to rot, yet it turned out that the
   wine made from them was still of excellent quality.

Production regions

   Riesling vines on a steep, south facing slope in the Mosel-Saar-Ruwer
   region.
   Riesling vines on a steep, south facing slope in the Mosel-Saar-Ruwer
   region.

   Riesling is considered one of the grape varieties that best expresses
   the terroir of the place where it is grown. It is particularly well
   suited for slate and sandy clay soil.

Germany

   Originating in German soil today Riesling is Germany’s leading grape
   variety, known for its characteristic “transparency” in flavor and
   presentation of terroir, and its balance between fruit and mineral
   flavours. In Germany, Riesling normally ripens between late September
   and late November, and late harvest Riesling can be picked as late as
   January.

   Three common characteristics of German Riesling are that they are
   rarely blended with other varietals, hardly ever exposed to commercial
   yeast and usually never exposed to oak flavor (despite some vintner
   fermenting in "neutral" oak barrels). To this last item there is an
   exception with some vinters in the wine regions of Palatinate (Pfalz)
   and Baden experimenting with new oak aging. The warmer temperatures in
   those regions produce heavier wines with a higher alcohol content that
   can better contend with the new oak. While clearer in individual
   flavours when it is young, a German Riesling will harmonize more as it
   ages, particularly around ten years of age.

   In Germany, sugar levels at time of harvest is an important
   consideration in the wine's production with prädikat levels measuring
   the sweetness of the wine. As equally important to winegrowers is the
   balance of acidity between the green tasting malic acid and the more
   citrus tasting tartaric acid. In cool years, some growers will wait
   till November to harvest in hopes of having a higher level of ripeness
   and subsequent tartaric acid.

   Before technology in wineries could stabilize temperatures, the low
   temperatures in winter of the northern German regions would halt
   fermentation and leave the resulting wines with natural sugars and a
   low alcohol content. According to local tradition, in the
   Mosel-Saar-Ruwer region the wine would then be bottled in tall,
   tapered, and green hock bottles. Similar bottles, although brown, are
   used for Riesling produced in the Rhine region.

   In the late 19th century German horticulturalists devoted many efforts
   to develop new Riesling hybrids that would create a more flexible, less
   temperamental grape that could still retain some of the elegant
   characteristics of Riesling. The most notable is the Müller-Thurgau
   developed in Geisenheim in 1882, it is said to be a cross of Riesling
   and Silvaner though this has come under doubt. Other Riesling/Silvaner
   crosses include the Palatinate regional favorite Scheurebe and
   Rieslaner. Kerner, a cross between Riesling and the red wine grape
   Trollinger is a high quality cross that has recently eclipsed Riesling
   in plantings.

   Riesling is also the preferred grape in production of Sekt, German
   sparkling wine.

   Riesling wines from Germany cover a vast array of tastes from sweet to
   off-dry halbtrocken to dry trocken. Late harvest Rieslings can ripen to
   become very sweet dessert wines of the beerenauslese (BA) and
   trockenbeerenauslese (TBA) class.

Alsace

   A cart in Alsace selling estate grown Rieslings.
   A cart in Alsace selling estate grown Rieslings.

   Riesling is on record as being planted in the Alsace region by 1477
   when its quality was praised by the Duke of Lorraine. Today over a
   fifth of Alsace's vineyards are covered with Riesling vines, mostly in
   the Haut-Rhin district, with the wine produce here being very different
   from neighboring German Riesling. This is partly from difference in the
   soil with the clay Alsatian soil being more dominately calcareous then
   the slate composition of Rheingau. The other differences come in wine
   making styles, with the Alsatian preferring more French-oriented
   methods that produce wines of higher alcohol content (normally around
   12%) and more roundness due to longer time spent aging in the barrel.
   In contrast to German wine laws, Alsatian rieslings can be chaptalized.

   In contrast to other Alastian wines, Rieslings in this area are not
   meant to be drunk young. Rieslings produce here tend to be mostly very
   dry with a cleansing acidity. They are thick bodied wines that coat the
   palate. These wines age exceptionally well with a quality vintage aging
   up to 20 years. This is beneficial since the flavors in an Alsace wine
   will often open up after three years, developing softer and fruitier
   flavours. Rieslings made in sweeter styles include the late harvest
   Vendange Tardive and the botrytize Sélection de Grains Nobles.

   In addition to Muscat, Gewürztraminer and Pinot Gris, Riesling is one
   of the acceptable varieties whose planting is allowed in Alsace's grand
   cru sites.

Australia and New Zealand

   Gold lettering on collectible Sydney Opera House wine
   Gold lettering on collectible Sydney Opera House wine

   In 1838 William Macarthur planted Riesling vines near Penrith in New
   South Wales. Riesling was the most planted white grape in Australia
   until the early 1990s when Chardonnay greatly increased in popularity.
   Riesling still flourishes in the Clare Valley, in particular the areas
   of Watervale and around the Polish Hill River, and the cooler Eden
   Valley where some sparkling Riesling is produced. The warmer Australian
   climate produces thicker skinned grapes, sometimes seven times the
   thickness of German grown grape. The grapes ripening in free drain soil
   composed of red soil over limestone and shale, producing a lean wine
   that as it matures produces toasty, honeycomb and lime aromas and
   flavours. It is common for Australian Rieslings to be fermented at low
   temperatures in stainless steel tanks with no oxidation of the wine and
   followed by earlier bottling.

   Australian Rieslings are noted for their oily texture and citrus fruit
   flavours in their youth and a smooth balance of freshness and acid as
   they age. The botrytized Rieslings have immense levels of flavor
   concentrations that have been favorably compared to lemon marmalade.

   Riesling was first planted in New Zealand in the 1970s and has
   flourished in the relatively cool climate of the Marlborough area and
   for late harvests in the Nelson region. In comparison to Australian
   Riesling, New Zealand produces lighter and more delicate wines that
   range from sweet to dry.

Austria

   Riesling is the second leading white grape varietal after the
   indigenous Grüner Veltliner. Austrian Riesling is generally thick
   bodied, coating the palate and producing a strong clarity of flavor
   coupled with a mouthwatering aroma. A particular Austrian Riesling
   trademark is a long finish that includes hints of white pepper. It
   flourishes in the cool climate and free-draining granite and mica soil
   of the Wachau region where Austrian wine laws allow for irrigation.
   With levels normally around 13% it is has a relatively high alcohol
   content for Riesling and is generally at its peak after 5 years.
   Austrian Riesling is not known for its sweetness and is mostly dry with
   very little grapes affected by botrytis.

North America

   In the late nineteenth century German immigrants brought with them
   Riesling vines, named Johannisberg Riesling, to qualify them as
   “legitimate” German Riesling. New York, particularly in the Finger
   Lakes region, was one of the earliest U.S. producers of Riesling.
   Plantings started to appear in California by 1857 and followed in
   Washington State in 1871.

   New York Riesling generally has a characteristic effervescent light
   body with a similarly light, mellow flavor. The wine can be dynamic
   though rarely robust, and ranges from dry to sweet. New York is also a
   notable producer of Riesling based Ice Wine, although a large majority
   of New York Ice Wine is made from Vidal Blanc and Vignoles.
   Riesling grapes affected with botrytis
   Riesling grapes affected with botrytis

   In California, Riesling lags far behind in popularity to Chardonnay and
   is not as commonly planted. A notable exception is the growing
   development of high quality Late Harvest dessert wines. So far, the
   Late Harvest wines most successfully produced are in the Anderson and
   Alexander Valleys where the weather is more likely to encourage the
   needed botrytis to develop. The Riesling that does come out of
   California tends to be softer, fuller, and having more diverse flavours
   than a "typical" German Riesling.

   In the Pacific Northwest there is a stark contrast in Riesling
   production, the grape is currently on the rise in Washington State but
   on the decline in neighboring Oregon. Riesling from this area ranges
   from dry to sweet, and has a crisp lightness that bodes well for easy
   drinking. Often there will be an easily detectable peach and mineral
   complex. Some Washington State winemakers, such as Chateau Ste.
   Michelle, are adapting German style Riesling production methods, and
   even partnering with well-known German vintners like Dr. Ernest Loosen
   to create specialty wines such as the Eroica Riesling. Pacific Rim is
   another Pacific Northwest winery that specializes almost entirely on
   Riesling in its various forms.

Niagara Peninsula, Ontario, Canada

   In Canada, Riesling is commonly used for Ice Wine, particularly in
   Ontario, where the wine is noted for its breadth and complexity.
   Niagara is a major producer of ice wine in general, putting it
   neck-and-neck with Germany. Late Harvest wines and some sparkling wines
   are produced with Riesling in Niagara but it is table wines from dry to
   off-dry that hold the largest share of production. The climate of the
   region is typically quite warm in the summertime which adds a layer of
   richness in the wines. It is interesting that the founder of St.
   Urbanshoff in the Mosel, Herman Weiss, was an early pioneer in
   Niagara's modern viticulture, selling his strain of Mosel clone
   Riesling to many producers in west Niagara (these vines are well over
   20 years old now). This clone and Niagara's summer heat make for
   uniquely bright wines and often show up in interesting dry styled
   versions. Many producers and wine critics will argue that Niagara's
   best offerings come from the Niagara Escarpment region which
   encompasses the Short Hills Bench, 20 Mile Bench and Beamsville Bench.

Other regions

   Riesling is also widely grown in South Africa, Chile and Central
   Europe, particularly Romania.

Production

   In wine making, the delicate nature of the Riesling grape requires
   special handling during harvesting to avoid crushing or bruising the
   skin. Without this care, the broken skins could leak tannin into the
   juice, giving a markedly coarse taste and throwing off balance the
   Riesling’s range of flavours and aromas.

   A wine that is best at its “freshest” states, the grapes and juice may
   be chilled often throughout the vinification process. Once, right after
   picking to preserve the grapes' more delicate flavours. Second, after
   it has been processed through a bladder press and right before
   fermentation. During fermentation, the wine is cooled in temperature
   controlled stainless steel fermentation tanks kept between 10°-18°C
   (50°-65°F). This differs from red wines that normally ferment at
   24°-29°C (75°-85°F)

   Unlike Chardonnay, most Riesling do not undergo malolactic
   fermentation. This helps preserve the tart, acidic characteristic of
   the wine that gives Riesling its “thirst-quenching” quality. (Producers
   of Sauvignon Blanc and Pinot Grigio often avoid malolactic fermentation
   for the same reason.) Riesling is often put through a process of cold
   stabilization, where the wine is stored just above its freezing point.
   The wine is kept at this temperature until much of the tartaric acid
   has crystallized and precipitated out of the wine. This helps prevent
   crystallization of the acid (often called "wine diamonds") in the
   bottle. After this, the wine is normally filtered again to remove any
   remaining yeast or impurities.

   In viticulture, the two main components in growing Riesling grapes are
   to keep it "Long & Low" meaning that the ideal situation for Riesling
   is a climate that allows for a long, slow ripening and proper pruning
   to keep the yield low and the flavor concentrated.

With food

   Riesling is a very versatile wine to have with food, because of its
   balance of sugar and notable acidity. It can pair with white fish, or
   with pork, and it is one of the few wines that can stand up to Thai and
   Chinese cuisine. Riesling's typical aromas are of flowers, tropical
   fruits, and mineral stone (such as slate or quartz), although, with
   time, the wine acquires a petrol or kerosene note that may be
   immediately arresting to new drinkers of Riesling while others may find
   it alluring.

   Riesling is almost never fermented or aged in new oak (although large,
   old oak barrels are often used to store and stabilise Riesling based
   wines in Germany and Alsace). This means that Riesling tends to be
   lighter weight and therefore suitable to a wider range of foods. The
   sharp acidity/sweetness in Rieslings can serve as a very good balance
   to foods that are high in salt content. In Germany, Cabbage is
   sometimes cooked with riesling to help taper the smell.

   As with other white wines, dry Riesling is generally served at 11°C
   (52°F). Sweeter Rieslings are often served warmer.

Labelling of Riesling

   Other names for Riesling are Johannisberg Riesling (named after the
   famed Schloss Johannisberg), White Riesling and Rhine Riesling. In
   Italy it is sometimes labeled Riesling Renano.

   Many grapes that incorporate the name Riesling are not true Riesling.
   For example, Grey Riesling is actually Trousseau Gris, an unrelated
   grape. Schwarzriesling ("black Riesling") is also known as Pinot
   meunier, a grape also used in the production of Champagne. In South
   Africa, the French grape Crouchen is known as Cape Riesling in contrast
   to "real Riesling" which is labeled in South Africa as Weisser (or
   White) Riesling.

Longevity

   Riesling's naturally high acidity and range of flavours make it
   suitable for extended aging. International wine expert Michael
   Broadbent rates aged German Rieslings, some hundreds of years old,
   extremely highly.

   The townhall of Bremen, Germany, stores various German wines, including
   Riesling based wines, in barrel back to the 1653 vintage.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riesling"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
