   #copyright

Rock Pigeon

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

                   iRock Pigeon
   Rock Pigeon near the shore in Connecticut
   Rock Pigeon near the shore in Connecticut

                             Conservation status

   Least Concern (LC)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Aves
   Order:   Columbiformes
   Family:  Columbidae
   Genus:   Columba
   Species: C. livia

                                Binomial name

   Columba livia
   Gmelin, 1789

   The Rock Pigeon (Columba livia), is a member of the bird family
   Columbidae, doves and pigeons. The bird is also known by the names of
   feral pigeon or domestic pigeon. In common usage, this bird is often
   simply referred to as the "pigeon". The species was commonly known as
   Rock Dove until the British Ornithologists' Union and the American
   Ornithologists' Union changed the official English name of the bird in
   their regions to Rock Pigeon.
   Feral Rock Pigeons commonly show a very wide range of plumage variation
   Enlarge
   Feral Rock Pigeons commonly show a very wide range of plumage variation

   The Rock Pigeon has a restricted natural resident range in western and
   southern Europe, North Africa, and into southwest Asia. Its habitat is
   natural cliffs, usually on coasts. Its domesticated form, the feral
   pigeon, has been widely introduced elsewhere, and is common, especially
   in cities, over much of the world. In Britain, Ireland, and much of its
   former range, the Rock Pigeon probably only occurs pure in the most
   remote areas. A Rock Pigeon's life span is anywhere from 3–5 years in
   the wild to 15 years in captivity, though longer-lived specimens have
   been reported.

   The species was first introduced to North America in 1606 at Port
   Royal, Acadia (now Nova Scotia).

   The Rock Pigeon is 30–35 cm long with a 62–68 cm wingspan. The white
   lower back of the pure Rock Pigeon is its best identification
   character, but the two black bars on its pale grey wings are also
   distinctive . The tail is margined with white. It is strong and quick
   on the wing, dashing out from sea caves, flying low over the water, its
   white rump showing well from above.

   The head and neck of the mature bird are a darker blue-grey than the
   back and wings; the lower back is white. The green and lilac or purple
   patch on the side of the neck is larger than that of the Stock Dove,
   and the tail is more distinctly banded. Young birds show little lustre
   and are duller. Eye colour of the pigeon is generally an orange colour
   but a few pigeons may have white-grey eyes. The eyelids are orange in
   colour and are encapsulated in a grey-white eye ring.

   When circling overhead, the white under wing of the bird becomes
   conspicuous. In its flight, behaviour, and voice, which is more of a
   dovecot coo than the phrase of the Wood Pigeon, it is a typical pigeon.
   Although it is a relatively strong flier, it also glides frequently,
   holding its wings in a very pronounced V shape as it does. Though
   fields are visited for grain and green food, it is nowhere so plentiful
   as to be a pest.
   Varying eye colour in Rock Pigeons.
   Enlarge
   Varying eye colour in Rock Pigeons.

   The bowing courtship, when the metallic lustre of the neck is fully
   displayed, often takes place on ledges where Guillemots and Razorbills
   sit.

   A small prehistoric subspecies of the Rock Dove that lived during the
   last ice age in Italy has been described as Columba livia minuta.
   Rock Pigeons in their natural habitat perched on sea cliffs. Most
   pigeons in an urban environment substitute sheer building facades for
   cliff faces
   Enlarge
   Rock Pigeons in their natural habitat perched on sea cliffs. Most
   pigeons in an urban environment substitute sheer building facades for
   cliff faces

Nest and nestling

   The nest is usually on a ledge in a cave; it is a slight structure of
   grass, heather, or seaweed. Like most pigeons it lays two white eggs.
   The eggs are incubated by both parents for about 18 days.

   The nestling has pale yellow down and a flesh-coloured bill with a dark
   band. It is tended and fed on " crop milk" like other doves. The
   fledging period is 30 days.

   Egg, measured in centimetres

   Nest with two eggs

   Newly hatched nestling and one egg

   Nestlings, one day

   Nestling, five days

   Nestlings, about ten days

   Young bird, 22 days

Domestication

   Rock Pigeons have been domesticated for several thousand years, giving
   rise to the domestic pigeon. Trained domestic pigeons are able to
   return to the home loft if released at a location that they have never
   visited before and that may be up to 1000 km away. A special breed,
   called homing pigeons has been developed through selective breeding to
   carry messages and members of this variety of pigeon are still being
   used in pigeon racing.

   Pigeons are also bred for meat and by fanciers to develop many exotic
   forms. Among those forms are the carrier pigeons, a variety of pigeon
   with wattles and a unique, almost vertical, stance ( pictures). Young
   pigeon meat is often sold under the name squab.

   Pigeons' extraordinary navigation abilities have been attributed to the
   theory that they are able to sense the Earth's magnetic field with tiny
   magnetic tissues in their head. This is all the more surprising as they
   are not a migratory species, which is a fact used by some
   ornithologists to dispute the "compass pigeon" theory.

   Many domestic birds have escaped or been released over the years, and
   have given rise to the feral pigeon. These show a variety of plumages,
   although some look very like the pure Rock Pigeons. The scarcity of the
   pure wild species is due to interbreeding with feral birds.

   Many people consider pigeons to be pests but they have made
   contributions of considerable importance to humanity, especially in
   times of war. In war the homing ability of pigeons has been put to use
   by making them messengers. So-called war pigeons have carried many
   vital messages and some have been decorated for their service. Medals
   such as the Croix de guerre, awarded to Cher Ami, and the Dickin Medal
   awarded to G.I. Joe have been given to pigeons for their service.

   Domestic pigeons are also commonly used in laboratory experiments in
   biology, medicine and cognitive science. They have been trained to
   distinguish between cubist and impressionist paintings, for instance.
   In another project, pigeons were shown to be more effective than humans
   in spotting shipwreck victims at sea. Current (2004) research in
   pigeons is widespread, encompassing shape and texture perception,
   exemplar and prototype memory, category-based and associative concepts,
   and many more unlisted here (see Pigeon intelligence and discrimination
   abilities of pigeons).

Feral pigeons in cities

   Although feeding them is now forbidden, pigeons still flock to London's
   Trafalgar Square
   Enlarge
   Although feeding them is now forbidden, pigeons still flock to London's
   Trafalgar Square
   Pigeon in flight
   Enlarge
   Pigeon in flight

   Feral pigeons, also called city doves or city pigeons, find the ledges
   of high buildings a perfect substitute for sea cliffs, and have become
   abundant in cities all over the world. However, they are often
   considered a pest or even vermin, owing to concerns that they spread
   disease (perhaps unfounded, see 1), damage property, cause pollution
   with their excrement, and drive out other bird species. Alternative,
   pejorative, nicknames for pigeons are sky rats, rats with wings, or
   gutter birds. In Montreal, Quebec, Canada, they are also commonly
   referred to as flying ashtrays.

   Many city squares are famous for their large pigeon populations,
   including:
     * Trafalgar Square — London
     * Dam Square — Amsterdam
     * Martin Place — Sydney
     * Piazza San Marco — Venice
     * Misir Carshisi — Istanbul
     * Rynek Główny — Cracow
     * Richard J. Daley Centre — Chicago
     * Piccadilly Gardens — Manchester

   Many places where pigeons could land are covered with spikes
   Enlarge
   Many places where pigeons could land are covered with spikes

   In the mid 20th century, the pigeons in Trafalgar Square were
   considered a tourist attraction, with street vendors selling packets of
   seeds for visitors to feed the pigeons. The feeding of the Trafalgar
   Square pigeons was controversially forbidden in 2003 by London mayor
   Ken Livingstone. However, activist groups such as Save the Trafalgar
   Square Pigeons flouted the ban, feeding the pigeons from a small part
   of the square that is under the control of Westminster City Council,
   not the mayor. The organisation has since come to an agreement to feed
   the pigeons only once a day, at 7.30am.

   Although pest exterminators using poison, a hawk or nets have been
   employed at ground level to control urban pigeon populations, the
   effect is limited and very short term. Pigeons breed when the food
   supply is good—for wild rock doves this might be on a seasonal basis so
   they usually breed once a year. In the urban environment, because of
   their year-round food supply, feral pigeons will breed continuously,
   laying eggs up to six times a year.

   Feral pigeons can be seen eating grass seeds and berries in urban parks
   and gardens in the spring, but there are plentiful sources throughout
   the year from scavenging (e.g. dropped fast-food cartons). Further food
   is also usually available from the disposing of stale bread in parks by
   restaurants and supermarkets, from tourists buying and distributing
   birdseed, etc. Pigeons tend to congregate in large, often thick flocks
   when going for discarded food, and many have been observed flying
   skillfully around trees, buildings, telephone poles and cables, and
   even moving traffic just to reach it.
   A Rock Pigeon perched in Central Park
   Enlarge
   A Rock Pigeon perched in Central Park

   Long term reduction of feral pigeon populations can only be achieved by
   restricting food supply, which in turn will involve legislation and
   litter (garbage) control. (See Dove Overpopulation.)

   As a result of the continuous food supply, pigeon courtship rituals can
   be observed in urban parks at any time of the year. Males on the ground
   initially puff up feathers at the nape of the neck to increase their
   apparent size and thereby impress or attract attention, then they
   single out a female in the vicinity and approach at a rapid walk, often
   bowing as they approach. Females invariably initially walk away or fly
   short distances, the males follow them at each stage. Persistence by
   the male will usually eventually cause the female to tolerate his
   proximity, at which point he will continue the bowing motion and very
   often turn full- or half-pirouettes in front of the female. Subsequent
   mating when observed is very brief with the male flapping his wings to
   maintain balance on the female. Sometimes the male and female beaks are
   locked together.

   Nests are rudimentary as for the wild doves and pigeons. Favourite
   nesting areas are in damaged property. Mass nesting is common with
   dozens of birds sharing a building. Loose tiles and broken windows give
   pigeons access — they are remarkably good at spotting when new access
   points become available for example after strong winds cause property
   damage. Nests and droppings will quickly make a mess of any nesting
   area. Pigeons are particularly fond of roof spaces containing water
   tanks, though they frequently seem to fall into the tanks and drown.
   Any water tank or cistern in a roof space needs to have a secure lid
   for this reason. The popularity of a nesting area seems little affected
   if pigeons die or are killed there — corpses are seen among live birds,
   who seem unconcerned.

   On undamaged property the gutters, chimney pots and external ledges
   will be used as nesting sites. Many building owners attempt to limit
   roosting by using bird control spikes and netting to cover ledges and
   resting places on the facades of buildings. These probably have little
   effect on the size of pigeon populations, but can help to reduce the
   accumulation of droppings on and around an individual building.

   Only the larger and more wary Wood Pigeon (which often shares the same
   territory and food supply) will build a tree nest; for some reason it
   prefers trees close to roads.

   The coo-ing of the feral pigeon is almost continuous when birds are on
   a nest; it is rarely heard at other times except courtship. Males are
   at least as likely to be on the nest as females, though a pair of birds
   will attend the nest.

   Peregrine Falcons which are also originally cliff dwellers have also
   adapted to the big cities, living on the window ledges of skyscrapers
   and often feeding exclusively on Rock Pigeons.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rock_Pigeon"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
