   #copyright

Rose-ringed Parakeet

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

              iRose-ringed Parakeet

                             Conservation status

   Least Concern (LC)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Aves
   Order:   Psittaciformes
   Family:  Psittacidae
   Genus:   Psittacula
   Species: P. krameri

                                Binomial name

   Psittacula krameri
   ( Scopoli, 1769)

   The Rose-ringed Parakeet (Psittacula krameri), also known as the
   Ring-necked Parakeet, is a gregarious tropical parakeet species that is
   popular as a pet. Its scientific name commemorates the Austrian
   naturalist Wilhelm Heinrich Kramer.

   This non-migrating species is one of few parrot species that have
   successfully adapted to living in 'disturbed habitats', and in that way
   withstood the onslaught of urbanisation and deforestation. In the wild,
   this is a noisy species with an unmistakable squawking call.
   Rose-ringed Parakeets are sexually dimorphic, and adult males sport
   black markings under their beaks and a dark band of colors around their
   necks.

Phylogeny and distribution

   Four subspecies are recognized, though they do not differ much:
     * African subspecies:

          + African Rose-ringed Parakeet (P. krameri krameri): West Africa
            in Guinea, Senegal and southern Mauretania, east to Western
            Uganda and Southern Sudan.
          + Abyssinian Rose-ringed Parakeet (P. krameri parvirostris):
            Northwest Somalia, west across northern Ethiopia to Sennar
            district, Sudan.

     * Asian subspecies:

          + Indian Rose-ringed Parakeet (P. krameri manillensis):
            Originated from the southern Indian subcontinent; introduced
            populations worldwide.
          + Neumann's Rose-ringed Parakeet (P. krameri borealis): east
            Pakistan, northern India and Nepal to central Burma;
            introduced populations worldwide in localities.

   A phylogenetic analysis using DNA (see Psittacula) showed that the
   Mauritius Parakeet (Psittacula echo) is closely related to this
   species, and probably needs to be placed between the African and Asian
   subspecies. Consequently, this species is paraphyletic.

Diet

   In the wild, Rose-ringed Parakeets usually feed on buds, fruits,
   vegetables, nuts, berries and seeds.

Size

   The Rose-ringed Parakeet is on average 40 cm (16 inches) long including
   the tail feathers. Its average single wing length is about 15–17.5 cm
   (6-7 inches). The tail accounts for a large portion of the length. The
   Indian Rose-ringed Parakeet, African Rose-ringed Parakeet, Abyssinian
   Rose-ringed Parakeet and Neumann's Rose-ringed Parakeet measure 42 cm,
   40 cm, 40 cm and 43 cm long, respectively.

Feral Rose-ringed Parakeets

   The Rose-ringed Parakeet has established feral populations in India and
   a number of European cities. There are also apparently stable
   populations in the USA in Florida and California. There also a small
   but sizeable population of Rose-ringed Parakeets in Tehran, Iran mostly
   concentrated in the northern parts of city.

   The Indian subspecies established itself in Britain during the mid to
   late 20th Century from introduced and escaped birds. There are two main
   population centres: the largest is based around south London, Surrey
   and Berkshire, and by 2005 consisted of many thousands of birds. A
   smaller population occurs around Margate and Ramsgate, Kent. Elsewhere
   in Britain, smaller feral populations have established from time to
   time (e.g., at Studland, Dorset).

   However, in some parts of South Asia - from where the Rose-ringed
   Parakeets originated, populations of these birds are decreasing due to
   trapping for the pet trade. Despite some people's attempts to revive
   their population by freeing these birds from local markets, the
   Rose-ringed Parakeet's population has dropped drastically in many areas
   of the Indian subcontinent.

Rose-ringed Parakeets as pets

   A blue Rose ring
   Enlarge
   A blue Rose ring

   These birds where first bred by the people of India at least 3,000
   years ago, and colour mutations of Rose-ringed parakeets were also
   bred. The royals prized them as pets and for their ability to speak. It
   was a popular status symbol in Indian culture to have a Rose-ringed
   parakeet. They were the first parrots brought to Europe and the Greeks
   were the first Europeans to breed them. Socrates is reported to have
   praised its beauty and ability to speak. The Romans then bred them for
   pets, and their beauty in their aviaries. In the 1920's aviculturists
   the popularity of the breed began to increase greatly. Now widely
   available in the pet trade, Rose-ringed Parakeets continue to gain
   popularity. Hand-fed Rose-ringed Parakeets are regarded as excellent
   pets if provided with daily attention, though even parent-raised
   Rose-ringed Parakeets make good pets when provided with regular
   handling and attention. They are generally family birds and are less
   likely to bond to only one person. With adequate attention, handling,
   and love, a Rose-ringed Parakeet can quickly become a beloved
   companion.

   Rose-ringed Parakeets are known to be hardy birds requiring less
   interaction than most other parakeets of their size. This makes them
   ideal for a bird owner who cannot spend as much time with his/her bird
   as other species need. Rose-ringed Parakeets can cope with as little as
   half an hour of interaction a day. However, they can become untame if
   not provided with daily interaction, especially during their early
   months.

   They require a relatively tall cage because of their long tails. A
   Rose-ringed Parakeet who will be spending most of his/her day inside
   the cage should be kept in a cage about 60 cm (24") wide x 45 cm (18")
   deep x 90 cm (36") high, though the larger the better, and the bar
   spacing should be between 1.25 cm (1/2 inch) and 1.875 cm (3/4 inch).
   Rose-ringed Parakeets are avid chewers and climbers and should
   therefore be provided with chewing toys in their cages. The cages
   should be in a place out of direct sunlight and free of drafts. A pet
   or captive Rose-ringed Parakeet should be kept in a bird-safe
   environment.

   Captive Rose-ringed Parakeets should be fed a nutritionally balanced
   diet of pellets and seeds, and the appreciated fruit, vegetable or nut
   treat should also be offered often. They should always have access to
   fresh water in their cages.

   The Rose-ringed Parakeet is considered one of the best talking
   parakeets and can learn a vocabulary of up to 250 words. Now these
   birds come in many mutations, including the common green, blue, grey
   and lutino among many other colors.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rose-ringed_Parakeet"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
