   #copyright

Rosemary

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Plants

                    iRosemary
   Rosemary in flower
   Rosemary in flower

                             Conservation status

   Secure
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Plantae
   Division: Magnoliophyta
   Class:    Magnoliopsida
   Order:    Lamiales
   Family:   Lamiaceae
   Genus:    Rosmarinus
   Species:  R. officinalis

                                Binomial name

   Rosmarinus officinalis
   L.

   Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis) is a woody, perennial herb with
   fragrant evergreen needle-like leaves. It is native to the
   Mediterranean region. It is a member of the mint family Lamiaceae,
   which also includes many other herbs. Forms range from upright to
   trailing; the upright forms can reach 1.5 m tall, rarely 2 m. The
   leaves are evergreen, 2-4 cm long and 2-5 mm broad, green above, and
   white below with dense short woolly hairs. The flowers are variable in
   colour, being white, pink, purple, or blue.

   The name rosemary has nothing to do with the rose or the name Mary, but
   derives from the Latin name rosmarinus, which is presumed to mean "dew
   of the sea", though some think this too may be derived from an earlier
   name.

   Rosemary is often commonly associated with memory and/or remembrance of
   the past.

Cultivation and uses

   The fresh and dried leaves are used frequently in traditional
   Mediterranean cuisine as a herb; a tisane can also be made from them.
   They are extensively used in cooking, and when burned gives off a
   distinct mustard smell.

   Since it is attractive and tolerates some degree of drought, it is also
   used in landscaping, especially in areas having a Mediterranean
   climate. It can in fact die in over-watered soil, but is otherwise
   quite easy to grow for beginner gardeners. It is very pest-resistant.

   Rosemary is easily pruned into shapes and has been used for topiary.
   When grown in pots, it is best kept trimmed to stop it getting too
   straggly and unsightly, though when grown in a garden, rosemary can
   grow quite large and still be attractive. It can be propagated from an
   existing plant by clipping a shoot 10-15 cm long, stripping a few
   leaves from the bottom, and planting it directly into soil.

   Numerous cultivars have been selected for garden use. The following are
   frequently sold:
     * 'Albus': white flowers
     * 'Arp': leaves light green, lemon-scented
     * 'Aureus': leaves speckled yellow
     * 'Benenden Blue': leaves narrow, dark green
     * 'Blue Boy': dwarf, small leaves
     * 'Golden Rain': leaves green, with yellow streaks
     * 'Irene': lax, trailing
     * 'Lockwood de Forest': procumbent selection from 'Tuscan Blue'
     * 'Ken Taylor': shrubby
     * 'Majorica Pink': pink flowers
     * 'Miss Jessop's Upright': tall, erect
     * 'Pinkie': pink flowers
     * 'Prostratus'
     * 'Pyramidalis' (a.k.a 'Erectus'): pale blue flowers
     * 'Roseus': pink flowers
     * 'Severn Sea': spreading, with arching branches; flowers deep violet
     * 'Tuscan Blue': upright

   Rosemary is a useful food preservative, according to research published
   in 1987 by Rutgers University, New Jersey. Researchers at Rutgers
   patented a chemical derived from rosemary that compares favourably with
   BHA and BHT in its preservative properties.

   Rosemary can be added as an unusual extra flavouring in lemonade.

Medicinal uses

   Rosemary has been found to be a stimulant and mild analgesic, and has
   been used to treat headaches, poor circulation, and many ailments for
   which stimulants are prescribed.

   Rosemary essential oil is a powerful convulsant; if applied to the
   skin, it may cause seizures in otherwise healthy adults or children .

   It can be used as a disinfectant, as a mouth wash and to treat fever or
   rheumatism.

   Externally it can be used in hair lotions; a few drops of Rosemary oil
   massaged into the scalp, then rinsed with an infusion of nettles can
   revitalise the hair. Used in this manner it supposed to prevent
   premature baldness. Rosemary is also reported to stop dandruff.

   Hungary water was first invented for a Queen of Hungary to 'renovate
   vitality of paralysed limbs'. It was used externally and is prepared by
   mixing 180g of fresh rosemary tops in full flower into a litre of
   spirits of wine. Leave to stand for four days then distill. It is also
   supposed to work as a remedy against gout if rubbed vigoursly on hands
   and feet.

   For a tonic against headaches put some sprigs into a teapot, add hot
   water, strain, and serve.

   Rosemary has a very old reputation for improving memory, and has been
   used as a symbol for remembrance (as in worn during weddings, war
   commemorations and funerals) in Europe, probably as a result of this
   reputation. Students in ancient Greece are reported to have worn sprigs
   of rosemary in their hair while studying for exams to improve their
   memory, and mourners would throw it into graves as a symbol of
   remembrance for the dead. In Shakespeare's Hamlet, Ophelia says,
   "There's rosemary, that's for remembrance".

   Rosemary and its constituents carnosol and ursolic acid have been shown
   to inhibit the growth of skin tumors and to provide a natural
   anti-oxidant protection against skin cancer and photodamage.

   Don Quixote (Chapter XVII, 1st volume) mixes it in its recipe of the
   miraculous balm of Fierabras with revolting results.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosemary"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
