   #copyright

Rotterdam

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: European Geography

   Rotterdam

   Location

   Coat of arms

   The coat of arms reads "Sterker door Strijd", i.e. "Stronger through
   Struggle".

   Flag

   Country
          The Netherlands

   Province
          South Holland

   Population
          588,718 (2006)

   Coordinates
          51° 55' N.; 4° 30' E.

   Website
          www.rotterdam.nl

   Nickname
          - Maasstad ("Meuse Town/City", or "Town/City of the Meuse")
          - Rotjeknor (used in affection)
          - Manhattan aan de Maas ("Manhattan upon Meuse", referring not
          to the city as a whole but rather to the city centre, after its
          – by Dutch standards – large amount of skyscrapers)
          - 010 (after its area code; used predominantly in
          football-related rivalry by "020", i.e. Amsterdam)

   Mayor
          I.W. (Ivo) Opstelten

   Rotterdam ( pronunciation ( help· info)) is, in terms of population,
   the second largest municipality in the Netherlands (after Amsterdam,
   the country's capital) and the largest city in the province of
   Zuid-Holland ( South Holland), the country's most populous province.
   The city has the largest port in Europe and was until 2004 the world's
   busiest port. It is situated on the banks of the river Nieuwe Maas
   ("New Meuse"), one of the streams in the delta formed by the Rhine and
   Meuse rivers. The name "Rotterdam" derives from the city's origin at a
   dam in a small river, the Rotte.

Municipality

   On 1 January 2006 (source: Statistics Netherlands), the municipality
   covered an area of 304.22 km² (206.44 km² land) with a population of
   588,500. The population of the greater Rotterdam metropolitan area
   Rijnmond ("Mouth of the Rhine") was 1,145,673. In 1965, the municipal
   population reached its peak at 731,000, but by 1984, it had decreased
   to 555,000 as a result of suburbanization.

   Rotterdam consists of 11 submunicipalities: Charlois (including
   Heijplaat), Delfshaven, Feijenoord, Hillegersberg-Schiebroek, Hoek van
   Holland, Hoogvliet, IJsselmonde, Kralingen-Crooswijk, Noord, Overschie,
   and Prins Alexander (with around 85,000 inhabitants the most populous
   submunicipality). Two other areas, Centrum (“Centre”) and Pernis, do
   not have official submunicipality status.

   Rotterdam lies in the Zuidvleugel (“South Wing”) of the Randstad (“Ring
   City”) conurbation, with 7.5 million inhabitants the sixth largest
   metropolitan area in Europe (after Moscow, London, the Ruhr Area,
   Istanbul, and Paris). The Zuidvleugel includes Leiden, The Hague,
   Zoetermeer, Delft, Vlaardingen, Schiedam, Capelle aan den IJssel,
   Spijkenisse and Dordrecht, and has a population of around 3.5 million.

Harbour

   The Waalhaven by night
   Enlarge
   The Waalhaven by night
   Europe Container Terminals
   Enlarge
   Europe Container Terminals

   Rotterdam has the largest port in Europe. Since 2004, Asian ports like
   Singapore and Shanghai have taken over its world leading position. In
   2004, Rotterdam was the seventh largest port in the world in terms of
   containers ( TEU) handled.

   Most important for the port of Rotterdam are the petrochemical industry
   and general cargo transhipment handling. The harbour functions as an
   important transit point for bulk and other goods between the European
   continent and other parts of the world. From Rotterdam goods are
   transported by ship, river barge, train or road. Since 2000, the
   Betuweroute, a fast cargo railway from Rotterdam to Germany, has been
   under construction. Large oil refineries are located west of the city.
   The rivers Meuse and Rhine also provide excellent access to the
   hinterland.

   In 1872, the Nieuwe Waterweg ("New Waterway") opened, a ship canal
   constructed to keep the city and port of Rotterdam accessible to
   seafaring vessels as the natural Meuse-Rhine branches silted up. In the
   first half of the twentieth century, the port's centre of gravity
   shifted westward towards the North Sea.

   Covering 105 square kilometers, the port of Rotterdam stretches over a
   distance of 40 kilometers. It consists of the city center's historic
   harbour area, including Delfshaven; the Maashaven/Rijnhaven/ Feijenoord
   complex; the harbors around Nieuw-Mathenesse; Waalhaven;
   Vondelingenplaat; Eemhaven; Botlek; Europoort, situated along the
   Calandkanaal, Nieuwe Waterweg and Scheur (the latter two being
   continuations of the Nieuwe Maas); and the reclaimed Maasvlakte area,
   which projects into the North Sea. The construction of a second
   Maasvlakte received initial political approval in 2004, but was stopped
   by the Raad van State (the Dutch Council of State, which advises the
   government and parliament on legislation and governance) in 2005,
   because the plans did not take enough account of environmental issues.
   On October 10, 2006, however, approval was acquired to start
   construction in 2008, aiming for the first ship to anchor in 2013.

History and recent developments

   Rotterdam, by Johan Barthold Jongkind (1856)
   Enlarge
   Rotterdam, by Johan Barthold Jongkind (1856)

   Rotterdam was granted city rights on 7 June 1340 by Willem IV of
   Holland.

   The port of Rotterdam slowly but steadily grew into a port of
   importance, becoming the seat of one of the six chambers of the VOC, or
   the Netherlands East India Company.

   The greatest spurt of growth, both in port activity and population,
   followed after the already mentioned completion of the Nieuwe Waterweg
   in 1872. The city and harbour started to expand on the South bank of
   the river. Delivering evidence of its rapid growth and success is the
   skyscraper in the French Chateau style, the White House, or Witte Huis,
   built in the American spirit of office buildings in 1898; its height is
   45 m, it was at the time of completion the tallest office building in
   Europe.

   On May 14, 1940, Rotterdam was bombed by the German Luftwaffe, on the
   last of five days of war in the Netherlands (save Zeeland). The heart
   of the city was almost completely destroyed, which Ossip Zadkine later
   expressed strikingly with his statue Stad zonder hart (City without a
   heart). The statue is located near the Leuvehaven, not far from the
   Erasmusbrug in the north of the city. From the 1950s through the 1970s,
   the city was rebuilt. It remained quite windy and open until the city
   councils from the 1980s on began developing an active architectural
   policy. Daring and new styles of apartments, office buildings and
   recreation facilities resulted in a more ' livable' city centre with a
   new skyline. In the 1990s, a new business centre on the south bank of
   the river, the Kop van Zuid has been built. The City Hall survived the
   bombing campaign.

Demographics

   With 55% of the inhabitants earning a low income, Rotterdam has its
   fair share of typical urban problems, such as dilapidated inner city
   areas.

Ethnic make-up of the city

   Figures are from 2004:
     * Dutch: 318,672
     * Surinamese: 52,377
     * Turkish: 43,550
     * Moroccan: 34,281
     * Antillean / Aruban: 20,390
     * North African (not Moroccan): 18,127
     * Cape Verdean: 14,919
     * Other: 97,543

   In the Netherlands, Rotterdam has the highest percentage of non-western
   foreigners. Nearly half the population are not native to the
   Netherlands or have at least one parent born outside the country. The
   city is home to one of the largest Cape Verdean communities in the
   world, as well as the largest Dutch Antillean community.

Historical population

     * 1796: 53,200 inhabitants
     * 1830: 72,300
     * 1849: 90,100
     * 1879: 148,100
     * 1899: 318,500
     * 1925: 547,900
     * 1965: 731,000
     * 1984: 555,000
     * 2005: 596,407
     * 2006: 588,576

Geography

   Satellite image of Rotterdam
   Enlarge
   Satellite image of Rotterdam

   Rotterdam is divided into a northern and a southern part by the river
   Nieuwe Maas, connected by (from west to east): the Beneluxtunnel; the
   Maastunnel; the Erasmusbrug (Erasmus Bridge); a subway tunnel; a train
   tunnel; the Willemsbrug (Willems Bridge); the Koninginnebrug ("Queen's
   Bridge"); and the Van Brienenoordbrug (Van Brienenoord Bridge). The
   former railway lift bridge "De Hef" ("the Lift") is preserved as a
   monument in lifted position between the Noordereiland ("Northern
   Island") and the south of Rotterdam.

   The city center is located on the northern bank of the Nieuwe Maas,
   although recent urban development has extended the centre to parts of
   southern Rotterdam known as De Kop van Zuid ("the Head of South", i.e.
   the northern part of southern Rotterdam). From its inland core,
   Rotterdam reaches the North Sea by a swath of predominantly harbour
   area.

   Built mostly behind dykes, large parts of the Rotterdam territory are
   below sea level. For instance, the Prins Alexander Polder in the
   northeast of Rotterdam well extends 6 meters below sea level, or rather
   below Normaal Amsterdams Peil (NAP) or Amsterdam Ordnance Datum. The
   lowest point in the Netherlands (6.76 meters below NAP) is situated
   just to the east of Rotterdam, in the municipality of Nieuwerkerk aan
   den IJssel.

   The Rotte river no longer joins the Nieuwe Maas directly. Since the
   early 1980s, when the construction of Rotterdam’s second subway line
   interfered with the Rotte’s course, its waters have been pumped through
   a pipe into the Nieuwe Maas via the Boerengat.

Education

   Rotterdam has one major university, the Erasmus University Rotterdam,
   named after one of the city's famous former inhabitants, Desiderius
   Erasmus. Many of the departments are world renowned. The 'Woudestein'
   campus houses (among others) the Rotterdam School of Management, which
   is a top ranked MBA school. In Financial Times' 2005 rankings it placed
   29th globally and 7th in Europe. The School of Economics is ranked 4th
   globally. The 'Hoboken' campus of EUR houses the Sophia (children) and
   Dijkzigt (general) hospitals, as well as the Medical Department of the
   University. These are known collectively as Erasmus MC (Erasmus Medisch
   Centrum in Dutch / Erasmus Medical Center in English). Erasmus Medical
   Center holds the 3rd worldwide ranking in medical research, behind the
   American institutions Harvard and Johns Hopkins. As a combined medical
   treatment and research centre it is particularly noted for its patient
   cohort studies in which large numbers of patients are followed for long
   periods of time.

   There are also three Hogescholen in Rotterdam. These schools award
   their students a Bachelor's degree and postgraduate or Master's degree.
   The three Hogescholen are Hogeschool Rotterdam, Hogeschool INHOLLAND
   and Hogeschool voor Muziek en Dans.

   Students in higher education comprise around 20% of Rotterdam's
   population.

Museums

   Rotterdam has many museums. Well known museums are the Boijmans-van
   Beuningen Museum, the [NAI] (Netherlands Architecture Institute), the
   Historisch Museum (Historical museum), the Volkenkundig Museum (foreign
   peoples and cultures), the [KunstHal] (design by Rem Koolhaas), the
   Maritiem Museum and the Brandweermuseum (Fire brigade museum). Other
   museums include the tax museum, the nature historical museum,
   historical museum the Dubbelde Palmboom and the Schielandhuis. At the
   historical shipyard and museum Scheepswerf 'De Delft' the
   reconstruction of Ship of the Line 'De Delft' can be visited.

Culture

   Alongside Porto, Rotterdam was European Capital of Culture in 2001. The
   city has its own orchestra, the Rotterdam Philharmonic Orchestra with
   its world famous musical director Valery Gergiev, a large congress and
   concert building called De Doelen, plus many theatres (including the
   new Luxor theatre) and movie theatres. The Ahoy complex in the south of
   the city is used for pop concerts, exhibitions, tennis tournaments and
   other activities. A major zoo called " Diergaarde Blijdorp" is situated
   at the northwest side of Rotterdam, complete with a walkthrough sea
   aquarium called " Oceanium".

   The city is home to the Rotterdam Academy of Fine Arts.

   Rotterdam is currently going through somewhat of a renaissance, with
   some urban renewal projects featuring ambitious architecture, an
   increasingly sparkling nightlife, and a host of summer festivals
   celebrating the city's multicultural population and identity, such as
   the Caribbean-inspired 'Summer Carnival', the Dance Parade, Rotterdam
   666, the Metropolis pop festival and the World Harbour days. There are
   also the International Film Festival in January, the Poetry
   International Festival in June, the North Sea Jazz Festival in July,
   the Valery Gergiev Festival in September, September in Rotterdam and
   the World of the Witte de With.

   The self-image of the city is that of a no-nonsense workers' city. In
   that sense, there is a healthy competition with Amsterdam, which is
   often viewed as the cultural capital of the Netherlands. There is a
   popular saying: "Amsterdam to party, Den Hague to live, Rotterdam to
   work".

   Rotterdam has had a rich hiphop scene since the early 1980s. It is also
   the home of Gabber, a type of music popular in the mid-1990s, with hard
   beats and samples. Bands like Neophyte and Rotterdam Terror Corps (RTC)
   started in Rotterdam.

Architecture and skyline

   Modern residential architecture (cube houses) in downtown Rotterdam
   Enlarge
   Modern residential architecture (cube houses) in downtown Rotterdam

   In 1898 the 45 meter high rise office building, the White House was
   completed, at that time the tallest office building in Europe.

   In the first decades of the 20th century some influential architecture
   in the modern style was built in Rotterdam. Notable are the Van Nelle
   fabriek (1929) a monument of modern factory design by Brinkman en Van
   der Vlugt, and Feyenoord's football stadium de Kuip (1936) also by
   Brinkman en Van der Vlugt. The architect J. J. P. Oud was a famous
   Rotterdammer in those days. During the early stages of World War II the
   center of Rotterdam was bombed by the Germans, destroying much of the
   older buildings in the center of the city. After initial crisis
   re-construction the centre of Rotterdam has become the site of
   ambitious new architecture.

   Rotterdam is also famous for its Kubuswoningen or cube houses built by
   architect Piet Blom in 1984. In addition to that there are many
   international well known architects based in Rotterdam like O.M.A ( Rem
   Koolhaas), MVRDV and Neutelings & Riedijk to name a few. Several young
   and upcoming offices like Star (strategies + architecture) and board
   are also based in Rotterdam.
   The Euromast
   Enlarge
   The Euromast

   Rotterdam houses several of the tallest structures in the Netherlands.
     * The Erasmus Bridge (1996) is a 2,600-foot cable stayed bridge
       linking the north and south of Rotterdam. It is held up by a
       138-meter tall pylon with a characteristic bend, earning the bridge
       its nickname "De Zwaan" ("the Swan").
     * Rotterdam has the tallest residential building in the Netherlands,
       called Montevideo: 152 meter
     * Rotterdam is also home to the tallest office building Delftse
       Poort: 151 meter, which houses Nationale Nederlanden insurance
       company, part of ING Group. ,
     * The city also houses the 186-meter tall Euromast ("Euro Mast"),
       which has long been a major tourist attraction. It was built in
       1960, initially reaching a height of 101 meters; in 1970, the
       Euromast was extended by 85 meters to its current height.

   Rotterdam has a reputation in being a platform for the architectural
   discourse and education; the Berlage Institute a postgraduate
   laboratory of architecture, and the NAi (Netherlands Architecture
   Institute), which is open to the public and has various and very good
   exhibitions on architecture and urban planning issues.

   Rotterdam is standing in the best European SkylineTop together with
   Frankfurt, Warsaw and Paris. More highrise projects are started in this
   city. ( overview tower devellopment in Rotterdam)

Sports

   Rotterdam is the home of three Eredivisie ("Honorary Division", or
   Dutch Premier League) football clubs: Feyenoord, Sparta and Excelsior.
   Rotterdam also has one Hoofdklasse (main class) club, PVV DOTO.

   Feyenoord, founded in 1908 and the dominant of the three, has won nine
   national titles since the introduction of professional football in the
   Netherlands, the last in 1999. It won the European Cup as the first
   Dutch club in 1970, and won the World Cup for club teams in the same
   year. In 1974, they were the first Dutch club to win the UEFA Cup and
   in 2002, Feyenoord won the UEFA Cup again. Seating 51,480, its stadium,
   called "Stadion Feijenoord" but popularly known as De Kuip ("the Tub"),
   is the largest in the country. De Kuip, located in the southeast of the
   city, has hosted many international football games, including the final
   of Euro 2000.

   Sparta, founded in 1888 and situated in the northwest of Rotterdam, won
   the national title in 1959; Excelsior (founded 1902), in the northeast,
   has never won any.

   Rotterdam has its own annual international marathon, which offers one
   of the fastest courses in the world. From 1985 until 1998, the world
   record was set in Rotterdam, first by Carlos Lopes and later in 1988 by
   Belayneh Dinsamo. The marathon starts and ends on the Coolsingel in the
   heart of Rotterdam.

   In field hockey, Rotterdam has the largest hockey club in the
   Netherlands, HC Rotterdam, with its own stadium in the north of the
   city and nearly 2,400 members. The first men's and women's teams both
   play on the highest level in the Dutch Hoofdklasse.

   Since 1986, the city has selected its best sportsman, woman and team at
   the Rotterdam Sports Awards Election, held in December.

Shopping

   Well-known streets in Rotterdam are the shopping centre the Lijnbaan
   (the first set of pedestrian streets of the country, opened in 1953),
   the Hoogstraat, the Coolsingel with the city hall, and the Weena, which
   runs from the Central Station to the Hofplein (square). A modern
   shopping venue is the Beurstraverse ("Stock Exchange Traverse"), better
   known by the informal name " Koopgoot" ("Buying/Shopping Gutter", after
   its low-lying position, crossing Rotterdam's main street Coolsingel
   below street level).

   The main shopping venue in the south of Rotterdam is Zuidplein, which
   lies close to Ahoy' Rotterdam, an accommodation center for shows,
   exhibitions, sporting events, concerts and congresses. Another
   prominent shopping center, called Alexandrium (sometimes still called
   by its former name "Oosterhof"), lies in the east of Rotterdam. It
   includes a large kitchen and furniture centre.

Commerce and industry

   Rotterdam is home to the Dutch half of Unilever, and Mittal Steel
   Company N.V., the world's largest steel company.

   Rotterdam has the largest port of Europe. The Port of Rotterdam has a
   strong relationship with the Port of Shanghai, the only port in the
   world exceeding the port of Rotterdam in terms of containers and oil
   shipped.

   The Erasmus University has a strong focus on research and education in
   management and economics. The University is located on the east side of
   the city and is surrounded by numerous multinational firms. On
   Brainpark I, Brainpark II, Brainpark III and 'Het Rivium' you can find
   offices from Deloitte, PricewaterhouseCoopers, AIG, KPMG, CMG, Procter
   & Gamble, Coca Cola Company, Cap Gemini, Ernst and Young etc. In the
   centre of the city you find the above mentioned Unilever offices, but
   also Robeco, Fortis (including Mees Pierson and Stad Rotterdam
   Verzekeringen) ABN AMRO, ING (Nationale Nederlanden) and the Rotterdam
   WTC.

Yearly events

     * January: International Film Festival Rotterdam
     * April-June
          + Marathon Rotterdam
          + Dunya Festival
     * July: Metropolis Music Festival
     * August: Pleinbioscoop
     * June till September: the Rotterdam Summerfestivals, including
          + North Sea Jazz Festival (second weekend of July)
          + Summer Carnival
          + Bavaria City Racing (Formule 1 / race car demonstrations)
          + FFWD Heineken Dance Parade ( technoparade),
     * September:
          + World Port Days (2006: 1, 2 and 3 September) (in Dutch)
          + Gergiev Festival Rotterdam

Public transport

   Rotterdam is well connected in international, national, regional and
   local public transport systems.

Airport

   Although much smaller than the international hub Schiphol airport,
   Rotterdam Airport (formerly known as "Zestienhoven") is the second
   largest airport in the country. Located north of the city, it has shown
   a very strong growth over the past five years, mostly caused by the
   growth of the low-cost carrier market. Environmental regulations make
   further growth uncertain.

Train

   Building of Rotterdam Central Station from 1953. The Central Station is
   currently under reconstruction
   Enlarge
   Building of Rotterdam Central Station from 1953. The Central Station is
   currently under reconstruction

   Rotterdam is well connected to the Netherlands railroad system, and has
   several international connections. The train system hosts:
     * Seven railway stations within the city boundaries (Rotterdam
       Centraal, Rotterdam Blaak, Rotterdam Alexander, Rotterdam Noord,
       Rotterdam Zuid, Rotterdam Lombardijen, Rotterdam Stadion (next to
       De Kuip, only open for events). The Hofplein Line stations were
       converted to metro stations in 2006.

     * Direct international services to Belgium and France via high speed
       train system: Thalys
     * Frequent international trains to Antwerp and Brussels, Belgium
     * Frequent services within the Netherlands:
          + Intercity line to The Hague, Leiden, Schiphol airport and
            Amsterdam (north)
          + Intercity line to Utrecht and on to Enschede (the east) or
            Leeuwarden (north-east)
          + Intercity line to Dordrecht, Roosendaal and on to Vlissingen
            (south west)
          + Intercity line to Dordrecht, Breda, Tilburg, Eindhoven and
            Venlo (south east)
          + Hourly services throughout the night connecting to Delft, The
            Hague, Leiden, Schiphol airport, Amsterdam, and, with a
            detour, Utrecht.
          + Several semi-fast services and local trains originate or call
            at Rotterdam Centraal; semi-fast services Amsterdam-Breda and
            Rotterdam Centraal-Utrecht Centraal-Arnhem/Nijmegen.
     * Detailed information available from the site of the Nederlandse
       Spoorwegen (Netherlands Railways)

   See also Hofplein Line.

Lightrail

   To bridge the gap between national train services and local public
   transportation the Netherlands Randstad is currently developing a
   regional lightrail system called Randstad Rail. First trains are
   scheduled for September 2006.

Metro

   Since 1968, Rotterdam has had the first Dutch metro system, consisting
   of two main lines.
   Enlarge
     * Erasmus Line: Rotterdam Central station - Albrandswaard (Rhoon,
       Poortugaal) - Hoogvliet - Spijkenisse
     * Caland Line: two lines from the northeast of Rotterdam (Ommoord and
       since September 2005 to the new constructed neighbourhood
       Nesselande (before it ended at Zevenkamp which is one stop before
       Nesselande), both in Prins Alexander) and one from Capelle aan den
       IJssel join; the combined line terminated in the west of Rotterdam,
       but on November 4, 2002, an extension was opened: the line now
       connects to the main railway network at Schiedam railway station,
       has a stop in Pernis and joins the Erasmus Line in Hoogvliet;
       trains on the Caland Line, like those on the Erasmus Line,
       terminate in Spijkenisse.

          The eastern parts of the Caland Line have some level crossings
          (with priority), and could therefore be called light rail
          instead of metro; however, they are integrated in the system;
          these parts have overhead wires, while the rest has a third
          rail, the vehicles can handle both.

   See also: List of Rotterdam metro stations, List of rapid transit
   systems.

Tram

   Rotterdam offers 9 tramlines with a total length of 93.4 kilometers.

Bus

   Rotterdam offers 38 buslines with a total length of 432.7 kilometers.

Fast Ferry

     * Rotterdam Willemskade - Krimpen aan den IJssel Stormpolder -
       Ridderkerk De Schans - Alblasserdam Kade - Papendrecht Oosteind -
       Dordrecht Merwekade.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rotterdam"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
