   #copyright

Royal Air Force

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Military History and War

   CAPTION: Royal Air Force


             Components
   Royal Air Force
   Royal Auxiliary Air Force
   RAF Regiment
   RAF Police
               History
   History of the Royal Air Force
   Timeline of the Royal Air Force
              Aircraft
   List of RAF aircraft
              Structure
   Strike Command
   No. 1 Group
   No. 2 Group
   JFACHQ
   Personnel and Training Command
   No. 22 Group
   List of stations
              Personnel
   Officer ranks
   Other ranks

   The Royal Air Force (RAF) is the air force branch of the British Armed
   Forces. The RAF was formed on April 1, 1918 and has taken a significant
   role in British military history since then, playing a large part in
   World War II, and more recently in conflicts such as the recent war in
   Iraq. With some 998 aircraft and in 2006, 46,880 personnel, the RAF is
   the fifth largest air force in the world. It is also one of the most
   technologically advanced, a position that is being enhanced
   significantly with the purchase of 232 Eurofighter Typhoons. The only
   founding member of the RAF still living today is Henry Allingham at age
   110.

Mission

   The RAF's mission is to "Produce a battle-winning agile air force: fit
   for the challenges of today; ready for the tasks of tomorrow; capable
   of building for the future; working within Defence to achieve shared
   purpose." This is to support the MOD's objectives, which are to
   "provide the capabilities needed: to ensure the security and defence of
   the United Kingdom and Overseas Territories, including against
   terrorism; to support the Government’s foreign policy objectives
   particularly in promoting international peace and security."

History

   Although the UK's "junior service" the RAF is the oldest independent
   air force in the world. It was founded on April 1, 1918, during the
   First World War, by Viscount Trenchard when he amalgamated the Royal
   Flying Corps and the Royal Naval Air Service. After the war, the
   service was cut drastically and its inter-war years were relatively
   quiet, with only minor actions being undertaken in some parts of the
   British Empire.
   The RAF Memorial on the Victoria Embankment, London, commemorating RAF
   personnel killed in the two World Wars
   Enlarge
   The RAF Memorial on the Victoria Embankment, London, commemorating RAF
   personnel killed in the two World Wars

   The RAF underwent rapid expansion prior to and during the Second World
   War. Under the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan of December 1939,
   the air forces of other members of the British Commonwealth trained and
   formed squadrons for service with RAF formations. Many individual
   personnel from these countries and from continental Europe also served
   with RAF squadrons.

   A defining period of the RAF's existence came during the Battle of
   Britain when it held off the Luftwaffe and helped to turn the tide of
   the war.

   The largest and most controversial RAF effort during the war was the
   strategic bombing campaign against Germany by RAF Bomber Command. Under
   the leadership of Air Chief Harris, RAF forces fire-bombed Dresden,
   causing the death of ca. 35,000 civilians. On 3 May 1945, in the last
   days of the war, three ships ( Cap Arcona, Thielbek, and Deutschland)
   were sunk in the Bay of Lübeck, after four separate attacks by RAF
   planes. Around 7,000 civilians of many nations were killed, most of
   them concentration camp prisoners from the Neuengamme, Stutthof and
   Mittelbau-Dora camps. The RAF has sealed all documents pertaining to
   these attacks until 2045.

       Royal Air Force badge. The RAF Motto is Per Ardua ad Astra (Latin),
                         which translates as Through Struggle to the Stars
                                                                   Enlarge
       Royal Air Force badge. The RAF Motto is Per Ardua ad Astra (Latin),
                         which translates as Through Struggle to the Stars

   During the Cold War years the main role of the RAF was the defence of
   the continent of Europe against potential attack by the Soviet Union,
   including holding the UK's nuclear deterrent for a number of years.
   Since the end of the Cold War, several large scale operations have been
   undertaken by the RAF, including the Kosovo War, the 2001 invasion of
   Afghanistan and the 2003 invasion of Iraq.

Structure of the RAF

   The professional head of the RAF is known as the Chief of the Air Staff
   (CAS), currently Air Chief Marshal Sir Glenn Torpy. The CAS heads the
   Air Force Board, which is a committee of the Defence Council. The Air
   Force Board (AFB) is the management board of the RAF and consists of
   the Commanders-in-Chief of the Commands, together with several other
   high ranking officers. The CAS also has a deputy known as the Assistant
   Chief of the Air Staff (ACAS); currently this post is held by Air
   Vice-Marshal Chris Moran.

Commands

   Authority is delegated from the AFB to the RAF's commands. While there
   were once individual commands responsible for bombers, fighters,
   training, etc, only two commands exist currently:
     * Strike Command — HQ at RAF High Wycombe — responsible for all of
       the operations of the RAF.
     * Personnel and Training Command — HQ now also at RAF High Wycombe —
       responsible for recruitment, initial, trade training, including
       flying training.

Groups

   Groups are the subdivisions of operational Commands, responsible for
   certain types of operation or for operations in limited geographical
   areas. As from 1 April 2006, Strike Command is made-up of two Groups
   following the disbandment of No.3 Group:
     * 1 Group — the Air Combat Group, controls the RAF's combat fast jet
       aircraft, including Joint Force Harrier, and has seven airfields in
       the UK plus RAF Unit Goose Bay in Canada, which is used extensively
       as an operational training base.
     * 2 Group — the Air Combat Support Group, controls the Strategic and
       Tactical air transport aircraft, the RAF Regiment, the RAF's Air to
       Air Refuelling aircraft as well as ISTAR and Search & Rescue
       assets.

   Only one group exists within Personnel and Training Command, namely 22
   Group.

Stations

   The RAF's roundel was adopted during the First World War. The roundel
   has been adopted and modified by Commonwealth air forces, often
   replacing the red circle with a national symbol.
   Enlarge
   The RAF's roundel was adopted during the First World War. The roundel
   has been adopted and modified by Commonwealth air forces, often
   replacing the red circle with a national symbol.

   An RAF Station is ordinarily subordinate to a Group and it is
   administratively sub-divided into Wings. Since the mid to late 1930s
   RAF stations have controlled a number of flying squadrons or other
   units at one location by means of a station headquarters.

Wings

   A Wing is either a sub-division of a Group acting independently or a
   sub-division of an RAF Station.

   Independent Wings are a grouping of two or more squadrons, either
   flying squadrons or ground support squadrons. In former times, numbered
   flying Wings have existed, but more recently they have only been
   created when required, for example during Operation Telic, Tornado
   Wings were formed to operate from Ali Al Salem and Al Udeid Air Bases;
   each of these were made up of aircraft and crews from several
   squadrons.

   On 31st March 2006, the RAF formed nine Expeditionary Air Wings (EAW).
   The Expeditionary Air Wings have been established to support
   operations. They have been formed at the nine main operating bases; RAF
   Coningsby, RAF Cottesmore, RAF Kinloss, RAF Leeming, RAF Leuchars, RAF
   Lossiemouth, RAF Lyneham, RAF Marham, and RAF Waddington. These units
   will be commanded by a Group Captain who is also the Station Commander.
   The unit is formed around the squadrons based at the stations housing
   the wing, however, they are flexible and can be quickly adapted for
   operations and deployment.

   On RAF Stations, a Wing is an administrative sub-division. For a flying
   station these will normally be Engineering Wing, Operations Wing and
   Administration Wing. Aside from these, the only Wings currently in
   permanent existence are the Air Combat Service Support wings of 2 Group
   which provide support services such as communications, supply and
   policing to operationally deployed units.

Squadrons

   The term squadron (sqn) can be used to refer to an administrative
   sub-unit of a station, e.g. Air Traffic Control sqn, Personnel
   Management sqn; there are also ground support squadrons, e.g. 2 (MT)
   Sqn.

   However, the primary use for the term is as the name of the flying
   squadrons which carry out the primary tasks of the RAF. RAF squadrons
   are somewhat analogous to the regiments of the British army, in that
   they have histories and traditions going back to their formation,
   regardless of where they are currently based, which aircraft they are
   operating, etc. They can be awarded standards and battle honours for
   meritorious service.

   Whilst every squadron is different, most flying squadrons are commanded
   by a Wing Commander and, for a fast-jet squadron, have an establishment
   of around 100 personnel and 12 aircraft, but 16 aircraft for Tornado F3
   Squadrons.

Flights

   A flight is a sub-division of a squadron. Flying squadrons are often
   divided into two flights, under the command of a Squadron Leader;
   administrative squadrons on a station are also divided into flights.

   There are several flying units formed as Flights rather than Squadrons,
   due to their small size.

RAF Personnel

   In 2006 the RAF employed 52,804 active duty personnel and more than
   12,000 reservists.At its height during the Second World War, in excess
   of 1,000,000 personnel were serving at any one time.

Officers

   Officers hold a commission from the Sovereign, which provides the legal
   authority for them to issue orders to subordinates. The commission is
   granted after successfully completing the 30-week-long Initial Officer
   Training course at the RAF College, Cranwell.

   The titles and insignia of RAF Officers were derived from those used by
   the Royal Navy, specifically the Royal Naval Air Service (RNAS) during
   World War I. For example, the rank of Squadron Leader derived its name
   from the RNAS rank of Squadron Commander. RAF officers fall into three
   categories: air officers, senior officers and junior officers.

Other Ranks

   Other Ranks attend the Recruit Training Squadron at RAF Halton for
   basic training, with the exception of the RAF Regiment, which trains
   its recruits at RAF Honington.

   The titles and insignia of Other Ranks in the RAF was based on that of
   the Army, with some alterations in terminology. Over the years, this
   structure has seen significant changes, for example there was once a
   separate system for those in technical trades and the rank of Chief
   Technician continues to be held only by personnel in technical trades.
   RAF other ranks fall into four categories: warrant officers, senior
   non-commissioned officers, junior non-commissioned officers and airmen.

Branches and Trades

     * All Pilots and Weapon Systems Officers (formerly known as
       Navigators) in the RAF are commissioned officers.
     * Non-commissioned aircrew fulfil roles such as Air Loadmasters
       (ALM), Air Signallers, Air Electronics Operators (AEO), etc,
       although they are now all known as Weapon Systems Operators.

   The majority of the members of the RAF serve in vital support roles on
   the ground.
     * Officers and Gunners in the RAF Regiment, which was created during
       World War II, defend RAF airfields from attack. They have infantry
       and light armoured units to protect against ground attack and until
       recently they operated surface-to-air missiles [ Rapiers ] to
       defend against air attack - this role was given to the Royal
       Artillery in 2005 and was taken against the wishes of the RAF,
       which wanted to retain and maintain its organic ground-to-air
       defence capability.
     * The RAF Police are the military police of the RAF and are located
       wherever the RAF is located. Unlike the UK Civil Police, the RAF
       Police are armed as needed. Since 2003 the RAF Police have stop and
       search, arrest, and search and seizure powers outside RAF Stations.
     * Intelligence Officers and Analysts of the RAF Intelligence Branch
       support all operational activities by providing timely and accurate
       Indicators and Warnings. They conduct military intelligence fusion
       and analysis by conducting imagery and communications analysis,
       targeting, and assessment of the enemies capabilities and intent.
     * Engineering Officers and technicians are employed to maintain and
       repair the equipment used by the RAF. This includes routine
       preparation for flight and maintenance on aircraft, as well as
       deeper level repair work on aircraft systems, IT systems, ground
       based radar, MT vehicles, etc.
     * Fighter Controllers (FC) and Air Traffic Controllers (ATC) control
       RAF and NATO aircraft from the ground. The FC control the
       interception of enemy aircraft while the ATC provide air traffic
       services at RAF stations and to the majority of en-route military
       aircraft in UK airspace.
     * Administrative Officers and associated trades perform a range of
       secretarial tasks as well as fulfilling training management,
       physical education and catering roles.
     * Royal Air Force Chaplains are trained by the Armed Forces
       Chaplaincy Centre at Amport House.
     * The Royal Air Force Medical Branch provides healthcare at home and
       on deployed operations, including aeromedical evacuation services.
       Medical officers are the doctors of the RAF and have specialist
       expertise in aviation medicine to support aircrew and their
       protective equipment. Medical Officers can go on aeromedical
       evacuations, providing vital assistance on search-and-rescue
       missions or emergency relief flights worldwide.
     * The RAF Legal Branch provides legal advice on discipline / criminal
       law and operations law.

Aircraft

                                                             Sea King HAR3
                                                                   Enlarge
                                                             Sea King HAR3

                                                               Chinook HC2
                                                                   Enlarge
                                                               Chinook HC2

                                                      Hercules C-130K (C3)
                                                                   Enlarge
                                                      Hercules C-130K (C3)

                                                                Tornado F3
                                                                   Enlarge
                                                                Tornado F3

                                                       Eurofighter Typhoon
                                                                   Enlarge
                                                       Eurofighter Typhoon

   Many types of aircraft currently serve with the RAF, although there is
   less variety in the order of battle of the organisation than in
   previous decades due to the increasing cost of military systems. The
   types currently in the RAF inventory are listed below.

   The code which follows each aircraft's name describe the role of the
   variant. For example, the Tornado F.3 is designated as a fighter by the
   'F', and is the third variant of the type to be produced.

Strike, attack and offensive support aircraft

   The mainstay of what the RAF calls its Offensive Support fleet is the
   Tornado GR.4. This supersonic aircraft can carry a wide range of
   weaponry, including Storm Shadow cruise missiles, laser guided bombs
   and the ALARM anti-radar missile. The Tornado is supplemented by the
   Harrier GR.7 & GR.7A and Jaguar GR.3 & GR.3A, which are used in the
   close air support role and to counter enemy air defences. The Harrier
   is being upgraded to GR.9 standard with newer systems and more powerful
   engines. The Harrier GR9 was formally accepted into RAF service in late
   September 06.

Air defence and Airborne Early Warning Aircraft

   The Tornado F.3 is the RAF's air defence fighter aircraft, based at RAF
   Leuchars and RAF Leeming to defend the UK’s airspace. The Sentry AEW.1
   provides airborne radar to detect incoming enemy aircraft and to
   co-ordinate the aerial battlefield. Both the Sentry and the F.3 have
   been involved in recent operations including over Iraq and the Balkans.
   The Tornado, in service in the air defence role since the late 1980s,
   is due to be replaced by the state of the art, Typhoon F.2.

Reconnaissance Aircraft

   Variants of attack aircraft, the Jaguar GR.3/GR.3A and Tornado GR.4A
   are fitted with specialist reconnaissance pods and squadrons exist with
   both types in the reconnaissance role. The elderly Canberra PR.9 was
   also used in this role for its ability to fly at high altitude for long
   duration sorties, however was recently retired from service. All three
   types are/were equipped with a range of cameras and sensors in the
   visual, infra-red and radar ranges of the spectrum. Providing
   electronic and signals intelligence is the Nimrod R.1. The new Sentinel
   R.1 provides ASTOR ground radar surveillance platform based on the
   Bombardier Global Express long range business jet.

Search and Rescue Aircraft

   Three squadrons of helicopters exist with the primary role of rescuing
   aircrew who have ejected or crash-landed their aircraft. These are 22
   Sqn and 202 Sqn with the Sea King HAR.3/HAR.3A in the UK and 84 Sqn
   with the Griffin HAR.2 in Cyprus. Although established in a military
   role, most of their operational missions are to rescue civilians from
   ships at sea, mountains and other locations.

Maritime Patrol

   The Nimrod MR2 primary role is that of Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW) and
   Anti-Surface Unit Warfare (ASUW). The Nimrod MR2 is additionaly used in
   a Search and Rescue (SAR) role, where its long range and extensive
   communications facilities allow it to co-ordinate rescues by acting as
   a link between rescue helicopters, ships and shore bases. It can also
   drop pods containing life rafts and survival supplies to people in the
   sea.The already very capable MR2,will begin to be replaced by 12 NIMROD
   MRA4 aircraft in the next few years.The NIMROD MRA4 is described by BAE
   Systems as a world leader in terms of maritime patrol platforms.

Support helicopters

   An important part of the work of the RAF is to support the Army by
   ferrying troops and equipment to and across the battlefield. The
   support helicopters are organised into the tri-service Joint Helicopter
   Command with Army and Navy aircraft. The large twin- rotor Chinook
   HC.2/HC.2A, based at RAF Odiham provides heavy lift and is supported by
   Merlin HC.3 and the smaller Puma HC.1, based at RAF Benson and RAF
   Aldergrove.

Transport and Air-to-Air Refuelling aircraft

   Having refuled the former Queen's Flight in 1995, 32 (The Royal)
   Squadron uses the BAe 125 CC.3, Agusta A109 and BAe 146 CC.2 in the VIP
   transport role, based at RAF Northolt in west London. More routine air
   transport tasks are carried out by the Tristars and VC10s based at RAF
   Brize Norton, both used to transport troops and cargo, and for
   air-to-air refuelling. Shorter range tactical transport is provided by
   the C-130 Hercules, the fleet including both older K-model and new
   J-model aircraft. The RAF has leased 4 C-17 Globemaster IIIs from
   Boeing to provide a strategic heavy airlift capability; it was
   announced in 2004 that these will be purchased, together with a further
   example, once the lease expires. The MOD as expressed a wish to buy a
   further 3 C-17's, but due to budget constraints the MOD can only afford
   to buy one each year, running the risk that the production line may be
   shut down before the RAF gets the aircraft it needs.

Training aircraft

   A wide range of aircraft types are used for training aircrew in their
   duties. At the more advanced stage in training, variants of front-line
   aircraft have been adapted for operational conversion of trained
   pilots, these include the Canberra T.4, Harrier T.10, Jaguar T.4 and
   Typhoon T.1. Advanced flying training for fast-jet, helicopter and
   multi-engine pilots is provided using the Hawk T.1, Griffin HT.1 and
   Super King Air T.1 respectively.

   Basic pilot training is provided on the Tucano T.1 and Eurocopter
   Squirrel HT.1, while navigator training is in the Dominie T.1.
   Elementary flying training is conducted on either the Slingsby Firefly
   or Tutor T.1, depending on the new pilot's route of entry to the
   service. The Tutor is also used, along with the Viking T.1 and Vigilant
   T.1 gliders, to provide air experience for Air Cadets.

Future aircraft

   The aircraft operated by the RAF continue to be upgraded and improved
   throughout their service life. In addition, new aircraft to replace
   existing fleets or fill new roles come into service every so often.

   Aircraft in development or soon to be deployed include the Airbus
   A400M, of which 25 are to be used to replace the remaining Hercules
   C-130Ks. (Some of the C-130K fleet was replaced by 25 new C-130J
   Hercules in 1999, 5 C-17s will be retained). A new version of the
   Chinook, the HC.3, with improved avionics and increased range, was
   developed mainly for special forces missions. Service entry has been
   delayed due to software problems and legal issues. The Eurofighter
   Typhoon is entering service and the RAF will be the largest operator of
   the type. The Typhoon will replace the Tornado F3 interceptor and the
   Jaguar GR3A ground attack aircraft by 2010. The Hawk 128 will replace
   the existing Hawks in service; the newer model being more similar in
   equipment and performance to modern front line aircraft. The ageing
   aerial refuelling fleet of VC10s and Tristars should be replaced with
   the Airbus A330 MRTT under the Future Strategic Tanker Aircraft
   programme. Problems with contract negotiations have led to unsolicited
   proposals for the conversion of civil Tristars or DC-10s. The Joint
   Combat Aircraft (the British designation for the F-35 Lightning II)
   will replace the Harrier GR.7 and GR.9. Studies have begun regarding
   the long term replacement for the Tornado GR.4 (Although the Future
   Offensive Air System project was cancelled in 2005). The RAF transport
   helicopter force, the Puma and Sea Kings, are to be replaced by the
   Support Amphibious and Battlefield Rotorcraft (SABR) project, likely a
   mix of Merlins and Chinooks.

RAF deployments

   Country Dates Deployment Details
   Lithuania 2004 Baltic Air Policing 4 Tornado F3 for a 3 months rotation
   under NATO monitoring mission
   Afghanistan 2001– Operation Veritas Chinooks provided airlift support
   to coalition forces. Since late 2004 six Harriers have provided
   reconnaissance and close air support to the ISAF.
   Bosnia 1995– Merlin helicopters RAF enforced no-fly zones over the
   Balkans in the late 1990s and participated in the NATO interventions in
   Bosnia and Kosovo. Today, RAF helicopters remain to provide support to
   the United Nations.
   Ascension Island 1981– Ascension Island Base Used as an air bridge
   between the UK and the Falkland Islands. United States Air Force also
   stationed at this base.
   Canada 1940s– RAF Unit Goose Bay, Canada RAF aircraft train in
   low-level tactical flying at CFB Goose Bay, an air force base of the
   Canadian Air Force.
   Cyprus 1956– RAF Akrotiri Located in the British Sovereign Base Area on
   Cyprus, the airfield acts a forward base for deployment of UK forces in
   the Middle East
   Falkland Islands 1984– RAF Mount Pleasant Built after the Falklands War
   to allow a fighter and transport facility on the islands, and to
   strengthen the defence capacity of the British Forces. A detachment of
   RAF Regiment provides anti-aircraft support.
   Gibraltar 1940s– RAF Gibraltar No permanently stationed aircraft. RAF
   aircraft, e.g. Hercules transports, make regular visits.
   Indonesia 2005 Support and transport RAF dispatched to South East Asia
   following the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake disaster to provide aid
   relief support
   Middle East 1990– Various RAF fighters based in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait
   prior to and during the 1990 Gulf War, and later to enforce no-fly
   zones over Iraq. Following the 2003 invasion of Iraq and the occupation
   of southern Iraq by British Forces, the RAF is deployed at Basra. SH is
   provided in Iraq by Merlin, Puma and Chinook
   Norway 1960s– Bardufoss Air Station RAF fighter and/or helicopter
   squadrons undergo winter-training here most years.

Symbols, flags and emblems

   Royal Air Force Ensign
   Enlarge
   Royal Air Force Ensign

   Following the tradition of the other British fighting services, the RAF
   has adopted various symbols to represent it and act as a rallying point
   for its members .

   The RAF Ensign is flown from the flagstaff on every RAF station during
   daylight hours. The design was approved by King George V in 1921, after
   much opposition from the Admiralty, who have the right to approve or
   veto any flag flown ashore or on board ship.

   British aircraft in the early stages of the First World War carried the
   Union Flag as an identifying feature, however this was easy to confuse
   with the German Iron Cross motif. Therefore in October 1914 the French
   system of three concentric rings was adopted, with the colours reversed
   to a red disc surrounded by a white ring and an outer blue ring. The
   relative sizes of the rings have changed over the years and during
   World War II an outer yellow ring was added. Aircraft serving in the
   Far East during World War II had the red disc removed to prevent
   confusion with Japanese aircraft. Since the 1970s, camouflaged aircraft
   carry low-visibility roundels, either red and blue on dark camouflage,
   or washed-out pink and light blue on light colours. Most uncamouflaged
   training and transport aircraft retain the traditional red-white-blue
   roundel.

   The Latin motto of the RAF, "Per Ardua ad Astra", is usually translated
   as "Through Adversity to the Stars". The choice of motto is attributed
   to a junior officer by the name of J S Yule, in response to a request
   from the first Commander of the RFC, Colonel Sykes, for suggestions.
   Royal Air Force fin flash (non combat version)
   Enlarge
   Royal Air Force fin flash (non combat version)

   The badge of the RAF, shown at the top of this article, is in heraldic
   terms: "In front of a circle inscribed with the motto Per Ardua Ad
   Astra and ensigned by the Imperial Crown an eagle volant and affronty
   Head lowered and to the sinister." It was approved in 1923 based on a
   design by a tailor at Gieves Ltd of Savile Row, although the original
   had an albatross rather than the eagle and was surrounded by a garter
   belt rather than the plain circle.

   In 2006 a flash was designed and issued to personnel with the same
   design as the tail panel for wear on combat clothing. It is 45mm
   squared. There is also a badge to go over the right chest pocket with
   the text ROYAL AIR FORCE in black capitals on a green background. There
   is no desert pattern available.

   The RAF also has its own tartan. Designed in 1988, it was only
   officially recognised by the Ministry of Defence in 2001. It is used by
   the RAF Pipes Band and may be worn by Officers serving at Scottish
   units with their No.5 HD Mess Dress.

Future

   Colonel Tim Collins, the former Army officer described as a hero during
   the Iraq war, prompted controversy by calling for the RAF to be
   disbanded as a separate arm; allowing the Fleet Air Arm and Army Air
   Corps to absorb aircrew and aircraft dedicated to specific sea and
   ground roles. However, a Ministry of Defence spokesman responded
   saying, "There is no question of the RAF being disbanded. The skills
   and challenges in the air environment are totally different to those
   faced in maritime or land environments. We need specialists in all
   three. The RAF does a fantastic job." Additionally, Nick Cook who edits
   the aviation section of Jane's Defence Weekly, voiced his disagreement
   with Tim Collins's idea saying "In an era when money is tight there is
   a lot of introspection about where scant resources should go, but this
   doesn't make any sense. You can't do without air power. It's totally
   unrealistic."

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Royal_Air_Force"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
