   #copyright

Royal Marines

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Military History and War

   CAPTION: Naval Service

          Components
   Royal Navy
     * Surface Fleet
     * Fleet Air Arm
     * Submarine Service

   Royal Marines
   Royal Fleet Auxiliary
   Royal Naval Reserve
   Royal Marines Reserve
            History
   History of the Royal Navy
   Future of the Royal Navy
             Ships
   Current Fleet
   Current deployments
   Historic ships
           Personnel
   The Admiralty
   Senior Officers
   Officer rank insignia
   Enlisted rate insignia

   His/Her Majesty's Royal Marines, also known as the Royal Marines (RM),
   are the Royal Navy's Light Infantry, the United Kingdom's amphibious
   force and specialists in Arctic and Mountain Warfare. A core component
   of the country's Rapid Deployment Force, the Corps is able to operate
   independently in all terrains, and are highly trained as commando
   forces. The high levels of training and competence, coupled with a
   unique mix of capabilities, are regarded as comparable to those found
   in Special Forces.

   The Royal Marines are a component part of the Naval Service which
   encompasses the Royal Navy and other units.

Role

                       Corps of Royal Marines
   Cap Badge of the Royal Marines
         Active       26 April 1755-
        Country       United Kingdom
         Branch       Royal Navy
          Type        Commando
          Role        Rapid reaction force/Home defence
          Size        Six battalions
        Part of       Naval Service
      Garrison/HQ     40 Commando - Taunton
                      42 Commando - Plymouth
                      45 Commando - Arbroath
                      Fleet Protection Group - HMNB Clyde
                      Commando Logistic Regiment - Chivenor
                      1 Assault Group - Poole
        Nickname      The Royals, HM Jollies, Bootnecks
         Motto        Per Mare Per Terram (By Sea By Land) (Latin)
         March        Quick - A Life on the Ocean Wave
                      Slow - Preobrajensky
                             Commanders
        Current
   commander          Naval Service
    Captain-General   HRH The Duke of Edinburgh
   Commandant-General Major General Garry Robison RM
                              Insignia
     Commando Flash

   The Royal Marines are a maritime focussed, amphibious, light infantry
   force capable of deploying at short notice in support of the United
   Kingdom Government's military and diplomatic objectives overseas and
   are optimised for highly manoeuvreable operational situation. As the
   United Kingdom Armed Forces' specialists in cold weather warfare the
   Corps will provide lead element expertise in the NATO Northern Flank
   and are optimised for high altitude operations.

   In common with the other armed forces the Royal Marines can provide
   resources for Military Aid to Civil Authority and Military Aid to Civil
   Power.

Command, Control and Organisation

   Command of the Royal Marines is vested in Commander in Chief Fleet with
   Commandant General Royal Marines, a Major General, embedded within the
   CINCFLEET staff as Commander UK Amphibious Force (COMUKAMPHIBFOR).

   The operational capability of the Corps comprises a number of
   Battalion-sized units, three of these are designated as "Commandos":
     * 40 Commando (known as Forty Commando) based at Norton Manor
       Barracks, Taunton, Somerset
     * 42 Commando (known as Four Two Commando) based at Bickleigh
       Barracks, Plymouth, Devon
     * 45 Commando (known as Four Five Commando) based at Condor Barracks,
       Arbroath, Angus, Scotland
     * Commando Logistic Regiment based at Chivenor, Devon
     * UK Landing Force Command Support Group based at Stonehouse
       Barracks, Plymouth
     * Fleet Protection Group Royal Marines based at HM Naval Base Clyde,
       Helensburgh, Argyll and Bute
     * Special Boat Service based at Royal Marines Barracks Poole, Dorset

   Each of these formations is commanded by a Lieutenant-Colonel of the
   Royal Marines, who may have sub-specialised in a number of ways
   throughout his career.

3 Commando Brigade

   Operational Control (OPCON) of the three Commandos and the Commando
   Logistics Regiment is delegated to 3 Commando Brigade Royal Marines
   based at Stonehouse Barracks which exercises control as directed by
   either CINCFLEET or the Permanent Joint Headquarters. As the main
   combat formation of the Royal Marines the Brigade has its own organic
   capability to support it in the field:
     * UK Landing Force Command Support Group which comprises:

          + CSG Headquarters Troop
          + Signals Squadron

               o Two HQ Satcomm Troops

          + Brigade Staff Squadron
          + Support Squadron

               o Brigade Patrol Troop
               o Electronic Warfare Troop (Y Troop)
               o Air Defence Troop
               o Tactical Air Control Parties
               o Police Troop

          + Logistics Squadron

               o Motor Transport Troop
               o QMs Troop
               o Equipment Support Troop

     * 539 Assault Squadron

   The Brigade also holds Operational Control of attached Royal Artillery
   and Royal Engineer assets.

Independent Elements

   The independent elements of the Royal Marines are:
     * Fleet Protection Group Royal Marines is responsible for the
       security of the United Kingdom's nuclear deterrent and other
       security-related duties. It also provides boarding party support
       for the embargo enforcement, counter narcotics and counter
       insurgency activities of the Royal Navy. It is commando-sized,
       however the structure differs to reflect its role, it bears the
       colours, battle honours and customs of 43 Commando.

     * Commando Training Centre: This is the training unit for the entire
       corps, and consists of three separate sections:
          + Commando Training Wing: This is the initial basic commando
            training section for new recruits to the Royal Marines, and
            the All Arms Commando Course.
          + Specialist Wing. This provides specialist training in the
            various trades which Marines may elect to join once qualified
            and experienced in a Rifle Company.
          + Command Wing: This provides command training for both officers
            and NCOs of the Royal Marines.

     * 1 Assault Group Royal Marines: Provides training in the use of
       landing craft and boats, and also serves as a parent unit for the
       three assault squadrons permanently-embarked on the Royal Navy's
       amphibious ships.
          + 4 Assault Squadron - HMS Bulwark
          + 6 Assault Squadron - HMS Albion
          + 9 Assault Squadron - HMS Ocean

     * Special Boat Service (SBS) are maritime special forces and under
       the Operational Control of Director Special Forces. The Service is
       battalion-sized and commanded by a Lieutenant Colonel with previous
       experience as a Swimmer Canoeist. Responsibilities include Maritime
       Counter-Terrorism operations and other special forces tasks.

     * Royal Marines Band Service provides regular bands for the Royal
       Navy and provides expertise to train RN Volunteer Bands. Bandsmen
       have a secondary role as field hospital orderlies. Personnel may
       not be commando trained, wearing a blue beret instead of green, the
       band service is the only branch of the Royal Marines which admits
       women.

Structure of a Commando

   The Commando Flash, sewn to the upper sleeve of a DPM shirt.
   Enlarge
   The Commando Flash, sewn to the upper sleeve of a DPM shirt.

   The three Commandos are each organised into six companies, further
   organised into platoon-sized troops) as follows:
     * Command Company
          + Main HQ
          + Tactical HQ
          + Reconnaissance Troop (includes a sniper section)
          + Mortar Troop (81 mm) (Includes 4 MFC pairs)
          + AT Troop (Milan - to be replaced Javelin ATGW)
          + Medium Machine Gun Troop
     * One Logistic Company
          + A Echelon 1 (A Ech1)
          + A Echelon 2 (A Ech2)
          + FRT
          + RAP
          + B Echelon (B Ech)
     * Two Close Combat Companies
          + Company Headquarters (Coy HQ)
          + 3 Close Combat Troops (Troop HQ, 3 Rifle Sections, Manoeuvre
            Support Section)
     * Two Stand Off Companies
          + Company Headquarters (Coy HQ)
          + Heavy Machine Gun (HMG) Troop (0.5" heavy machine guns)
          + Anti-Tank Troop (Milan - to be replaced with Javelin)
          + Close Combat Troop

   In general a rifle company Marine will be a member of a four-man fire
   team, the building block of commando operations. A Royal Marine works
   with his team in the field and lives with them in his accommodation (if
   he lives in barracks).

   This structure is a recent development, formerly Commandos were
   structured similarly to light Infantry Battalions. During the
   restructuring of the United Kingdom's military services the Corps
   evolved from a Cold War focus on NATOs Northern Flank towards a more
   expeditionary posture.

Amphibious Ready Group

   Royal Marines in a Rigid Raider assault watercraft
   Enlarge
   Royal Marines in a Rigid Raider assault watercraft

   The Amphibious Ready Group is a mobile, balanced amphibious force,
   based on a Commando Group and its supporting assets, that can be kept
   at high readiness to deploy into an area of operations. The Amphibious
   Ready Group is normally based around specialist amphibious ships, most
   notably HMS Ocean, the largest ship in the British fleet. Ocean was
   designed and built to accommodate an embarked commando and its
   associated stores and equipment. The strategy of the Amphibious Ready
   Group is to wait "beyond the horizon" and then deploy swiftly as
   directed by HM Government. The whole amphibious force is intended to be
   self-sustaining and capable of operating without host-nation support.
   The concept was successfully tested in operations in Sierra Leone.

Commando Helicopter Force

   The Fleet Air Arm Commando Helicopter Force uses both Sea King
   transport and Lynx Light lift/ light attack helicopters to provide
   aviation support for the Royal Marines. It consists of both Royal Navy
   and Royal Marines personnel, who need not be commando trained.

Training

   Marines undergo the longest basic training regimen of any Infantry
   force in the world (32 weeks), at the Commando Training Centre Royal
   Marines (CTCRM) at Lympstone, Devon. The Royal Marines is the only part
   of the British Armed Forces where Officers and Other Ranks are trained
   at the same location. Much of the basic training is carried out on the
   rugged terrain of Dartmoor and Woodbury common with a significant
   proportion taking place at night. Before beginning Royal Marines
   recruit training the potential recruit must attend a PRMC known as
   Potential Royal Marines Course held at CTCRM. PRMC lasts 3 days and
   asseses measuring physical ability and intellectual capacity to
   undertake the recruit training. Officer candidates must also undertake
   the Admiralty Interview Board.

   Officers and Marines undergo the same training up to the commando
   tests, thereafter Marines go on to employment in a rifle company while
   Officers continue training. Officer courses are required to meet higher
   standards in the Commando tests.

Basic training

   The first weeks of training are spent learning basic skills that will
   be used later. This includes much time spent on the parade ground and
   on the rifle ranges. Physical training at this stage emphasizes
   all-round body strength, in order to develop the muscles necessary to
   carry the heavy weights a marine will use in an operational unit. Key
   milestones include a gym passout at week 9 (not carried out with
   fighting order), which shows that a recruit is ready for the Bottom
   Field, a battle swimming test, and learning to do a "regain" (i.e.
   climb back onto a rope suspended over a water tank). Most of these
   tests are completed with the ever present "fighting order" of 32 lb of
   equipment. Individual fieldcraft skills are also taught at this basic
   stage.

The Commando Course

   The culmination of training is a period known as the Commando Course.
   Since the creation of the British Commandos during World War II, all
   Royal Marines, except those in the Royal Marines Band Service, complete
   the Commando course as part of their training (see below). Key aspects
   of the course include climbing and ropework techniques, patrolling, and
   amphibious operations.

   This intense phase ends with a series of tests which have remained
   virtually unchanged since World War II. Again these tests, and indeed
   virtually all the training, is done with a "fighting order" of 32 lb
   (14.5kg) of equipment.

   The commando tests are taken on consecutive days, they include;
     * A nine-mile (14.5 km) speed march, carrying full fighting order, to
       be completed in 90 minutes; the pace is thus 10 minutes per mile (6
       min/km or 6 mph).

     * The Endurance course is a six mile, (9.65 km), course across rough
       terrain at Woodbury Common near Lympstone, which includes tunnels,
       pipes, wading pools, and an underwater culvert. The course ends
       with a four-mile run back to CTCRM. Followed by a marksmanship
       test, where the recruit must hit 6 out of 10 shots at a target
       representing a fig. 11 target at 200 m. To be completed in 73
       minutes (71 minutes for Royal Marine officers), these times were
       recently increased by one minute as the route of the course was
       altered. The Course ends at the 25m range where the recruit must
       then put at least 6 out of 10 shots on target without cleaning
       their weapon.

     * The Tarzan Assault Course. This is an assault course combined with
       an aerial confidence test. It starts with a death slide and ends
       with a rope climb up a thirty foot vertical wall. It must be
       completed with full fighting order in 13 minutes, 12 minutes for
       Royal Marine officers. The Potential Officers Course also includes
       confidence tests from the Tarzan Assault Course, although not with
       equipment.

     * The Thirty miler. This is a 30 mile (48 km) march across Dartmoor,
       wearing fighting order, and additional safety equipment. It must be
       completed in 8 hours for recruits and 7 hours for Royal Marine
       officers, who must also navigate the route themselves, rather than
       following a DS with the rest of a syndicate and carry their own
       equipment.

   The day after the 30 mile (48 km) march, any who failed any of the
   tests may attempt to retake them.

   Completing the Commando Course successfully entitles the recruit or
   officer to wear the coveted green beret but does not mean that the
   Royal Marine has finished his training. That decision will be made by
   the troop or batch training team and will depend on the recruit's or
   young officer's overall performance. Furthermore, officer training
   still consists of many more months.

   After basic and commando training, a Royal Marine Commando will
   normally join a unit of 3 Commando Brigade. There are three Royal
   Marines Commando infantry units in the Brigade: 40 Commando located at
   Norton Manor Camp near Taunton in Somerset, 42 Commando at Bickleigh
   Barracks, near Plymouth, Devon, and 45 Commando at HMS Condor, Arbroath
   on the east coast of Scotland.

Specialist training

   Royal Marines may then go on to undertake specialist training in a
   variety of skills; Platoon Weapons Instructor, Mortar operator,
   signals, clerks, sniper, PT instructor, Mountain Leader, Swimmer
   Canoeist, chef, Landing Craft coxwain etc.

   Training for these specialisations may be undertaken at CTCRM or in a
   joint environment, such as Royal School of Signals or the Defence
   Police College.

   Some Marines undergo military parachute training at RAF Brize Norton
   without having to undergo P-Company training with the Parachute
   Regiment. This allows flexibility of insertion methods for all force
   elements.

Current weapons

     * L85A2 IW - 5.56 x 45 mm (Individual Weapon)
     * L86A2 LSW - 5.56 x 45 mm (Light Support Weapon)
     * L110A1 Light Machine Gun 5.56 x 45 mm belt or magazine.
     * L82A1 Barret - .50 inch (12.7 mm) BMG (Browning Machine gun)
       anti-materiel sniper rifle
     * L96A1 Sniper Rifle - 7.62 x 51 mm Accuracy International
       bolt-action sniper rifle
     * L7A2 GPMG (General Purpose Machine Gun) - the FN MAG 7.62 x 51 mm
       belt-fed machine gun.
     * L1A1 Heavy Machine Gun .50 inch (12.7 mm) BMG (Browning Machine
       gun)
     * LAW 80 ( (Light Anti-tank Weapon))
     * MILAN wire guided anti-tank missile (in the process of being
       replaced by the Javelin Anti-Tank missile)
     * L16A2 81 mm Mortar (High Explosive, Smoke and Illuminating
       ammunition)
     * L9A1 Browning - 9 x 19 mm Parabellum semi-automatic pistol
     * L107A1 - 9 x 19 mm Parabellum semi-automatic pistol
     * L17A2 UGL (Under-slung Grenade Launcher) - Attachment to L85A2

History

Origin

   The first unit of English Naval Infantry, originally called the Duke of
   York and Albany's Maritime Regiment of Foot and soon becoming known as
   the Admiral's Regiment, was formed on October 28, 1664, with an initial
   strength of 1200 Infantrymen recruited from the Trained Bands of London
   as part of the mobilisation for the Second Dutch War. It was the fourth
   European Marine unit formed, being preceded by the Spanish Marines
   (1537), the Portuguese Marines (1610) and the French Marines (1622).
   Later followed by the formation of the Dutch Marines in 1665. James
   (later King James II), the Duke of York, Lord High Admiral and brother
   of King Charles II, was Captain-General of the Company of the Artillery
   Garden, now the Honourable Artillery Company, the unit that trained the
   Trained Bands. The Regiment was very distinct, being dressed in yellow
   rather than the red of the other Regiments until 1685. The name
   "Marines" first appeared in official records in 1672. John Churchill,
   the 1st Duke of Marlborough, was the most famous member of this
   Regiment. A Company of Guards served as Marines to augment the Marines
   of the Admiral's Regiment during the Naval battle of Sole Bay in 1672.
   Marlborough's conduct as an ensign in the Guards during the battle so
   impressed James that he commissioned him a Captain in the Admiral's
   Regiment after four Marine Captains died during the battle. Marlborough
   later led a Battalion of the Regiment in the land battle of Enzheim in
   1674. The Regiment was disbanded in 1689 shortly after James II was
   deposed in the Glorious Revolution and The Buffs replaced them as third
   in precedence in the British Army.
   Portrait of a Marine officer, by William Dobson, 17th century
   Enlarge
   Portrait of a Marine officer, by William Dobson, 17th century

   The Marine Regiments of the Army were revived in 1690 and disbanded
   again in 1699. In 1702 six Regiments were formed for the War of Spanish
   Succession. The most historic achievement of these Marines was the
   capture of the mole during the assault on Gibraltar (sailors of the
   Royal Navy captured the Rock itself) and the subsequent defence of the
   fortress alongside the Dutch Marines in 1704. In 1713 three of these
   Regiments were transferred to the Line and the others disbanded. Only
   four Companies of Marine Invalids remained.

   Six Marine Regiments were raised for the War of Jenkins Ear in 1739
   with four more being raised later. One large Marine Regiment
   (Spotswood's Regiment later Gooch's Marines, the 61st Foot) was formed
   of American colonists and served alongside British Marines at
   Cartegena, Columbia and Guantanamo, Cuba in the War of Jenkin's Ear (
   1741). Among its officers was Lawrence Washington, the half-brother of
   George Washington. In 1747, the remaining regiments were transferred to
   the Admiralty and then disbanded in 1748.

   Even though they were part of the Army, these Marines were quite
   nautical at times. Some Royal Navy officers began in these Marine
   regiments and some kept their Marine rank throughout their careers, one
   Royal Navy Captain even serving as the Captain of Marines on his own
   ship. They were used by the Admiralty to rig ships before they were
   placed in commission as the Royal Navy had no extra sailors, the law
   requiring that all sailors must be part of a commissioned vessel. It
   was another law requiring that in order for Army Regiments to be paid,
   the entire Regiment had to muster that led to their transfer to the
   Admiralty. This requirement was hard for the Marine Regiments to follow
   as their Companies were stationed on many different ships.

   In 1755 His Majesty's Marine Forces, fifty Companies in three
   Divisions, headquartered at Chatham, Portsmouth, and Plymouth, were
   formed under Admiralty control. During the rest of the 18th century,
   they served in numerous landings all over the world, the most famous
   being the landing at Bellisle on the Brittany coast in 1761. They also
   served in the American Revolutionary War, being particularly courageous
   in the Battle of Bunker Hill led by Major John Pitcairn. These Marines
   also often took to the ship's boats to repel attackers in small boats
   when RN ships on close blockade were becalmed. In 1802, largely at the
   instigation of Admiral the Earl St. Vincent, they were titled the Royal
   Marines by King George III.

   The Royal Marine Artillery (RMA) was formed as a separate unit in 1804
   to man the artillery in bomb ketches. This had been done by the Royal
   Regiment of Artillery, but a lawsuit by a Royal Artillery officer
   resulted in a court decision that Army officers were not subject to
   Naval orders. As their uniforms were the blue of the Royal Regiment of
   Artillery this group was nicknamed the "Blue Marines" and the Infantry
   element, who wore the scarlet uniforms of the British infantry, became
   known as the "Red Marines", often given the derogatory nickname
   "Lobsters" by sailors.

   The Royal Marines Artillery (RMA) & Royal Marines Light Infantry (RMLI)
   where almalgamated in 1929.

   Pursuing a career in the Marines was considered social suicide - the
   Marines were deeply unpopular in society as most Marines were failures
   in life running away from their problems on land. Marines officers,
   unlike their counterparts in the Army or regular Navy, faced obstacles
   when trying to climb the social ladder, as officers in the Marines were
   widely perceived as failures unable to obtain commissions in the Army.
   In addition, the Royal Navy began handing out positions previously held
   by RM Colonels to post-captains on half-pay, meaning that the farthest
   most RM officers could advance was to Major.

19th Century

   During the Napoleonic Wars, the Royal Navy suffered from manpower
   problems in the Marines, and so regular Infantry units from the Army
   often had to be used as shipboard replacements. In the War of 1812,
   escaped American slaves were formed into the Corps of Colonial Marines
   and fought at Bladensburg. Other Royal Marines units raided up and down
   Chesapeake Bay, fought in the Battle of New Orleans and later helped
   capture Fort Bowyer in Mobile Bay in the last action of the war.

   In 1855 the Infantry forces were re-named the Royal Marines Light
   Infantry (RMLI) and in 1862 the name was slightly altered to Royal
   Marine Light Infantry. The Royal Navy did not fight any other ships
   after 1850 (until 1914) and became interested in landings by Naval
   Brigades. In these Naval Brigades, the function of the Royal Marines
   was to land first and act as skimishers ahead of the sailor Infantry
   and Artillery. This skirmishing was the traditional function of Light
   Infantry. For most of their history, British Marines had been organised
   as fusiliers. It was not until 1923 that the separate Artillery and
   light Infantry forces were formally amalgamated into the Corps of Royal
   Marines.

   In the rest of the 19th Century the Royal Marines served in many
   landings especially in the First and Second Opium Wars (1839-1842 and
   1856-1860) against the Chinese. These were all successful except for
   the landing at the Mouth of the Peiho in 1859, where Admiral Sir James
   Hope ordered a landing across extensive mud flats even though his
   Brigadier, Colonel Thomas Lemon RMLI, advised against it.

   During the Crimean War in 1854 and 1855, three Royal Marines earned the
   Victoria Cross, two in the Crimea and one in the Baltic. The use of the
   new "torpedoes" (mines) by the Russians in the Baltic made the campaign
   there particularly suited to RM raiding and reconnaissance parties.
   Landings by the British and French Navy and Marines in 1854 were
   repulsed by the Russians at Petropavlovsk on the Pacific coast of
   Russia.

20th Century

   The Royal Marines also played a prominent role in the Boxer Rebellion
   in China ( 1900), where a Royal Marine earned a Victoria Cross. For the
   first part of the 20th Century, the Royal Marines' role was the
   traditional one of providing shipboard Infantry for security, boarding
   parties and small-scale landings. The Marines' other traditional
   position on a Royal Navy ship is manning "A" (the forwardmost) gun
   turret.

First World War

   During the First World War, in addition to their usual stations aboard
   ship, Royal Marines were part of the Royal Naval Division which landed
   in Belgium in 1914 to help defend Antwerp and later took part in the
   amphibious landing at Gallipoli in 1915. It also served on the Western
   Front. The Division's first two commanders were Royal Marine Artillery
   Generals. Other Royal Marines acted as landing parties in the Naval
   campaign against the Turkish fortifications in the Dardanelles before
   the Gallipoli landing. They were sent ashore to assess damage to
   Turkish fortifications after bombardment by British and French ships
   and, if necessary, to complete their destruction. The Royal Marines
   were the last to leave Gallipoli, replacing both British and French
   troops in a neatly planned and executed withdrawal from the beaches. It
   even required some Marines to wear French uniforms as part of the
   deception. In 1918 Royal Marines led the raid at Zeebrugge. Five Royal
   Marines earned the Victoria Cross in the First World War, two at
   Zeebrugge, one at Gallipoli, one at Jutland and one on the Western
   Front. After the war Royal Marines took part in the allied intervention
   in Russia. In 1919, the 6th Battalion RMLI mutinied and was disbanded
   at Murmansk.

Second World War

   During the Second World War, a small party of Royal Marines were first
   ashore at Namsos in April 1940, seizing the approaches to the Norwegian
   town preparatory to a landing by the British Army two days later. The
   Royal Marines formed the Royal Marine Division as an amphibiously
   trained division, parts of which served at Dakar and in the capture of
   Madagascar. In addition the Royal Marines formed Mobile Naval Base
   Defence Organisations (MNBDOs) similar to the US Marine Corps Defense
   Battalions. One of these took part in the defence of Crete. Royal
   Marines also served in Malaya and in Singapore, where due to losses
   they were joined with remnants of the 2nd Battalion , Argyll and
   Sutherland Highlanders to form the "Plymouth Argylls". The Royal
   Marines formed one Commando (A Commando) which served at Dieppe. One
   month after Dieppe, most of the 11th Royal Marine Battalion was killed
   or captured in an amphibious landing at Tobruk in Operation Daffodil ,
   again the Marines were involved with the Argyll and Sutherland
   Highlanders this time the 1st Battalion. In 1943 the Infantry
   Battalions of the Royal Marine Division were re-organised as Commandos,
   joining the Army Commandos. The Division command structure became a
   Special Service Brigade command. The support troops became landing
   craft crew.
   Men of No 4 Commando engaged in house to house fighting with the
   Germans at Riva Bella, near Ouistreham.
   Enlarge
   Men of No 4 Commando engaged in house to house fighting with the
   Germans at Riva Bella, near Ouistreham.

   A total of four Special Service, later Commando, Brigades were raised
   during the war, and Royal Marines were represented in all of them. A
   total of nine RM Commandos ( Battalions) were raised during the war,
   numbered from 40 to 48.

   1 Commando Brigade had just one RM Battalion, No 45 Commando. 2
   Commando Brigade had two RM battalions, Nos 40 and 43 Commandos. 3
   Commando Brigade also had two, Nos 42 and 44 Commandos. 4 Commando
   Brigade was entirely Royal Marine after March 1944, comprising Nos 41,
   46, 47 and 48 Commandos.

   1 Commando Brigade took part in the assaults on Sicily and Normandy,
   campaigns in the Rhineland and crossing the Rhine. 2 Commando Brigade
   was involved in the Salerno landings, Anzio, Comacchio, and operations
   in the Argenta Gap. 3 Commando Brigade served in Sicily and Burma. 4
   Commando Brigade served in Normandy and in the Battle of the Scheldt on
   the island of Walcheren during the clearing of Antwerp.

   In January 1945, two further RM Brigades were formed, 116th Brigade and
   117th Brigade. Both were conventional Infantry, rather than in the
   Commando role. 116th Brigade saw some action in the Netherlands, but
   117th Brigade was hardly used operationally. In addition one Landing
   Craft Assault (LCA) unit was stationed in Australia late in the war as
   a training unit.

   In 1946 the Army Commandos were disbanded, leaving the Royal Marines to
   continue the Commando role (with supporting Army elements).

   A number of Royal Marines served as pilots during the Second World War.
   It was a Royal Marines officer who led the attack by a formation of
   Blackburn Skuas that sank the German cruiser Königsberg. Eighteen Royal
   Marines commanded Fleet Air Arm squadrons during the course of the war,
   and with the formation of the British Pacific Fleet were
   well-represented in the final drive on Japan. Captains and Majors
   generally commanded squadrons, whilst in one case Lt. Colonel R.C.Hay
   on HMS Indefatigable was Air Group Co-ordinator from HMS Victorious of
   the entire British Pacific Fleet.

   Only one Marine was awarded a Victoria Cross in the Second World War,
   for action at Lake Comacchio in Italy. So far that is the last awarded
   to a Royal Marine.

After 1945

   Royal Marines in 1972
   Enlarge
   Royal Marines in 1972

   Royal Marines were involved in the Korean War. 41 (Independent)
   Commando was reformed in 1950, and was originally envisaged as a
   raiding force for use against North Korea. It performed this role in
   partnership with the US Navy until after the landing of United States
   Army X Corps at Wonsan. It then joined the 1st Marine Division at
   Koto-Ri. As Task Force Drysdale with Lt. Col. D.B. Drysdale RM in
   command, 41 Commando, a USMC company, a US Army company and part of the
   divisional train fought their way from Koto-Ri to Hagaru after the
   Chinese had blocked the road to the North. It then took part in the
   famous withdrawal from Chosin Reservoir. After that, a small amount of
   raiding followed, before the Marines were withdrawn from the conflict
   in 1951. It received the US Presidential Unit Citation after the USMC
   got the regulations modified to allow foreign units to receive the
   award.

   After playing a part in the long-running Malayan Emergency, the next
   action came in 1956, during the Suez Crisis. Headquarters 3 Commando
   Brigade, and Nos 40, 42 and 45 Commandos took part in the operation. It
   marked the first time that a helicopter assault was used operationally
   to land troops in an amphibious attack. British and French forces
   defeated the Egyptians, but after pressure from the United States, and
   French domestic pressure, they backed down.

   Further action in the Far East was seen during the Konfrontasi. Nos 40
   and 42 Commando went to Borneo at various times to help keep Indonesian
   forces from causing trouble in border areas. The most high profile
   incident of the campaign was a company strength amphibious assault by
   Lima Company of 42 Commando at the town of Limbang to rescue hostages.

   From 1969 onwards Royal Marine units regularly deployed to Northern
   Ireland during The Troubles.

   The Falklands War provided the backdrop to the next action of the Royal
   Marines. Argentina invaded the islands in April 1982. A British task
   force was immediately despatched to recapture them, and given that an
   amphibious assault would be necessary, the Royal Marines were heavily
   involved. 3 Commando Brigade was brought to full combat strength, with
   not only 40, 42 and 45 Commandos, but also the 2nd and 3rd Battalions
   of the Parachute Regiment attached. The troops were landed at San
   Carlos Water at the western end of East Falkland, and proceeded to "
   yomp" across the entire island to the capital, Stanley, which fell on
   14 June 1982. Not only was 3 Commando Brigade deployed, but also a
   Royal Marines divisional headquarters, under Major-General Jeremy
   Moore, who was commander of British land forces during the war.

   3 Commando Brigade was not deployed in the 1991 Gulf War, but was
   deployed to northern Iraq in the aftermath to provide aid to the Kurds.
   The remainder of the 1990s saw no major warfighting deployments, other
   than a divisional headquarters to control land forces during the short
   NATO intervention that ended the Bosnian War.

   More recently Royal Marines detachments have been involved in
   operations in Kosovo, Sierra Leone, and East Timor.

   From 2000 onwards, the Royal Marines began converting from their
   traditional light infantry role towards an expanded force protection
   type role, with the introduction of the Commando 21 concept, leading to
   the introduction of the Viking, the first armoured vehicle to be
   operated by the Royal Marines for half a century.

   In November 2001, after the seizure of Bagram Air Base by the Special
   Boat Service, Charlie Company of 40 Commando became the first British
   regular forces into Afghanistan, using Bagram Air base to support
   British and US Special Forces Operations. With the arrival Bravo
   Company 40 Commando in December 2001 then moving into Kabul itself,
   beginning the building of the infrastructure which became ISAF.

   2002 Saw the deployment of 45 Commando Royal Marines to Afghanistan,
   where contact with enemy forces was expected to be heavy. However
   little action was seen, with no Al-Qaida or Taliban forces being found
   or engaged.

   3 Commando Brigade deployed on Operation TELIC in early 2003 with the
   USMC's 15th Marine Expeditionary Unit under command. The Brigade
   conducted an amphibious assault on the Al Faw peninsula in Iraq,
   securing the port and oil installations to assure continued operability
   of the Iraqs export capability. The attack proceeded well, with light
   casualties. 3 Commando Brigade served as part of the US 1st Marine
   Division and received the US Presidential Unit Citation.

   In late 2006, 3 Commando Brigade relieved 16 Air Assault Brigade in
   Helmand Province, Afghanistan, as part of Operation Herrick.

Traditions and insignia

   image:RoyalMarineBadge.png

   The Royal Marines have a proud history and unique traditions; they have
   so many battle honours that the "globe itself" has become the symbol of
   the Corps.

   The badge of the Royal Marines is designed to commemorate the history
   of the Corps. The Lion and Crown denotes a Royal regiment. King George
   III conferred this honour in 1802 "in consideration of the very
   meritorious services of the Marines in the late war."

   The "Great Globe itself" surrounded by laurels was chosen by King
   George IV as a symbol of the Marines' successes in every quarter of the
   world. The laurels are believed to honour the gallantry they displayed
   during the investment and capture of Belle Isle, off Lorient, in April
   through June 1761.

   The word "Gibraltar" refers to the Siege of Gibraltar in 1704. It was
   awarded in 1827 by George IV as a special distinction for the services
   of four of the old Army Marine regiments (Queen's Own Marines, 1st
   Marines, 2nd Marines, 3rd Marines). All other honours gained by the
   Royal Marines are represented by the "Great Globe". As a consequence,
   there are no battle honours displayed on the colours of the four
   battalion sized units in the corps.

   When referring to individual Commandos: 45 Commando is referred to as
   "four-five" rather than "forty-five commando" as is 42 Commando, 40
   Commando is "forty".

   The only units which carry colours are 40 Commando, 42 Commando, 45
   Commando, and the Fleet Protection Group (which is the custodian of the
   colours of 43 Commando).

   The fouled anchor, incorporated into the emblem in 1747, is the badge
   of the Lord High Admiral and shows that the Corps is part of the Royal
   Navy.

   Per Mare Per Terram ("By Sea, By Land"), the motto of the Marines, is
   believed to have been used for the first time in 1785.

   The regimental quick march of the Corps is A Life on the Ocean Wave,
   while the slow march is Preobrajensky.

   Dress headgear is a white Wolseley pattern pith helmet surmounted by a
   ball, a distinction once standard for artillerymen. This derives from
   the part of the Corps that was once the Royal Marine Artillery.

   The Royal Marines are one of six regiments allowed by the Lord Mayor of
   London to march through the City as a regiment in full array. This
   dates to the charter of Charles II that allowed recruiting parties of
   the Admiral's Regiment of 1664 to enter the City with drums beating and
   colours flying.

Order of Precedence

   As the descendant of the old Marine Regiments of the British Army, the
   Royal Marines has a position in the Order of Precedence of the
   Infantry; this is after the 49th Regiment of Foot, the descendant of
   which is the Royal Gloucestershire, Berkshire and Wiltshire Regiment.
   Therefore, the Royal Marines would parade after the RGBW. This is
   because the 49th Foot was the last Regiment raised prior to the
   formation of the Corps of Marines as part of the Royal Navy in 1755.
   However, when the Royal Navy is on parade, then the RM parades with
   them at the extreme right of the line.
   Preceded by:
   Royal Anglian Regiment Infantry Order of Precedence Succeeded by:
   Yorkshire Regiment
   (14th/15th, 19th and 33rd/76th)

Alliances

     * Flag of Australia  Australia - Royal New South Wales Regiment
     * Flag of Australia  Australia - 1st Commando Regiment
     * Flag of Barbados  Barbados - Barbados Defence Force

     * Flag of Netherlands  Netherlands - Korps Mariners (Bond of
       Friendship)
     * Flag of United States  United States - United States Marine Corps
       (Bond of Friendship)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Royal_Marines"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
