   #copyright

Royal Parks of London

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

   Flowers in the Royal Greenwich Park, London
   Enlarge
   Flowers in the Royal Greenwich Park, London

   The Royal Parks of London are lands originally owned by the monarchy of
   England or the United Kingdom for the recreation (mostly hunting) of
   the royal family. With increasing urbanisation of London, some of these
   were preserved as freely accessible open space and became public parks.
   There are today eight parks formally described by this name and they
   cover around 5,500 acres (2,226 hectares) of land in Greater London.
     * Bushy Park
     * The Green Park
     * Greenwich Park
     * Hyde Park
     * Kensington Gardens
     * The Regent's Park
     * Richmond Park
     * St. James's Park

   Hyde Park and Kensington Gardens (which are adjacent), Green Park,
   Regent's Park and St James's Park are the largest green spaces in
   central London. Bushy Park, Greenwich Park and Richmond Park are in the
   suburbs. Brompton Cemetery, although not a park, is another of the
   green spaces managed by Royal Parks.

   They are managed by The Royal Parks (an executive agency of the
   Department for Culture, Media and Sport) and are policed by the
   Metropolitan Police (the English section of the previous force policing
   the parks, the Royal Parks Constabulary, has been abolished). The main
   form of funding for the Royal Parks is a central government grant. This
   contrasts with most of London's other parks, which are funded by local
   borough councils. The Royal Parks generates additional income from
   commercial activities such as catering and staging public events such
   as concerts.

   The Royal Parks Foundation is a registered charity which raises funds
   to protect, support and create new opportunities within the Parks. They
   have a number of membership schemes such as adoption and champion
   programmes.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Royal_Parks_of_London"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
