   #copyright

Royal Grammar School Worcester

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Education

         Royal Grammar School Worcester
           Motto: Respice et Prospice
   'Remember the Past and Look to the Future'
   Established ante 1291
   Type        Private coeducational secondary
   Principal   Andrew Rattue
   Founder     Bishop Bosel
   Students    1223
   Grades      1-13
   Location    Worcester, UK
   Colours     Blue, green and white
   Website     www.rgsw.org.uk

   The Royal Grammar School Worcester (RGS Worcester) is a British
   independent public school founded before 1291.It is in the north of the
   city and has its origins in the seventh century. The school has many
   notable buildings, architecturally and historically, of which Perrins
   Hall is the most striking. The school has an active Old Pupils'
   Association, the Old Elizabethans, whose membership includes famous
   names.

   The school turned coeducational at the end of 2002, after a history of
   more than 700 years, and includes pre-preparatory and preparatory
   departments, RGS The Grange (both of which are coeducational). The
   school is a day-school; until 1992 accepted boarders, who resided in
   Whiteladies house, a building that is rumoured to contain hidden
   treasure from Charles I, when he sought refuge there during the Civil
   War.

History

   The School was originally founded as a secular monastic school in
   Worcester around 685 by Bishop Bosel. It was located outside the
   monastic precincts (as with the The King's School, Canterbury) and
   catered for the relatives of monks and children intending to go into
   the monastery. The first written reference to the school appears in
   1265 when the Bishop of Worcester, Walter de Cantelupe, sent four
   chaplains into the city to teach.

   Conclusive evidence appears in 1291 when an argument was settled by
   Bishop Godfrey Giffard regarding who owned the wax from the candles
   used at the feast of St Swithun. It was decided that the Scholars of
   the Worcester School owned the wax, and the Rector of Saint Nicholas
   Church had to rely on the generosity of the scholars in order to get
   candle wax. The headmaster is mentioned as Stephen of London. The
   letter dated December 1291 is in the County Records Office in
   Worcester.

   The next headmaster was appointed in 1312 as Hugh of Northampton as
   recorded in the Bishop's register for that year. He was appointed
   personally by the Bishop of Worcester, Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord
   Chancellor Walter Reynolds. The school continued to exist under the
   control of the city guilds through the centuries with various records
   of headmasters being appointed, again listed in the registers of the
   bishops of Worcester. One in particular was 'Sir Richard (Chaplain)',
   who was dismissed by the bishop of Worcester, Philip Morgan, in 1422
   for taking money from the scholars for his own use. He was replaced the
   same year by Sir John Bredel. Sir Richard Pynnington was appointed in
   1485 and is known to have given money to the Archbishop of Canterbury's
   fund, showing the strong connection of the school with the church.

Rival schools

   In 1501 an attempt was made at establishing a rival school in the city,
   but the Bishop of Worcester at the time, Sylvestre de Giglis, passed a
   law that stated any person who set up a school in the city or monastic
   precincts would be excommunicated. Thus all rivals ceased to exist, and
   the headmaster of that said school, Hugh Cratford MA, was created
   headmaster of the City School in 1504.

   In 1541, however, Henry VIII founded a new public school in Worcester;
   The King's School Worcester was based on the former site of the Royal
   Grammar School, and to this day there still exists a level of rivalry
   between the two schools, which manifests itself most obviously at
   sports fixtures (mainly rugby) between the two schools. On 22/11/06
   R.G.S won 11-6. This win was the second in a row for the Royal Grammar
   School, as Cameron Pimlow scored the winning try with ten seconds left
   on the clock.

Royal charters

   Bishop Hugh Latimer wrote to Thomas Cromwell, Lord Chancellor, in 1535
   asking for money to help with the City Walls, the Bridge and the School
   again showing the school's connection with the Bishop. Indeed the
   school was often referred to as the Bishop's School. After a petition
   by some notable citizens of Worcester to endow the school permanently,
   the school was given a Royal Charter by Queen Elizabeth I in 1561 and a
   governing body known as the Six Masters was set up, which remains as
   the governing body today. Amongst famous Six masters are John Wall,
   Earl Beauchamp and Sir Anthony Lechemere.

   The Six Masters acquired much land for the school including its current
   site bought in 1562, the Pitchcroft fields, now used as the city
   racecourse, and land in Herefordshire still owned by the school. The
   1906 Charity Commission survey also recorded a number of Pubs in
   Worcester which still exist today.

   A second Royal Charter was granted in 1843 by Queen Victoria, and the
   title of 'Royal' was conferred in 1869 after the school moved to its
   present site in Worcester. (It is interesting to note that when Queen
   Victoria presented the school with three volumes, personally signed by
   her, she seemed to forget the title of the school. The first volume,
   Leaves from the Journal of Our Life in the Highlands 1848 to 1861,
   referred to the school as the 'Royal Free School of Worcester'; whilst
   the second volume she presented, More Leaves from the Journal of Our
   Life in the Highlands 1862 to 1882, had the name of the school as
   'Queen Elizabeth's Free Grammar School, Worcester.)

Modern times

   In the Twentieth and Twenty-first centuries the school has had
   connections with Worcester Academy USA, with which the RGS is twinned,
   and is currently forming a connection with a secondary school based in
   Tanzania. The school has close links with private schools in the local
   region due to its membership of the 'Monmouth Group', which is a
   collection of schools similar in aims and membership to that of the
   Eton Group. The school is also a member of the HMC meaning it has links
   with schools across the globe. The school has links with four (of the
   other six) Royal Grammar Schools in the country due to its
   participation in an annual cricket competition between five of the RGS
   Schools. The other four RGS schools that compete are those in
   Colchester, Guildford, High Wycombe, and Newcastle with the host school
   changing each year, this year the competition will be held at
   Guildford. (It is interesting to note that RGS Guildford is Andrew
   Rattue's former employer, he was Deputy Head there until he took up the
   post of Headmaster at RGS Worcester.)

Land and buildings

   Many of the current buildings were paid for by the great benefactor and
   collector Charles William Dyson Perrins, who was an Old Boy and a Six
   Master. Perrins Hall was named after his father James Dyson Perrins,
   owner of Lea and Perrins Worcestershire Sauce, who went to the school.
   The Combined Cadet Force (CCF) was set up in 1910 and continues to this
   day, with a rifle range being incorporated into the basement of Perrins
   Hall in 1914.
   Eld Hall and Library from the front of school.
   Enlarge
   Eld Hall and Library from the front of school.

   The School Playing Fields are located nearby at the back of the school,
   next to the Birmingham and Worcester Canal. Flagge Meadow (pronounced
   Flag) was first levelled and used for cricket in 1886 and has seen many
   famous international cricketers play there (see Past Pupils). The other
   playing field across the road from Flagge Meadow is St Oswald's Field
   mainly used for athletics. Athletics is one of the oldest recorded
   sports of the school being played before the 1860s. Today it continues
   as a major summer sport along with cricket, with tournaments being held
   against rival Public Schools from around the country.

   In 1996 the school acquired a site to the north of the city where the
   Prep School moved in 2003, known as RGS The Grange. There are over 40
   acres of playing fields used by both junior and senior school pupils.
   Fresh building work took place at the turn of the millennium as after
   over seven hundred years of recorded history the school decided to
   accept girls into the sixth form in 2002, and by 2007 the school will
   be fully coeducational.

School's halls

   Front of the Clock Block.
   Enlarge
   Front of the Clock Block.

   The Old School buildings were built in 1868 on a site owned by the
   school since 1562. The Main Hall, Eld Hall and adjoining buildings were
   designed by A E Perkins in the Gothic style. It is three bays long with
   a central lantern. A life-size statue of Elizabeth I by R L Boulton
   stands above the central window.

   The Perrins Hall is arguably the finest building.Built in 1914 to the
   plans of Alfred Hill Parker (an Old Boy), it is in a Jacobethan style
   with an Oriel Window on the staircase end and balcony looking over the
   hall. The interior is panelled with fitted bookcases (which make up the
   Dowty Library ) and a plastered ceiling. The organ is on the stage. Two
   war memorials for the two World Wars are housed in the hall. The hall
   is named after James Dyson Perrins of the Lea and Perrins
   Worcestershire sauce factory and was built by his son Charles William
   Dyson Perrins, whose life size portrait hangs opposite the fireplace.
   Portraits of the 20th-century headmasters hang below.

   The Clock Block is connected to the Perrins Hall and was built in 1927,
   and had extension work carried out in 1967 to link it to the Science
   Block. It has a bell tower and clock above the entrance. The bell is
   made of Cotswold Limestone, and is surmounted by the carved head of Old
   Father Time. To commemorate the millennium a stained glass window was
   commissioned and installed over the main entrance to the Clock Block.

Other buildings of note

   Long walk with the science block in the distance, note the small school
   crest in the foreground, featuring the three Black Pears.
   Enlarge
   Long walk with the science block in the distance, note the small school
   crest in the foreground, featuring the three Black Pears.

   The Science buildings form the third side of the courtyard. These were
   built in 1922 and opened in that year by the Duke and Duchess of York
   (later King George VI and Queen Elizabeth). The science buildings were
   subsequently re-furbished in 1996 and thereafter re-opened by Michael
   Portillo. The science block features at one end of a long path which
   comes from the main quad of the school, which is the location of
   Perrins Hall and the Main block. This long path is known as Long Walk,
   in reference not only to its length, but the hope that pupils will not
   run along it!

   Whiteladies House, built in the seventeenth century, was traditionally
   the Headmaster's house and stands opposite Clock Block across the
   gardens. Its West wall is part of the Whiteladies Priory chapel built
   in 1255. Its name derives from the White Habbit that worn by Cistercian
   nuns, who were based at a Nunnery, which was adjacent to Whiteladies.
   The School's library, with the old roof structure clearly visible.
   Enlarge
   The School's library, with the old roof structure clearly visible.

   Other buildings include Priory House (17th Century), Pullinger House
   (1980s), Gordon House (after Adam Lindsay Gordon OE) and Hillard Hall
   (1961, opened by Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother on her second visit
   to the school). The Almshouses, built in 1877 in the Arts and Crafts
   style, were designed by the famous architect Sir Aston Webb and are an
   example of some of his earliest work. Sir Aston Webb designed the
   facade of Buckingham Palace, the Royal Naval College Dartmouth and the
   Victoria and Albert Museum.

   The most recent building work to a school building took place on the
   school's library. The library was refurbished in 2001, and was renamed
   the Philip Sawyer Library (after the former Chairman of the Governors).
   The library is situated above Eld Hall, and features a high vaulted
   roof structure.

Trees of note

   The school has a rare Black Pear tree, planted in 1961,in its main
   courtyard. The tree is associated with Worcester after the visit of
   Queen Elizabeth I in 1574 (at which a scholar from her school welcomed
   her to the city) when she commented on the Black Pear trees. Hence the
   City, County, and the School have three black pears on their Arms.
   Worcestershire County Cricket Club also has a connection with black
   pears, and this can be seen in their logo which features three black
   pears. The club have planted a black pear tree in their ground so that
   there should be an apt link, and have planted younger trees ready for
   the future. The black pears are in fact not black but are dark red and
   taste very bitter and so, it is alleged, taste better when poached in
   red wine..

   During the period of Godfrey Brown's headmastership he was keen to
   increase the number and variety of trees around the school. To that end
   he planted a false acacia (Robina pseudoacacia) in his first year at
   the school, outside of the Clock Building. By the time Mr. Brown came
   to leave the school (28 years later) the tree had grown so rapidly that
   it overtopped the building. However, shortly after he left the tree
   mysteriously wilted and died .

   The most celebrated tree of all at the school, however, was not the
   Black Pear tree but a very ancient mulberry growing near to
   Whiteladies. However in 1955 extension to the Whiteladies meant it had
   to be removed.

School houses

   A school tie showing that the pupil is in Wylde.
   Enlarge
   A school tie showing that the pupil is in Wylde.

   The house system was introduced in 1899 by the then headmaster
   Frederick Arthur Hillard. Initially six houses were established, and
   membership of houses was based on the place of residence of each boy.
   The original houses were: Boarders, Barbourne, City, St. John's, County
   A, and County B. In 1909 the house system was changed to reflect the
   increasing number of boys in the school, and the difficulty of
   allocating pupils on the basis of where they lived. The six houses
   created in 1909 were: School House, for boarders, (which, due to common
   usage, changed to Whiteladies, as this was the building in which the
   boarders lived); Temple (after Henry Temple, headmaster 1850s); Tudor
   (after Elizabeth I); Woolfe (after Richard Woolfe, benefactor 1877 );
   Wylde (after Thomas Wylde, benefactor 1558); and Yewle (after Robert
   Yewle, Six Master 1561).In 1963 two additional houses were created by
   the then headmaster Godfrey Brown, namely Langley (after William
   Langley, Six Master 1561) and Moore (after John Moore, benefactor
   1626).

   Every pupil in the school is a member of a House, with members of the
   same family always being in the same house. Pupils wear different ties
   to represent which house they are in, with the basic tie design being
   the same for all pupils (a navy blue tie with a repeated crown motif)
   but with different coloured stripes to represent the house. In house
   sports events pupils wear different coloured socks to indicate which
   house they are in (this colour being the same as the colour of the tie
   stripe).

                            CAPTION: A table summarising house information

                      House Year of foundation                 Named after
                  Langley          1963              William Langley
                   Moore           1963                John Moore
                  Temple           1909               Henry Temple
                   Tudor           1909                Elizabeth I
                  Woolfe           1909              Richard Woolfe
                   Yewle           1909               Richard Yewle
                Whiteladies        1909        The school's boarding house
                   Wylde           1909               Thomas Wylde

   The colours that represent each house are as follows: Langley is
   represented by Salmon Pink; Moore by Red (although as the original
   beneficiaries of Moore's scholarship to the school had to wear "blue
   coats of ancient cut" the colour, perhaps, ought to be blue); Temple by
   Green; Tudor by Purple; Whiteladies by White, but on the socks for
   sports by Black; Woolfe by Orange; Wylde by a Light Blue; and Yewle by
   Yellow.

   The school has a yearly house championship, which is decided by events
   (which include sporting events such as football, rugby, cricket and
   athletics; shooting; general knowledge; art; chess; and more recently
   dance) throughout the school year in which all eight houses compete,
   with the winners of each event being awarded eight points, the second
   placed house seven, down to the losing house one point. (Some events
   have been tried but not retained as part of the competition, the most
   recent of which is house fishing, which was tried once and not
   retained; some events have changed in format over the years (most
   notably cricket, which went from being a 50- over a side outdoor
   competition, to a much faster paced indoor 6-a-side comeptition). The
   house championship is traditionally called the 'Cock House' (or Cock
   House Cup Competition ) competition, its name deriving from that of the
   Cock. The original cup that was competed for is one which was presented
   to the school in 1902 by the Old Elizabethans' Association; in modern
   times competition is for a cup which was introduced in 1978.

   Among the housemasters of note is John Fletcher Twycross Hills, who was
   housemaster of Yewle from 1930 until 1963. The strongest house in
   recent years has been Wylde, which has won the championship for the
   last 12 years running. Its housemaster, Jon Shorrocks, may well rival
   John Hills as the most note-worthy housemaster: In his 25 years at the
   school, 18 as housemaster, Wylde has won the house championship 16
   times.

Academics

   The school operates on a 9:00 a.m. to 3:50 p.m. schedule, which
   includes 8 periods (of either 35 or 40 minute durations), a morning
   break (of 20 minutes) and a lunch break, where senior students may go
   off site.

   The school offers 17 subjects at A-level and 18 subjects at GCSE level
   (the difference in subjects is due to the fact that the school does not
   offer English A-Level, although it does offer English Literature at
   A-level). The school has had a strong academic track record in recent
   years. In 2005 its A-Level results were the highest in Worcestershire,
   and in the top 150 schools nationally. The school has had a record
   year, this year, of offers to Oxbridge, with 14 students being offered
   conditional offers. In 2005 over a 99% secured places at universities,
   with 6% deciding to take GAP years. This year the school has had
   considerable success in national competitions.

Extracurricular activities

   The school has a number of sports teams which compete with schools from
   both within the locality and those from around the country. The school
   fields teams in cricket, rugby, football, athletics, rowing, tennis,
   netball, hockey and chess. The cricket team had its most successful
   season in the school's history in 2005, with the highest number of
   games won, as well as that it retained the RGS Cup, and the Chesterton
   Cup. In 2006 the Chesterton Cup was won again by the school, meaning
   that it has won it five time, which is more then any other school. The
   rugby team has had success in recent years: reaching the quarter-final
   in the Daily Mail Cup in 2005, and in 2006 beating local rivals Kings
   in the annual derby.

   The school also has a general knowledge team, which in 2006 reached the
   regional final of the National General Knowledge Competition. In 2006
   the school's debating team, similarly, reached the West of England
   finals of the ESU's Schools' Mace Debating Competition, in which they
   were just knocked out by the eventual national winners. In 2004 and
   2005 the school reached the national finals of this competition.

   There is a large and active CCF section at the school, with all three
   branches of the services represented. Students also have the
   opportunity to participate in the The Duke of Edinburgh's Award scheme,
   and all three levels of award are regularly achieved by students. One
   of the other activities that students can participate in is the Ten
   Tors event, with the school having had teams compete at all three
   distance levels.

Notable patrons

     * Bishop Godfrey Giffard (1240-1306) Bishop of Worcester and Lord
       Chancellor of England.
     * Bishop Walter Reynolds (d.1327) Archbishop of Canterbury and Lord
       Chancellor of England.
     * Hugh Latimer (1470-1555) Bishop of Worcester and Protestant Martyr.
     * C.W. Dyson Perrins Chairman Royal Worcester Porcelain and
       collector.
     * Queen Elizabeth I
     * Queen Victoria
     * Godfrey Brown Headmaster 1950-78,Olympic Gold Medallist.

Past pupils

   Famous Old Boys of the school or Worcester Old Elizabethans (more
   complete list here), include (in alphabetical order)
     * John Mark Ainsley (1963-) Tenor
     * Sir Roy Allen (R.G.D. Allen) (1906-1980) Economist
     * Dom Augustine Bradshaw (1574-1618) Catholic missionary
     * Sir Reginald Bray KG (d.1503) Statesman and Architect
     * Tim Curtis (1960-) Cricketer, former captain of Worcestershire.
     * Adam Lindsay Gordon (1833-1870) National Poet of Australia
     * Dean Headley (1970-) Former England International Cricketer
     * Imran Khan (1952-) Cricketer
     * William Langland (1330-1387)
     * Benjamin Williams Leader RA (1831-1923) Artist
     * Sir Thomas Littleton (1407-1481) Lawyer
     * Graham Robb (1958-) Author
     * T J Cobden Sanderson (1840-1922) Arts and Crafts movement pioneer
     * Philip Serrell TV Auctioneer. He is this year's Old Elizabethans'
       President.
     * Jon Turley (1971-) Children's writer
     * Professor Michael Wilding (1942-) Australian Author
     * Sir Edward Leader Williams (1828-1910) civil engineer ( Manchester
       Ship Canal)
     * Augustine Bradshaw (1575-1618) A Benedictine monk.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Royal_Grammar_School_Worcester"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
