   #copyright

São Paulo

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Central & South American
Geography

   São Paulo
   Skyline of São Paulo
   Skyline of São Paulo

   Official flag of São Paulo
              Flag

                              Official seal of São Paulo
                                         Seal

   Motto: Non ducor, duco ( Latin: I am not led, I lead)
   Administrative division of the city
   Administrative division of the city
   Country Brazil
   Region Southeast
   State São Paulo
   Mayor Gilberto Kassab ( PFL)
   Area
    - City 1,522.99 km²
    - Metro 8,051 km²
   Elevation 760 m
   Population
    - City (2006) 11,016,703
    - Density 7,233/km²
    - Metro 19,403,480
   Time zone UTC-3 ( UTC-3)
    - Summer ( DST) UTC-2 ( UTC-2)
   Website: São Paulo

   São Paulo ( pron. IPA: [sɐ̃w̃ 'paw.lu]; Portuguese for Saint Paul) is
   the capital of the state of São Paulo in southeastern Brazil. It is
   located at 23°32′36″S, 46°37′59″W, 400 km (250 miles) from Rio de
   Janeiro, and 1,030 km (640 miles) from federal capital Brasília.

   The city has an area of 1,523.0 square kilometres (588.0 sq. miles) and
   a population of just over 11 million (2006 IBGE estimate), which makes
   it the largest and most populous city in the Southern Hemisphere and a
   global city.

   Nineteen million people live in the greater São Paulo metropolitan area
   as defined by the government (Região Metropolitana) — making it one of
   the five most populous in the world. However, when the many adjacent
   metropolitan areas, such as Baixada Santista, São José dos Campos,
   Campinas, Sorocaba, etc. are included, such as in the Extended
   Metropolitan Area (Complexo Metropolitano Estendido) São Paulo, there
   are nearly 29 million inhabitants, more than any other city in the
   world except Tokyo, Japan with 35 million. (source: IBGE). The region
   forms an even larger urban corridor or megalopolis with Rio de Janeiro
   and Volta Redonda.

   The state of São Paulo is also highly populated, however most
   metropolitan areas hug São Paulo with the exception of Ribeirão Preto.
   The entire state has a population of over 40 million.

   People from the city of São Paulo are called paulistanos, while
   paulista designates anyone from the whole of São Paulo state, including
   the paulistanos. The city's motto is Non ducor, duco, which is Latin
   for "I am not led, I lead". A famous nickname for the city is "Sampa".

History

   Jesuit missionaries José de Anchieta and Manoel da Nóbrega founded the
   village of São Paulo de Piratininga on January 25, 1554. Along with
   their entourage, they established a mission named Colégio de São Paulo
   de Piratininga aimed at converting the Tupi-Guarani Native Brazilians
   to the Catholic religion. Located just beyond the Serra do Mar cliffs,
   overlooking the port city of Santos, and close to River Tietê, the new
   settlement became the natural entrance from the South East coast to the
   vast and fertile plateau to the West that would eventually become the
   State of São Paulo.
   Modern reconstruction, in Pateo do Collegio, downtown, of the Jesuit
   school (now a museum) and church which marked the foundation of the
   city in the 16th century
   Enlarge
   Modern reconstruction, in Pateo do Collegio, downtown, of the Jesuit
   school (now a museum) and church which marked the foundation of the
   city in the 16th century

   In the 17th and 18th centuries, groups of explorers who named
   themselves the Bandeirantes browsed forests and new territories within
   the Latin American continent searching for gold, diamonds and other
   riches. The Bandeirantes ended up being responsible for a great deal of
   the Brazilian territorial expansion beyond the Tordesilhas Line and the
   discovery of many mines of precious metals and stones. There are
   several monuments in honour of their contribution to the city,
   including the Monumento às Bandeiras, one of the landmarks of São
   Paulo.

   São Paulo officially became a city in 1711. In the 19th century, it
   experienced a flourishing economic prosperity, brought about mainly by
   coffee exports, which were shipped abroad from the port of neighbouring
   city Santos. After 1881, waves of immigrants from Italy, Japan and many
   other countries have emigrated to São Paulo in order to work at the
   enormous coffee plantations established in the State. At the beginning
   of the 20th century, the coffee cycle had already plummeted due to,
   among other factors, a sharp decline in international coffee prices.
   The local enterpreneurs then started investing in the industrial
   development of São Paulo, attracting new contingents of overseas
   immigrants to the city.
   Avenida Paulista in 1902
   Enlarge
   Avenida Paulista in 1902

   Another important historical landmark is the University of São Paulo's
   Law School, also known as Largo São Francisco, claimed to be the first
   academic institution in Brazil. First installed into a monastery, it
   was founded on 1 March 1828, right after the beginning of the Brazilian
   Empire, following the increasing need for lawyers and politicians. As
   wealthy Brazilians used to go to Portugal to take undergraduate law
   courses, the Brazilian Emperor, Dom Pedro I, decided that it was time
   to create a national law school. It attracted students from all over
   the country, who gave São Paulo a bohemian lifestyle.

   In 1972 a fire disaster occurred in Andraus Building and in 1974 in
   Joelma Building.

Law and Government

   Palácio dos Bandeirantes - Home to the state government
   Enlarge
   Palácio dos Bandeirantes - Home to the state government

   Because of its economic and demographic weight, São Paulo has always
   played a pivotal role in Brazilian politics. With a constituency larger
   than that of many Brazilian states, the mayor's office is viewed by
   politicians as a springboard for state and national-level offices.

   São Paulo's latest mayors were:
        Mayor      Entry in Left Office in       Party
   Gilberto Kassab 2006     -              PFL
   José Serra      2005     2006           PSDB
   Marta Suplicy   2001     2004           PT
   Celso Pitta     1997     2000           PPB and PTN
   Paulo Maluf     1993     1996           PDS , PPR and PPB
   Luiza Erundina  1989     1992           PT
   Jânio Quadros   1986     1988           PTB
   Mário Covas     1983     1985           PMDB

   See also: List of Mayors of São Paulo

Geography

Physical setting

   Location of the Metropolitan Region
   Enlarge
   Location of the Metropolitan Region

   São Paulo is located on a plateau that is part of the Serra do Mar
   (Portuguese for "Sea Range"), itself part of the vast region known as
   the Brazilian Highlands, with an average elevation around 800m (2,625
   ft) - though at a distance of only about 70 km (40mi) from the Atlantic
   Ocean. This distance is covered by two highways ( Anchieta and
   Imigrantes, see "Transportation" section below) that roll down the
   range, leading to the port city of Santos and the beach resort of
   Guarujá.

   Rolling terrain prevails within the urbanized areas of São Paulo, but
   to the north, the Serra da Cantareira (Cantareira Range) displays
   higher elevations and a sizable remnant of the Atlantic Rain Forest.
   The whole region is very tectonically stable, and no significant
   seismic activity has ever been recorded.
   The building-dense Avenida Paulista surroundings as seen from the
   mostly low-rise neighborhood of Jardins
   Enlarge
   The building-dense Avenida Paulista surroundings as seen from the
   mostly low-rise neighbourhood of Jardins

   The Tietê River was once a source of freshwater and recreation for São
   Paulo. However, in the latter half of the 20th century, like its
   tributary, the Pinheiros, it became grossly polluted by raw sewage and
   industrial effluents. A substantial clean-up program for both rivers
   has met with some success. Neither is navigable in the stretch that
   flows through the city, but transportation is important on the Tietê
   further downstream, as the river is part of the River Plate basin.

   There are no large natural lakes in the region, but the Guarapiranga
   and Billings reservoirs are used for power generation, water storage,
   and recreation.

   The original flora consisted mainly of a great variety of broadleaf
   evergreens. Today, non-native species are common, as the mild climate
   and abundant rainfall permit a multitude of tropical, subtropical and
   temperate plants to be cultivated, with eucalyptus being especially
   ubiquitous.

Climate

   Ibirapuera Park and Ginasio
   Enlarge
   Ibirapuera Park and Ginasio

   According the Köppen climate classification São Paulo has a humid
   subtropical climate. Though generally considered by Brazilians to be
   drizzly and rather cool, São Paulo's climate is by world standards
   actually warm and mild. Summer temperatures seldom reach 30°C (86°F)
   during Summer, while frost is rare during Winter. All-time record
   temperatures are 35.3ºC in November 15, 1985 and -2.1°C (28°F) in 1918
   (in the mountains around the city -3.9ºC were registered in August 2,
   1955). Snow flurries were reported officialy just on one occasion in
   June 25, 1918. Rainfall is abundant, especially in the warmer months,
   but rare between June and August. Neither São Paulo or the nearby coast
   has ever been hit by a tropical cyclones, while tornadic activity is
   uncommon.

     Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Year
   Avg high °C (°F) 27 (81) 28 (83) 27 (81) 25 (77) 23 (74) 22 (71) 21
   (70) 23 (73) 23 (73) 25 (77) 26 (78) 26 (79) 24 (76)
   Avg low °C (°F) 19 (67) 19 (67) 18 (66) 17 (63) 15 (59) 13 (56) 12 (54)
   13 (56) 14 (57) 16 (60) 17 (63) 18 (65) 16 (61)
   Rainfall mm (in.) 241 (9.5) 203 (8.0) 142 (5.6) 58 (2.3) 43 (1.7) 38
   (1.5) 28 (1.1) 36 (1.4) 58 (2.3) 150 (5.9) 122 (4.8) 198 (7.8) 1317
   (51.9)

Metropolitan region

   A simulated-colour satellite image of the Greater São Paulo
   metropolitan area (centre), Campinas (above), Sao Jose dos Campos
   (right), and the coastal towns of Santos and São Vicente (below)
   Enlarge
   A simulated-colour satellite image of the Greater São Paulo
   metropolitan area (centre), Campinas (above), Sao Jose dos Campos
   (right), and the coastal towns of Santos and São Vicente (below)

   São Paulo is officially inserted in a larger metropolitan region named
   "Grande São Paulo" ("Greater São Paulo"). The region holds, in total,
   39 municipalities and a population of more than 19 million (as of 2005
   according to IBGE).

Boroughs

   The City of São Paulo is divided into 31 boroughs, or more exactly,
   subprefectures (in Portuguese subprefeituras), whose names are:
     * Aricanduva
     * Butantã
     * Campo Limpo
     * Capela do Socorro
     * Casa Verde
     * Cidade Ademar
     * Cidade Tiradentes
     * Ermelino Matarazzo
     * Freguesia do Ó
     * Guaianases
     * Ipiranga

                           * Itaim Paulista
                           * Itaquera
                           * Jabaquara
                           * Jaçanã
                           * Lapa
                           * M'Boi Mirim
                           * Mooca
                           * Parelheiros
                           * Penha
                           * Perus

                                             * Pinheiros
                                             * Pirituba
                                             * Santana
                                             * Santo Amaro
                                             * São Mateus
                                             * São Miguel
                                             * Sé
                                             * Vila Maria
                                             * Vila Mariana
                                             * Vila Prudente

   Each subprefecture is divided into several districts (in most cases,
   two or three). The subprefectures with the greatest number of districts
   are the boroughs of Sé, in the historical downtown, Butantã, the
   location of USP, Lapa, Penha and Mooca, all having eleven districts.
   Well known districts include:
     * Morumbi
     * Vila Olímpia
     * Pacaembu
     * Higienópolis

                      * Vila Madalena
                      * Paulista
                      * Centro
                      * Liberdade

                                       * Ibirapuera

   These boroughs are arranged in nine regions, which are the following:
     * Centre - the most central borough, it includes only the borough of
       Sé
     * Northeast - residential middle-class area, near the city of
       Guarulhos, and with a few industries. In this region is placed the
       intermunicipal bus station and some event places.
     * Northwest - it's a poor area, crossed by the railway and roadway to
       Campinas and other important cities of the state.
     * West - It's an important university and cultural region. In this
       region is placed the Paulista Avenue and most of the luxury
       neighborhoods.
     * Central-South - This region has the highest per capita income of
       the city. Many offices and brazilian headquarters of multinational
       companies are settled there. This includes Morumbi, Santo Amaro and
       Nações Unidas.
     * Southeast - Former industrial region, now settled by some "new
       rich" people. Some important historical boroughs like Ipiranga and
       Mooca are in this region.
     * East 1 - It's a developing region, settled by proletarian and low
       income people, but with some urban services.
     * South and East 2 - The poorest areas of the city, with a large
       number of people living in favelas and high criminal rate.

Social Policies

   In the vicinity of São Paulo are three SOS Children's Villages':
     * SOS Children's Village Poá (35km, opened 1968)
     * SOS Children's Village São Bernardo do Campo (35km, Riacho Grande,
       opened 1970)
     * SOS Children's Village Rio Bonito (opened 1980)
          + Capacity: home of up to 108 children, take care for up to 440
            pre-school children, Primary School

Economy

   Berrini avenue: the brand new financial center of São Paulo
   Enlarge
   Berrini avenue: the brand new financial centre of São Paulo

   São Paulo is the financial and industrial centre of Latin America. The
   city is considered to headquarter more German companies than any other
   single city outside Germany. Likewise, it is also considered to
   headquarter more American companies among any other city outside the
   United States. São Paulo's GDP is around US$ 260 billion in 2006
   dollars.

   São Paulo's stock exchange is the Bovespa, while its futures exchange
   is BM&F. Its financial districts are located on the surroundings of
   Avenida Paulista and in the Centro Velho (Old Centre). Other important
   business districts are located in the boroughs of Pinheiros and Santo
   Amaro, including the large artery Faria Lima.

   There are a number of highly specialised regions, like Bom Retiro and
   Brás (wholesale garment districts), Consolação (lighting equipment),
   Rua Santa Ifigênia (electrical and electronic parts), Rua Teodoro
   Sampaio (furniture and musical equipment), the posh Rua Oscar Freire
   (designer and label stores), Avenida Europa (automobiles) and the
   crowded Rua Vinte Cinco de Março. São Paulo is also home to a large
   number of advertising and broadcasting companies.
   Trading floor of the Brazilian Mercantile and Futures Exchange, located
   in downtown São Paulo
   Enlarge
   Trading floor of the Brazilian Mercantile and Futures Exchange, located
   in downtown São Paulo

   In the last few years, São Paulo has become a major home to many
   international events and fairs, visited by the most varied audiences,
   ranging from scientists and artists to merchants and entrepreneurs,
   coming from Brazil and also abroad. Some of the most important events
   that usually take place in the city are:
     * Shoes and Sport Items International Fair - COUROMODA
     * Textile Industry International Fair - FENIT
     * Construction International Fair
       Commercial complex in Itaim Bibi, one of the main business
       districts in the city
       Enlarge
       Commercial complex in Itaim Bibi, one of the main business
       districts in the city
     * Shoes, Fashion Accessories and Machines International Fair -
       FRANCAL
     * Cosmethics and Beauty International Fair - COSMETICA
     * Lodging-related products, services and equipment International Fair
       - EQUIPOTEL
     * Car International Fair - Salão do Automóvel
     * International Book Fair - Bienal Internacional do Livro

   There has been a gradual change in the city economic profile since a
   decade ago, from a strongly industrialized base to service and
   technology-oriented activity. Intensive manpower-consuming industries
   have been replaced by a great number of high-technology industries and
   service providers of many flavours. Business has increased, many new
   colleges have been founded, and there has been a boom in many sectors,
   particularly shopping malls, entertainment, construction and
   business-oriented tourism.

Demographics

   Liberdade, São Paulo
   Enlarge
   Liberdade, São Paulo

   São Paulo has significant ethnic diversity in comparison to other major
   cities:
     * 5,000,000 are direct or indirect descendants of Italians. There is
       a building named Edifício Itália (Italy Building), in honour of the
       Italians. It was once the tallest building of the city (165m).
     * 3,000,000 people are direct or indirect descendants of Portuguese.
     * 2,000,000 are direct or indirect descendants of Spaniards.
     * 1,500,000 people have direct or indirect African ancestry.
     * 1,000,000 people are direct or indirect descendants of Germans.
     * 850,000 people are direct or indirect descendants of Lebanese
       immigrants— by far the largest number of Lebanese outside Lebanon.
     * More than 1 million people are direct or indirect descendants of
       Japanese. São Paulo has the largest number of Japanese outside
       Japan. The Japanese community's historical centre is the Liberdade
       neighbourhood.
     * São Paulo is home to the largest Jewish community in Brazil with
       about 130,000 people.
     * There is a considerable number of immigrants from other countries
       in Latin America, especially Argentina, Uruguay, Paraguay, Bolivia,
       and Chile.
     * Note that many paulistanos have mixed ethnic origins; the numbers
       above may count individuals belonging to multiple groups.

   Other sizable groups are:
     * Chinese
     * Koreans
     * Armenians
     * Lithuanian
     * Greeks
     * Syrians
     * Polish

Languages

   As in the rest of Brazil, Portuguese is the dominant language of the
   vast majority of the population. However, many other languages, such as
   German, Japanese, Arabic, Spanish, Chinese, and Korean, are still
   spoken by first and second-generation members of their respective
   ethnic communities. Italian (its southern dialects in particular) was
   once widespread, and though most Italo-Brazilians in the city are no
   longer fluent in it, typical paulistano Portuguese retains a
   distinctive Italian cadence.

Education

   São Paulo hosts the most well known, and often considered most
   important, university of Brazil, the University of São Paulo (USP). A
   public university, maintained by the State of São Paulo USP is free to
   any student who is accepted. It is one of the largest schools in the
   country, and boasts large research programs, as well as one of the best
   educational centers in the country. Located in the city is the main
   campus as well as the medical and law school. Several smaller campuses
   are located throughout the state. More than 60% of scientific
   production came from this institution.

   There are a number of private universities throughout the city, and
   another small public school. As for secondary education, the majority
   of schools are private, with public schools often being dangerous and
   not having good education, as well as opportunities for those who
   graduate from them

   Also, Sao Paulo city host the National Institute of Nuclear Research
   IPEN ( Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Nucleares) and the biggest
   public hospital ( Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da
   USP).

Sights of Interest

   Avenida Paulista at dusk
   Enlarge
   Avenida Paulista at dusk

   São Paulo is a major cultural centre. The city has an ethnically
   diverse metropolitan area, with heavy Italian, Spanish, Portuguese,
   German, Arab and Japanese influences.

   The city is known for its varied and sophisticated cuisine, ranging
   from Chinese to French, from fast food chains to five star restaurants.
   There are 52 different types of cuisines in São Paulo, and more than 12
   thousand restaurants. Other venues such as thousands of bars, pubs,
   lounges and discos cater to a variety of music tastes.

   São Paulo is home to the University of São Paulo and the Federal
   University of São Paulo, as well as many other private colleges such as
   the Pontifical Catholic University of São Paulo and Mackenzie
   Presbyterian University, the latter founded by North American
   missionaries; two major art museums ( MASP and Pinacoteca do Estado), a
   major symphonic orchestra ( OSESP), and a Formula One Grand Prix racing
   circuit ( Interlagos).

   There are two major airports in the São Paulo metropolitan area:
   Governor André Franco Montoro (also known as Guarulhos, neighbour city
   where it's located, and Cumbica, a district in said city) ( GRU, for
   domestic and international flights) and Congonhas, insteresting
   building in the 50's architectural style ( CGH, for domestic flights).

Sights

     * Edifício Itália (skyscraper with observation deck)
     * Banespa Building (skyscraper with observation deck and museum)
     * Pátio do Colégio (founding site of the city)
     * Catedral da Sé (the metropolitan cathedral, a symbol of the city)
     * Museu Paulista (a museum built in honour of the proclamation of the
       independence of Brazil)
     * Solar da Marquesa (a rare example of 18th century architectural
       style)
     * Paulista Avenue (one of the most important thoroughfares of the
       city and the site of

   many cultural centers and museums, such as the MASP and Centro Cultural
   Itau)
     * Ibirapuera Park (the second largest park of the city (Parque do
       Carmo is the greatest), is also home to several museums. It is
       known for its buildings designed by the architect Oscar Niemeyer,
       such as the OCA and the new Ibirapuera Auditorium)
     * Roof floor of Hotel Unique has a spectacular view of the city
       especially at night

   Here is as summary of the events that occur every year or every two
   years in the São Paulo City:

Festival for Electronic Art

   Every two years, Associação Cultural Videobrasil's International
   Electronic Art Festival brings groundbreaking work by cream-of-the-crop
   artists from all over the world to São Paulo. In keeping with the
   constant transformations in media and support, the curatorship has
   added installations, performances, VJs, CD-ROM art, and internet art to
   the programme.

   The Festival includes a competitive exhibition of so-called southern
   circuit and an extensive parallel programme. Art shows, debates and
   meetings introduce new ideas and art work, setting new guidelines for
   contemporary art in Brazil.

   Exhibitions featuring work by prominent electronic artists are also
   part of the Festival. Brazilian pioneers such as Rafael França and
   Olhar Eletrônico, and international guests such as Nam June Paik, Bill
   Viola and Gary Hill, have featured in the event’s past editions. Each
   edition has a theme of its own.
   The well-known "Monumento às Bandeiras", by Victor Brecheret - one of
   the symbols of São Paulo
   Enlarge
   The well-known "Monumento às Bandeiras", by Victor Brecheret - one of
   the symbols of São Paulo

Bienal de São Paulo

   The São Paulo Art Biennial is a cultural event hosted every two years.
   Almost 1 million people visited the 26th Bienal in 2004.

   Its theme was chosen to enable a wide range of artistic positions to
   feel comfortable. The concept of "Free Territory" involved various
   dimensions: it had a physical-geographical, a socio-political as well
   as an aesthetic dimension — the latter, of course, being of greatest
   interest in the context of this exhibition.

   In order to emphasise the thematic unity of the overall exhibition, the
   invited artists and those representing the countries are mixed together
   on the 25,000 square metres of the spacious Oscar Niemeyer Pavilion.
   Despite the complexity of individual voices, the end result was
   intended to be a unity.

   In addition to an intensification of the North-South dialogue inside
   Brazil, the Bienal's aims include the promoting of links between
   non-European cultures along a South-South orientation.

São Paulo Fashion Week

   Brazil first entered the international fashion circuit with the
   increasing reputation of famous Brazilian top models such as Adriana
   Lima, Gisele Bündchen, Fernanda Tavares, Ana Beatriz Barros and Ana
   Hickmann, and the "discovery" of some fresh talents such as Alexandre
   Herchcovitch by some international fashion magazines. As a consequence
   of this, São Paulo Fashion Week is the place to see and to be seen in
   Brazilian fashion scene, always attracting a number of international
   editors and models.

   Nowadays, São Paulo Fashion Week is one of the most relevant fashion
   events in Brazil. It takes place twice a year at the building of Bienal
   de São Paulo.

São Paulo Gay Parade

   Also a major event in the city, the São Paulo Gay Parade attracted
   about 3 million people to Avenida Paulista in 2006, according to
   official statistics. It is usually opened by the city's mayor. A huge
   carnival goes all the way through the city centre. The last parade was
   held on June 17, 2006. It is one of the largest gay pride events in the
   world.

March For Jesus

   The March for Jesus is a Christian parade in Avenida Paulista. In 2005
   about 3 million people participated in the event. The first March for
   Jesus was in 1987 in the city of London, and was established by the
   pastor Roger Forster, and by the singer and composer Graham Kendrick.
   In 1998, more than 10 million people in more than 170 nations took part
   in the event.

Other events

     * Anima Mundi Festival
     * AnimeCon - International Anime Convention
     * AnimeDreams - International Anime Convention
     * Comdex
     * Mercado Mundo Mix
     * São Paulo International Film Festival
     * Carnival of São Paulo
     * Skol Beats
     * Tim Festival
     * Festa de N. S. Achiropita
     * Video Games Live

Sports

Soccer

   Morumbi - Stadium
   Enlarge
   Morumbi - Stadium
   Pacaembu - Stadium
   Enlarge
   Pacaembu - Stadium

   As in the rest of Brazil, Soccer is by far the most important sport in
   the city. The major clubs in São Paulo are Corinthians, Palmeiras and
   São Paulo. They are all playing in the Brazilian Série A. The fourth
   club of the city is Portuguesa, currently playing in Brazilian Série B.
   Another popular club in São Paulo is Santos FC from the nearby coastal
   city of the same name, Santos. There are two other small clubs in the
   city, Juventus and Nacional.

   Soccer teams
       Club     League           Venue           Established
    Palmeiras   Série A Parque Antártica Stadium 1914
   Corinthians  Série A Parque São Jorge Stadium 1910
   São Paulo FC Série A Morumbi Stadium          1935
    Portuguesa  Série B Canindé Stadium          1920
     Juventus   Série C Rua Javari Stadium       1924
     Nacional   Série C Nicolau Alayon Stadium   1919
   The Interlagos Circuit
   Enlarge
   The Interlagos Circuit

Saint Silvester Marathon

   The Saint Silvester Marathon takes place every New Year's Eve ( 31
   December). It was first held in 1925, when the competitors ran about
   8,000 metres around the streets. Since then, the distance raced has
   varied, and it is now fixed at 15 km. Registration takes place from 1
   October, with the maximum number of entrants limited to 15,000.

Brazilian Grand Prix

   The Brazilian Grand Prix is a Formula One championship race which
   occurs at the Autódromo José Carlos Pace in Interlagos.

Other sports

   Volleyball, basketball and tennis are other major sports. There are
   several traditional sports clubs in São Paulo that are home for teams
   in many championships. The most important are Pinheiros (volleyball,
   basketball and handball), Paulistano (basketball), Banespa
   (volleyball), Hebraica (basketball) and São Paulo Athletic Club ( rugby
   union).

Transportation

   Imigrantes highway
   Enlarge
   Imigrantes highway

   The city is crossed by many of the most important roads of the country,
   such as the BR-116, SP-270, SP-280, Rodovia Anhangüera, Rodovia dos
   Bandeirantes, Rodovia Anchieta, Rodovia Castelo Branco and Rodovia dos
   Imigrantes. Some railways also cross the city. They are, however, very
   old and were constructed intending not to transport people, but to
   transport coffee to the Santos seaport. However, there are new projects
   to build new medium-high speed railway tracks from São Paulo to Rio de
   Janeiro (a project has been announced by the Brazilian government to
   build a high speed railway service in order to link the country's
   biggest cities, the trains would go as fast as 280 km/h, and would link
   São Paulo and Rio in about 1 hour and 30 minutes. These works are still
   waiting to be officially announced by the government, however some news
   has been heard on this matter), Campinas and to São Paulo-Guarulhos
   Airport. The other important project is the "Expresso Bandeirantes",
   that is a medium speed rail service (about 160 km/h) from São Paulo to
   Campinas, which would make the journey go from the hour and a half
   nowadays to about 50 minutes, linking São Paulo, Jundiaí, Campinas
   Airport, and Campinas city centre. This service is also going to be
   connected to the railway service that is going to link São Paulo city
   centre and Guarulhos Airport. Works on this last railway service
   between São Paulo city centre and Guarulhos Airport were announced to
   begin in 2007, which is going to be the beginning of the renewal of
   Brazilian passenger railway service.

   São Paulo has three airports. In 2005, about 33 million people passed
   through the city's airports (mainly from Congonhas and Guarulhos
   International, the only two operating commercial flights) São Paulo
   thus contains the most crowded air space both in Latin America and the
   Southern Hemisphere. Infraero, Brazil's main airport authority,
   predicts that with the new remodelling of Guarulhos Airport, within
   five years São Paulo's airports will handle about 45 million. There are
   also plans to expand the Campinas Viracopos Airport. Campinas is
   located about 90 km from São Paulo. In about 15 years, São
   Paulo-Campinas airspace will expand from the 34 million figure nowadays
   to 100 million. Congonhas Domestic Airport operates domestic and
   regional flights, mainly to Rio de Janeiro, Belo Horizonte and
   Brasília. Campo de Marte Airport handles some private and small
   airplanes. Guarulhos International Airport, known to paulistanos as
   "Cumbica", located 25 km north east from the city centre in the
   neighbouring city of Guarulhos, operates domestic and international
   flights.
   The Luz Railway Station in the downtown.
   Enlarge
   The Luz Railway Station in the downtown.

   São Paulo has the highest per capita helicopter ownership in the
   developing world and now rivals Tokyo and New York as the world's
   leading helicopter user. The owners are an elite wealthy class who take
   advantage of around one hundred helipads and heliports to conveniently
   avoid heavy traffic and to rise above contact with the more dangerous
   aspects of urban life.
   Consolação subway station in Paulista is on the Green Line
   Enlarge
   Consolação subway station in Paulista is on the Green Line

   The city has 60.5 km of underground railway systems (34.6 km fully
   underground) (the São Paulo Metro, locally known as the Metrô), with 4
   lines in operation and 57 stations (33 underground), complemented by
   another 270 km of CPTM (Companhia de Trens Metropolitanos, or "Company
   of Metropolitan Trains") railways. Both CPTM and the underground
   railway lines carry some 3.5 million people on an average weekday, and
   a few new underground lines to be constructed are expected to add
   another million people to the system within the next five years. All
   the main projects from the São Paulo railway and underground system for
   the next 10 years can be found on the Portuguese pages of the Metrô and
   CPTM. The projects are said to expand the system from the current 330
   km to more than 500 km on the next 10 years.
   23 de Maio one of the most important freeways in Sao Paulo
   Enlarge
   23 de Maio one of the most important freeways in Sao Paulo

   The bulk of the public transportation (public and private companies) is
   composed of approximately 17,000 buses, colored uniformily according to
   the non-central region served (ex.: light green for the buses that go
   center-southwest, dark blue for northern area). Until recently, there
   was a strong presence of informal transportation (dab vans), now fully
   legalized and operating under the same colour scheme of the main
   system.

   São Paulo grew quickly from the 1940s to the 1980s and many roads and
   buildings were constructed without major planning. As a result, heavy
   traffic is common in the main avenues of the city, and traffic jams are
   relatively common in its larger highways. The main means of commuting
   into the city is by car and by bus. An effective way of avoiding heavy
   vehicles traffic in the city, such as buses and trucks that crossed the
   city for other destinations, was planned by ex-governor Mário Covas as
   a ring of road that circles the city, called Rodoanel Mario Covas, and
   is currently beeing built by DERSA.

Sister cities

     * Abidjan, Ivory Coast ( 1981)
     * Alta Floresta, Brazil ( 1995)
     * Amman, Jordan ( 1997)
     * Asunción, Paraguay ( 1998)
     * Bamako, Mali ( 2000)
     * Barcelona, Spain
     * Beijing, PR China ( 1999)
     * Budapest, Hungary ( 2000)
     * Buenos Aires, Argentina ( 1999)
     * Cluj-Napoca, Romania ( 2000)
     * Coimbra, Portugal ( 1996)
     * Córdoba, Spain ( 2001)
     * Damascus, Syria ( 1999)
     * Funchal, Portugal ( 1998)
     * Góis, Portugal ( 2000)
     * Havana, Cuba ( 1997)
     * Johannesburg, South Africa ( 1995)
     * La Paz, Bolivia ( 1999)
     * La Plata, Argentina ( 1988)
     * Leiria, Portugal ( 1996)
     * Lima, Peru

     * Lisbon, Portugal ( 1995)
     * Luanda, Angola ( 1993)
     * Macau SAR, China ( 1999)
     * Mendoza, Argentina ( 1998)
     * Milan, Italy ( 1962)
     * Montevideo, Uruguay ( 2001)
     * Naha, Japan ( 1998)
     * Norfolk, Virginia, USA ( 1988)
     * Osaka, Japan ( 1985)
     * Paris, France ( 2004)
     * Presidente Franco, Paraguay ( 1994)
     * San Cristóbal de La Laguna, Spain ( 1990)
     * San José, Costa Rica
     * Santiago, Chile ( 1998)
     * Santiago de Compostela, Spain ( 2000)
     * Seoul, South Korea ( 1997)
     * Shanghai, PR China ( 1988)
     * Tel Aviv, Israel ( 2004)
     * Sydney, Australia ( 1997)
     * Toronto, Canada ( 1999)
     * Yerevan, Armenia ( 1999)

Current critical problems

   Since the beginning of the 20th century, São Paulo has been the major
   economic centre in Brazil. With the arrival of the two World Wars and
   the Great Depression, exports of coffee to the United States and Europe
   were critically affected, leading rich coffee farmers to invest in
   industrialisation in the city. The new job positions in the industrial
   sector contributed to attracting many people from other regions of the
   country, especially from the north east. From a population of merely
   32,000 inhabitants in 1880, São Paulo increased its population to
   approximately 250,000 in 1900, 1,800,000 in 1940, 4,750,000 in 1960 and
   8,500,000 in 1980. The effects of this populational boom in the city
   are:
     * Although urbanization plans have been implemented in some areas,
       São Paulo has developed quickly without major planning.
     * Ineffective public transport associated with a high number of cars
       and other vehicles in circulation lead to consistently congested
       traffic on many roads of the city.
     * Due to heavy usage and poor engineering, the quality of the
       pavement on certain roads (especially in the outskirts of the city)
       is problematic, and potholes and other asphalt defects are common.
     * Approximately 830,000 people - about 5% of the population - live in
       slums (favelas) in São Paulo and surrounding regions.
     * The so-called PCC ( Primeiro Comando da Capital or First Command of
       the Capital) is a criminal faction whose terrorist attacks in May
       and July 2006 shocked its citizens. However, the main target of
       these attacks were not civilians, but the police and government
       officials.
     * Although there exists several parks across the city, the green area
       per capita is very small. Because of the lack of developed green
       spaces and the relative impermeability of the paved ground, floods
       are common in particular areas. Rain water cannot be drained
       properly and water accumulates quickly, causing floods mostly
       during the summer.
     * Air pollution is high. The two major rivers crossing the city,
       River Tietê and River Pinheiros, are severely polluted. A major
       project intended to clean up these rivers is underway, but complete
       success is not likely to be achieved for at least 14 years
       [citation needed].
     * Crime rate is high, and many paulistanos have sought personal
       security by living in gated communities or high-rise secured
       condominiums.

Famous Paulistanos

     * Ayrton Senna
     * Rubens Barrichello
     * Leandro Barbosa
     * Gustavo Borges
     * Luciano Burti
     * Cafu
     * Hélio Castroneves
     * Mário de Andrade
     * Oswald de Andrade
     * Emerson Fittipaldi
     * Eder Jofre
     * Amyr Klink
     * Anita Malfatti
     * Felipe Massa
     * Fernando Meirelles
     * Nenê
     * José Carlos Pace
     * Rivelino
     * Robert Scheidt
     * Ricardo Semler
     * Fernando Meligeni
     * Miguel Kohlmann

Major holidays

     * January 1 – New Year
     * January 25 – São Paulo's Anniversary — city holiday
     * Between February and March – Carnival (Brazilian national holiday,
       it starts on the Friday to Tuesday preceding Lent. The holiday ends
       at noon on Ash Wednesday)
     * Easter
     * April 21 – Tiradentes
     * May 1 – Labour Day
     * Second Sunday in May – Mother's Day
     * Between May and June – Corpus Christi
     * July 9 – Constitutional Revolution of 1932
     * Second Sunday in August – Father's Day
     * September 7 – Brazil Independence Day
     * October 12 – Our Lady's Day/ Children's Day
     * November 2 – All Souls' Day
     * November 15 – Republic Day
     * November 20 – Afro-Brasilian's Consience Day
     * December 25 – Christmas

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S%C3%A3o_Paulo"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
