   #copyright

Saint Kitts and Nevis

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Central & South American
Countries; Countries

   Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis
   Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis

   Flag of Saint Kitts and Nevis Coat of arms of Saint Kitts and Nevis
   Flag                          Coat of arms
   Motto: Country Above Self
   Anthem: " O Land of Beauty!"
   Royal anthem: " God Save the Queen"
   Location of Saint Kitts and Nevis
   Capital
   (and largest city) Basseterre
   17°18′N 62°44′W
   Official languages English
   Government Parliamentary democracy
   Commonwealth Realm
    - Monarch Queen Elizabeth II
    - Governor-General Sir Cuthbert Sebastian
    - Prime Minister Dr. Denzil Douglas
   Independence From the United Kingdom
    - Date 19 September 1983
   Area
    - Total 261 km² ( 207th)
   101 sq mi
    - Water (%) Negligible
   Population
    - July 2005 estimate 42,696 ( 209th)
    - Density 164/km² ( 64th)
   424/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2002 estimate
    - Total $339 million ( 213th)
    - Per capita $14,649 ( 47th)
   HDI  ( 2003) 0.834 (high) ( 49th)
   Currency East Caribbean dollar ( XCD)
   Time zone ( UTC-4)
   Internet TLD .kn
   Calling code + 1-869

   Saint Kitts and Nevis, officially the Federation of Saint Christopher
   and Nevis (or the Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis), located in the
   Leeward Islands, is a unitary island nation in the Caribbean and the
   smallest nation in the Americas in both area and population. The
   capital city and government for the federated state is mainly on the
   larger island of Saint Kitts (formerly named Saint Christopher). The
   smaller state of Nevis (formerly named: Nuestra Señora de las Nieves)
   lies about 3 km southeast of Saint Kitts. Historically the British
   dependency of Anguilla was also a part of this union, which was then
   known collectively as Saint Christopher-Nevis-Anguilla.

   Although Saint Kitts and Nevis are geographically within the Leeward
   Islands, they are relatively close to a cluster of several other
   islands. To the north-northwest lie the islands of Saint Eustatius,
   Saba, Saint Barthélemy, and Saint Martin. To the northeast are Antigua
   and Barbuda, and to the south-east is Montserrat.

   Both the names Saint Christopher and Saint Kitts are given in the
   Constitution of Saint Christopher and Nevis.

History

   Saint Kitts and Nevis along with Anguilla, both colonies of the United
   Kingdom, became an associated state with full internal autonomy in
   1967. Angullians rebelled, and their island was allowed to separate
   from the others in 1971. St. Kitts and Nevis achieved independence in
   1983. It is the newest sovereign nation of the Americas. In August
   1998, a vote in Nevis on a referendum to separate from St. Kitts fell
   short of the two-thirds majority needed. In late September 1998,
   Hurricane Georges caused approximately $445 million in damages and
   limited GDP growth for the year.

   Alexander Hamilton, the first United States Secretary of the Treasury,
   was born on Nevis and spent his childhood there and on the island of
   St. Croix.

Politics

   The country is an independent Commonwealth Realm with Queen Elizabeth
   II as its head of state, represented in St. Kitts and Nevis by a
   Governor-General, who acts on the advice of the Prime Minister and the
   Cabinet. The prime minister is the leader of the majority party of the
   House, and the cabinet conducts affairs of state.

   St. Kitts and Nevis has a unicameral legislature, known as the National
   Assembly. It is comprised of fourteen members - eleven elected
   Representatives - three of whom are from the island of Nevis - and
   three Senators who are appointed by the Governor-General, two of whom
   being appointed on the advice of the Prime Minister, and one on the
   advice of the leader of the opposition. Unlike in other countries,
   Senators do not constitute a separate Senate or upper house of
   parliament, but sit in the National Assembly, alongside
   Representatives. All members serve five-year terms. The Prime Minister
   and the Cabinet are responsible to the Parliament.

   Saint Kitts and Nevis are a full & participating member of the
   Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean
   States (OECS).
   Parishes of Saint Kitts and Nevis
   Enlarge
   Parishes of Saint Kitts and Nevis

Parishes

   The federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis is divided into fourteen
   parishes, Nine divisions on Saint Kitts and Five divisions on Nevis.
   They are as follows:

    Parishes of Saint Kitts and Nevis Flag of Saint Kitts & Nevis
                                Saint Kitts
     Christ Church Nichola Town | Saint Anne Sandy Point | Saint George
    Basseterre | Saint John Capisterre | Saint Mary Cayon | Saint Paul
    Capisterre | Saint Peter Basseterre | Saint Thomas Middle Island |
    Trinity Palmetto Point
                                   Nevis
    Saint George Gingerland | Saint James Windward | Saint John Figtree |
    Saint Paul Charlestown | Saint Thomas Lowland

Geography

   Map of Saint Kitts and Nevis
   Enlarge
   Map of Saint Kitts and Nevis

   The country has two main islands, Saint Kitts and Nevis. The highest
   peak is Mount Liamuiga, which tops at 1 156 m.

   The islands are of volcanic origin, with large central peaks covered in
   jungle; the steep slopes leading to these peaks are mostly uninhabited.
   The vast majority of the population on both islands live close to the
   sea where the terrain flattens out. There are numerous rivers
   descending from the mountains of both islands, which provide fresh
   water to the local population. St. Kitts also has one very small lake.
     *

Economy

   Salt Ponds Overlooking Nevis
   Enlarge
   Salt Ponds Overlooking Nevis

   Saint Kitts and Nevis was the last sugar monoculture in the Eastern
   Caribbean. Faced with a sugar industry that was finding it increasingly
   difficult to earn a profit, the Government of St. Kitts and Nevis
   embarked on a program to diversify the agricultural sector and
   stimulate the development of other sectors of the economy.

   In mid-2005, the sugar economy in St. Kitts was finally shut down by
   the government, after running continuous losses for many years. As of
   this writing, the primary industry of St. Kitts is tourism.

Demographics

   As of July 2000, there were 42,696 inhabitants; their average life
   expectancy was 72.4 years. Emigration has historically been very high,
   and the population is about 25% lower than at its peak of about 51,100
   in 1960.

   Emigration from St. Kitts & Nevis to the United States:
     * 1986-1990: 3,513
     * 1991-1995: 2,730
     * 1996-2000: 2,101
     * 2001-2005: 1,756

Gallery

   Downtown Basseterre

   Downtown Basseterre

   Fishing boat, Basseterre harbour

   Flamingo Tongue shell on a Sea Fan

   Divers and anemone on the MV River Taw wreck

   Juvenile French Angelfish near a sunken van

   Diver and fish, MV River Taw wreck

   Diver and sponges

   Royal Gramma or Fairy Basslet

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saint_Kitts_and_Nevis"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
