   #copyright

Saladin

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Historical figures

   Artistic representation of Saladin (1137 - March 4, 1193), Kurdish:
   Selahedîn Ayûbî; صلاح الدين يوسف بن ايوب; al-Malik al-Nāṣir Ṣalāḥ
   al-Dīn Yūsuf bin Ayyūb
   Enlarge
   Artistic representation of Saladin (1137 - March 4, 1193), Kurdish:
   Selahedîn Ayûbî; صلاح الدين يوسف بن ايوب; al-Malik al-Nāṣir Ṣalāḥ
   al-Dīn Yūsuf bin Ayyūb

   Saladin or Salah al-Din, ( Arabic: صلاح الدين الأيوبي, Kurdish: صلاح
   الدین ایوبی) (c. 1138 - March 4, 1193) was a twelfth century Kurdish
   Muslim general and warrior from Tikrit, in present day northern Iraq.
   He founded the Ayyubid dynasty of Egypt, Syria, Yemen, Iraq, Mecca
   Hejaz and Diyar Bakr. Saladin is renowned in both the Muslim and
   Christian worlds for leadership and military prowess tempered by his
   chivalry and merciful nature, during his war against the Crusaders.
   Salah ad-Din is an honorific title which translates to The
   Righteousness of the Faith from Arabic.

Rise to power

   Saladin was born in 1138 into a Kurdish family in Tikrit and was sent
   to Damascus to finish his education. His father, Najm ad-Din Ayyub, was
   governor of Baalbek. For ten years Saladin lived in Damascus and
   studied Sunni Theology, at the court of Nur ad-Din (Nureddin). After an
   initial military education under the command of his uncle, Nur ad-Din's
   lieutenant Shirkuh, who was representing Nur ad-Din on campaigns
   against a faction of the Fatimid caliphate of Egypt in the 1160s,
   Saladin eventually succeeded the defeated faction and his uncle as
   vizier in 1169. There, he inherited a difficult role defending Egypt
   against the incursions of the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem, under Amalric
   I. His position was tenuous at first; no one expected him to last long
   in Egypt where there had been many changes of government in previous
   years due to a long line of child caliphs fought over by competing
   viziers. As the leader of a foreign army from Syria, he also had no
   control over the Shi'ite Egyptian army, which was led in the name of
   the now otherwise powerless caliph Al-Adid. When the caliph died, in
   September 1171, Saladin had the imams pronounce the name of Al-Mustadi,
   the Abbassid caliph in Baghdad, at sermon before Friday prayers, and
   the weight of authority simply deposed the old line. Now Saladin ruled
   Egypt, but officially as the representative of Nur ad-Din, who himself
   conventionally recognised the Abbassid caliph. Saladin revitalized the
   economy of Egypt, reorganized the military forces and, following his
   father's advice, stayed away from any conflicts with Nur ad-Din, his
   formal lord, after he had become the real ruler of Egypt. He waited
   until Nur ad-Din's death before starting serious military actions: at
   first against smaller Muslim states, then directing them against the
   Crusaders. With Nur ad-Din's death ( 1174), he assumed the title of
   sultan in Egypt. There he declared independence from the Seljuks, and
   he proved to be the founder of the Ayyubid dynasty and restored Sunnism
   in Egypt. He extended his territory westwards in the maghreb, and when
   his uncle was sent up the Nile to pacify some resistance of the former
   Fatimid supporters, he continued on down the Red Sea to conquer Yemen.
   He is also regarded as a Waliullah which means the friend of God to the
   Sunni Muslims.

Fighting the Crusaders

   "Saladin, king of Egypt" from a fifteenth century illuminated
   manuscript; the "globus" in his left hand is a European symbol of
   kingly power.
   Enlarge
   "Saladin, king of Egypt" from a fifteenth century illuminated
   manuscript; the " globus" in his left hand is a European symbol of
   kingly power.

   On two occasions, in 1171 and 1173, Saladin retreated from an invasion
   of the Kingdom of Jerusalem. These had been launched by Nur ad-Din, and
   Saladin hoped that the Crusader kingdom would remain intact, as a
   buffer state between Egypt and Syria, until Saladin could gain control
   of Syria as well. Nur ad-Din and Saladin were headed towards open war
   on these counts when Nur ad-Din died in 1174. Nur ad-Din's heir
   as-Salih Ismail al-Malik was a mere boy, in the hands of court eunuchs,
   and died in 1181.

   Immediately after Nur ad-Din's death, Saladin marched on Damascus and
   was welcomed into the city. He reinforced his legitimacy there in the
   time-honoured way -- by marrying Nur ad-Din's widow. Aleppo and Mosul,
   on the other hand, the two other largest cities that Nur ad-Din had
   ruled, were never taken, but Saladin managed to impose his influence
   and authority on them in 1176 and 1186 respectively. While he was
   occupied in besieging Aleppo, on May 22, 1176 the elite shadowy
   assassin group " Hashshashins" attempted to murder him.

   While Saladin was consolidating his power in Syria, he usually left the
   Crusader kingdom alone, although he was generally victorious whenever
   he did meet the Crusaders in battle. One exception was the Battle of
   Montgisard on November 25, 1177. He was defeated by the combined forces
   of Baldwin IV of Jerusalem, Raynald of Chatillon and the Knights
   Templar. Only one tenth of his army made it back to Egypt.

   A truce was declared between Saladin and the Crusader States in 1178.
   Saladin spent the subsequent year recovering from his defeat and
   rebuilding his army, renewing his attacks in 1179 when he defeated the
   Crusaders at the Battle of Jacob's Ford. Crusader counter-attacks
   provoked further responses by Saladin. Raynald of Chatillon, in
   particular, harassed Muslim trading and pilgrimage routes with a fleet
   on the Red Sea, a water route that Saladin needed to keep open. Raynald
   threatened to attack the holy cities of Mecca and Medina. In
   retaliation, Saladin besieged Kerak, Raynald's fortress in
   Oultrejordain, in 1183 and 1184. Raynald responded by looting a caravan
   of pilgrims on the Hajj in 1185.

   In July, 1187, Saladin invaded the Kingdom of Jerusalem. On July 4,
   1187, he faced at the Battle of Hattin the combined forces Guy of
   Lusignan, King consort of Jerusalem, and Raymond III of Tripoli. In the
   battle alone the Crusader army was largely annihilated by the motivated
   army of Saladin in what was a major disaster for the Crusaders and a
   turning point in the history of the Crusades. Saladin captured Raynald
   de Chatillon and was personally responsible for his execution.
   (According to the chronicle of Ernoul, Raynald had captured Saladin's
   so called 'sister' in a raid on a caravan, although this is not
   attested in Muslim Sources. According to Muslim Sources, Saladin never
   had a 'sister,' but only mentioned the term when referring to 'any'
   fellow female Muslim woman.) Guy of Lusignan was also captured but his
   life was spared. Two days after the Battle of Hattin, Saladin ordered
   the execution of all prisoners of the military orders by beheading.
   According to Imad al-Din, Saladin watched the executions “with a glad
   face.” The execution of prisoners at Hattin was not the first by
   Saladin. On 29 August 1179, Saladin captured the castle at Bait
   al-Ahazon and approximately 700 prisoners were captured.
   The Middle East, c. 1190. Saladin's empire and its vassals shown in
   red; territory recovered from the Crusader states 1187-1189 shown in
   pink. Light green indicates Crusader territories surviving at Saladin's
   death.
   Enlarge
   The Middle East, c. 1190. Saladin's empire and its vassals shown in
   red; territory recovered from the Crusader states 1187-1189 shown in
   pink. Light green indicates Crusader territories surviving at Saladin's
   death.

   Soon Saladin had taken back almost every Crusader city. He recaptured
   Jerusalem on October 2, 1187, after 88 years of Crusader rule (see
   Siege of Jerusalem). Saladin initially was unwilling to grant terms of
   quarter to the occupants of Jerusalem until Balian of Ibelin threatened
   to kill every Muslim in the city, estimated between 3,000 to 5,000, and
   to destroy Islam’s holy shrines of the Dome of the Rock and the Aqsa
   Mosque if quarter was not given. Saladin consulted his council and
   these terms were accepted. Ransom was to be paid for each Frank in the
   city whether man, woman, or child. Saladin allowed many to leave
   without having the required amount for ransom for others. According to
   Imad al-Din, approximately 7,000 men and 8,000 women could not make
   their ransom and were taken into slavery.

   Only Tyre held out. The city was now commanded by the formidable Conrad
   of Montferrat. He strengthened Tyre's defences and withstood two sieges
   by Saladin. In 1188, Saladin released Guy of Lusignan and returned him
   to his wife Queen regnant Sibylla of Jerusalem. Both rulers were
   allowed to seek refuge at Tyre, but were turned away by Conrad, who did
   not recognise Guy as King. Guy then set about besieging Acre (see Siege
   of Acre).

   Hattin and the fall of Jerusalem prompted the Third Crusade, financed
   in England by a special " Saladin tithe". This Crusade took back Acre,
   and Saladin's army met King Richard I of England at the Battle of Arsuf
   on September 7, 1191 at which Saladin was defeated. Saladin's
   relationship with Richard was one of chivalrous mutual respect as well
   as military rivalry; both were celebrated in the courtly romances that
   developed in Northern Europe. When Richard was wounded, Saladin offered
   the services of his personal physician. At Arsuf, when Richard lost his
   horse, Saladin sent him two replacements. Saladin also sent him fresh
   fruit with snow, to keep his drinks cold. Richard had suggested to
   Saladin that his sister could marry Saladin's brother - and Jerusalem
   could be their wedding gift.

   The two came to an agreement over Jerusalem in the Treaty of Ramla in
   1192, whereby the city would remain in Muslim hands but would be open
   to Christian pilgrimages; the treaty reduced the Latin Kingdom to a
   strip along the coast from Tyre to Jaffa.

   Saladin died on March 4, 1193 at Damascus, not long after Richard's
   departure. When they opened Saladin's treasury they found there was not
   enough money to pay for his funeral; he had given most of his money
   away in charity. His tomb is in Damascus, at the Umayyad Mosque, and is
   a popular attraction.

Recognition

   Despite his fierce struggle to the Christian incursion, Saladin
   achieved a great reputation in Europe as a chivalrous knight, so much
   so that there existed by the fourteenth century an epic poem about his
   exploits, and Dante included him among the virtuous pagan souls in
   Limbo. The noble Saladin appears in a sympathetic light in Sir Walter
   Scott's The Talisman (1825). Despite the Crusaders' slaughter when they
   originally conquered Jerusalem in 1099, Saladin granted amnesty and
   free passage to all common Catholics and even to the defeated Christian
   army, as long as they were able to pay the aforementioned ransom (the
   Greek Orthodox Christians were treated even better, because they often
   opposed the western Crusaders). An interesting view of Salah ad-Din and
   the world in which he lived is provided by Tariq Ali's novel The Book
   of Saladin (London: Verso, 1998).

   Despite the differences in beliefs, the Muslim Saladin was respected by
   Christian lords, Richard especially. Richard once praised Saladin as a
   great prince, saying that he was without doubt the greatest and most
   powerful leader in the Islamic world. Saladin in turn stated that there
   was not a more honorable Christian lord than Richard. After the treaty,
   Saladin and Richard sent each other many gifts as tokens of respect,
   but never met face to face.

   The name Salah ad-Din means "Righteousness of Faith", and through the
   ages Saladin has been an inspiration for Muslims in many respects.
   Modern Muslim rulers have sought to capitalise on the reputation of
   Saladin. A governorate centred around Tikrit in modern Iraq, Salah ad
   Din, is named after Saladin, as is Salahaddin University in Arbil.

   Few structures associated with Saladin survive within modern cities.
   Saladin first fortified the Citadel of Cairo (1175 - 1183), which had
   been a domed pleasure pavilion with a fine view in more peaceful times.
   In Syria even the smallest cities centred on a defensible citadel, and
   Saladin introduced this essential feature to Egypt.

   Among the forts he built was Qalaat Al-Gindi, a mountaintop fortress
   and caravanserai in the Sinai. The fortress overlooks a large wadi
   which was the convergence of several caravan routes that linked Egypt
   and the Middle East. Inside the structure are a number of large vaulted
   rooms hewn out of rock, including the remains of shops and a water
   cistern. A notable archaeological site, it was investigated in 1909 by
   a French team under Jules Barthoux.

   According to The French Writer Rene Grousse:

   "It is equally true that his generosity, his piety, devoid of
   fanaticism, that flower of liberality and courtesy which had been the
   model of our old chroniclers, won him no less popularity in Frankish
   Syria than in the lands of Islam"

   Renee Grousse The Epic of the Crusades Orion Press 1970 Translated from
   the French by Noel Lindsay

Burial site

   The tomb of sultan Saladin near the northwestern corner of the Umayyad
   Mosque, Damascus, Syria.
   Enlarge
   The tomb of sultan Saladin near the northwestern corner of the Umayyad
   Mosque, Damascus, Syria.

   Saladin is buried in a mausoleum in the garden outside the Umayyad
   Mosque in Damascus, Syria. Emperor Wilhelm II of Germany donated a new
   marble sarcophagus to the mausoleum. Saladin was, however, not placed
   in it. Instead the mausoleum now has two sarcophagi: one empty in
   marble and one in wood containing the body of Saladin.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saladin"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
