   #copyright

Salford

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

                       Salford

   Image:dot4gb.svg
                     Statistics
   Population:          72,750
                   Ordnance Survey
   OS grid reference:   SJ805985
                   Administration
   Borough:             Salford
   Metropolitan county: Greater Manchester
   Region:              North West England
   Constituent country: England
   Sovereign state:     United Kingdom
                        Other
   Ceremonial county:   Greater Manchester
   Historic county:     Lancashire
                      Services
   Police force:        Greater Manchester Police
   Fire and rescue:     {{{Fire}}}
   Ambulance:           North West
              Post office and telephone
   Post town:           SALFORD
   Postal district:     M3, M5, M6
   Dialling code:       0161
                      Politics
   UK Parliament:       Salford, Salford and Eccles
   European Parliament: North West England

   Salford is a city in the north-west of England. With neighbouring towns
   it forms the borough of the City of Salford in Greater Manchester and
   is historically part of Lancashire.

   The city's eastern boundary separates Salford from the city of
   Manchester. The centres of the two cities are divided by the River
   Irwell. The city is part of the Greater Manchester Urban Area.

   At the 2001 census, the entire borough (which includes Salford) had a
   population of 216,103, whilst Salford proper had a population of
   72,750.

History

   Salford Cathedral
   Enlarge
   Salford Cathedral

   The name of Salford derives from the Anglo-Saxon Sealhford = "
   sallow-tree ford", in reference to the willow (latin salix) trees that
   grow alongside the banks of the River Irwell that flows through the
   city. The city's coat of arms shows three curved blue lines,
   representing the ford in the river, surrounded by sallow leaves.

   Salford gave its name to the ancient hundred of Salford, sometimes
   called Salfordshire. The settlement's early history was marked by the
   granting of a charter by Ranulf, Earl of Chester, about 1230. The
   charter made Salford a free borough. The old medieval centre of Salford
   was located next to the River Irwell, on the opposite bank to
   Manchester. Old streets such as Greengate and Gravel Lane formed the
   market area.

Industrial Revolution

   Salford was one of the UK's first major industrial towns and gained
   status at the start of the industrial revolution. Cloth and silk were
   made there and the processes of dyeing, fulling and bleaching were
   carried out. It eventually grew to be one of the greatest cotton towns.
   Salford was incorporated as a municipal borough in 1844 under the
   provisions of the Municipal Corporations Act 1835. During the Victorian
   era new developments, including new municipal buildings appearing along
   the Crescent, shifted the centre of the town. As Manchester gained
   importance, Salford's ancient centre became less vital and the area
   around Greengate and Salford Bridge now shows no sign of its historic
   importance to the city.

   In 1849 the municipal borough was the first in England to establish a
   public library, museum and art gallery, preceding the Public Libraries
   Act of 1850. The opening of the Manchester Ship Canal in 1894 and the
   construction of Salford Docks also brought employment for almost eighty
   years. The city became a maritime centre with vast docks constructed
   along the ship canal. From here, locally-produced goods were shipped
   all over the world. Salford was granted city status by a Royal Charter
   of 1926. Another charter of 1967 raised the Royal Salford Technical
   Institute to the status of university by establishing The University of
   Salford.

Decline

   Vast areas of the city were re-developed in the 1960s and 1970s, with
   the traditional terraced housing giving way to concrete tower blocks
   and austere architecture. The docks declined during the same period.

Amalgamation

   In 1974 the County Borough of the City of Salford (including Pendleton,
   Claremont, Langworthy, Broughton, Weaste, Ordsall and Seedley) was
   incorporated into the metropolitan borough of the City of Salford.

   The new metropolitan borough also included the former municipal
   boroughs of Eccles (including Monton, Winton and Barton-upon-Irwell)
   and Swinton and Pendlebury and the former Urban Districts of Irlam
   (including Cadishead) and Worsley (including Walkden and Little
   Hulton).

Regeneration

   In the last decade the planning mistakes of the 1960s began to be
   rectified and the city is beginning to benefit from government
   investment. However the many high-rise blocks that remain are a
   striking feature of the city. Salford now has many tourist attractions
   such as the Imperial War Museum North (located in the neighbouring
   Trafford MBC area) and the Lowry Centre, an award winning art gallery
   comprising 2 theatres and 3 galleries. The centre is named after artist
   L. S. Lowry, many of whose works can be seen there.
   The Salford Quays, with the Lowry Centre arts complex in the centre
   Enlarge
   The Salford Quays, with the Lowry Centre arts complex in the centre

Transport

   The city is linked to Manchester by the Metrolink tram system, which
   runs near the docks area to Langworthy and Eccles. There are also
   railway stations at Salford, Salford Crescent, Swinton, Eccles,
   Patricroft, Irlam, Walkden and Moorside.

Shopping

   Refurbished 1960s built high rise apartments
   Enlarge
   Refurbished 1960s built high rise apartments

   Currently, the city's main shopping area is Salford Shopping City,
   Pendleton — colloquially referred to as 'The Precinct' — close to The
   University of Salford. However this area suffers from extreme
   deprivation and is dominated by the central business district of nearby
   Manchester. There is a shopping precinct at Eccles, with smaller
   shopping areas at Walkden, Swinton and Little Hulton. Originally, the
   area around Liverpool Road was a shopping hub, but this has long since
   declined. Salford Quays has been shortlisted as the new possible city
   centre by 2020.

Health

   The main NHS medical facilities are located at Hope Hospital, near
   Eccles. The former Salford Royal Hospital was closed in the early
   1990s.

   The University of Salford was awarded university status in 1967. It is
   one of four universities in Greater Manchester and has approximately
   19,000 students.

Culture

   Salford's first annual film festival held at the Red Cinema in the
   Lowry Outlet at Salford Quays in 2003 was a huge success. The second,
   in November 2004 achieved similar results, showcasing some new local
   talent.

   Manchester's award-winning international theatre festival 27/4, takes
   place each July at the North of England's only fringe theatre venue,
   Studio Salford at the Kings Arms, Bloom Street, Salford, which is also
   a popular live music venue.

   In early 2005, Riga appealed to the EU to advise people against
   travelling to Salford after a Latvian man was stabbed in the head in
   Broughton. However, local government insist that Salford is a safe
   place to visit.

Demographics

   Salford is a city of contrasting demographies. Whilst the area
   immediately adjacent to Manchester City Centre, Salford Quays and
   suburban areas to the far west of the city such as Worsley are
   relatively affluent (with the main road colloquially known as
   'Millionaire's Row'), other parts of the city are some of the most
   deprived communities in the UK. In August 2005 a survey by Channel 4
   television rated the city as the 9th worst place to live in the UK
   (based on criteria of crime, education, environment, lifestyle and
   employment).

   The city has seen a major rise in construction especially in the
   Salford Quays area with modern living spaces and office buildings. It
   also has regional offices for major corporations including IBM,
   McDonald's, BUPA and Citifinancial.
   The development of the 'NV Buildings' modern apartments in Salford
   Quays as at August 2005
   Enlarge
   The development of the 'NV Buildings' modern apartments in Salford
   Quays as at August 2005

Twin towns

     * France Clermont-Ferrand, a city and commune of France, in the
       Auvergne région'.
     * Germany Lünen, Germany, http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/L%C3%BCnen

   St Ouen France Narbonne France

Famous people from Salford

Born in Salford

     * Sir Alex Oppenheim
     * Russell Watson
     * David Shakeshaft
     * Andrew Pollitt
     * Bez
     * Tim Burgess
     * Alistair Cooke ( 1908- 2004)
     * Peter Maxwell Davies
     * Terry Eagleton
     * Sir Harold Evans
     * Albert Finney
     * Clinton Ford
     * Stephen Gallagher
     * Walter Greenwood
     * Peter Hook
     * Graham Gouldman
     * Samuel Braham
     * Paul Scholes
     * John Motson
     * Bernard Sumner
     * James Prescott Joule
     * Mike Leigh
     * James Agate
     * Elkie Brooks
     * John Cooper Clarke
     * Robert Powell
     * Mark E. Smith
     * Shelagh Delaney
     * Don Whillans
     * Ricky Ashworth
     * Christopher Eccleston
     * Mark Hendrick
     * George Coulouris
     * Joanne Whalley
     * Phil Bardsley
     * Tony Wilson
     * Jamie Hill
     * Wallied Orabi

Residents (past and present)

     * The Dooleys (1970s pop group)
     * Nico (during most of the 1980s)
     * John Virgo
     * Ben Kingsley
     * Jimmy Savile
     * L S Lowry
     * James H Reeve
     * Harold Riley
     * Ryan Giggs

Sport

   Salford is one of the few sizeable cities in the UK not to have a
   professional football team of its own. The nearest team to Salford is
   Manchester United F.C. just across the Quays in Trafford whom the
   majority of Salfordians support. Salford has a strong rugby league
   history and has the Super League side, Salford City Reds who are the
   premier sporting team, and the National League 2 side Swinton Lions.
   Other lesser-known teams include Langworthy Reds and Folly Lane. Since
   Commonwealth Games 2002 The Quays are a major international triathlon
   site

Districts of the City of Salford

     * Pendleton
     * Eccles
     * Langworthy
     * Kersal
     * Worsley
     * Walkden
     * Irlams o' th' Height
     * Little Hulton
     * Pendlebury
     * Swinton
     * Wardley
     * Irlam
     * Seedley
     * Cadishead
     * Ordsall
     * Monton
     * Winton
     * Weaste
     * Broughton
     * Peel Green
     * Barton-upon-Irwell

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salford"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
