   #copyright

Salt Lake City, Utah

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: North American Geography

                      Salt Lake City, Utah
   Skyline of Salt Lake City, Utah
               Nickname: "Crossroads of the West"
   Location of Salt Lake City in Salt Lake County, Utah
   Location of Salt Lake City in Salt Lake County, Utah
               Coordinates: 40°45′0″N, 111°53′0″W
        County      Salt Lake
        Mayor       Rocky Anderson
         Area
        - City      285.9 km²
        - Land      282.5 km²
        - Water     3.3 km²
      Elevation     1,288 m
      Population
     - City (2000)  181,743
       - Density    643.3/km²
        - Metro     1,005,232
      Time zone     Mountain ( UTC-7)
    - Summer ( DST) Mountain ( UTC-6)
                 Website: http://www.slcgov.com

   Salt Lake City is the capital and the most populous city of the U.S.
   state of Utah. According to 2005 U.S. Census Bureau estimates, the
   city's population is 178,097. It is the seat of Salt Lake County, which
   encompasses the Salt Lake Valley and includes the city and fifteen
   other municipalities. The city's name is often shortened to Salt Lake
   or referred to by its initials, S.L.C.

   The Salt Lake City Metropolitan Area spans Salt Lake County and two
   additional counties, Summit and Tooele, and had a total estimated
   population of 1,034,484 in 2005. These counties are situated in a
   greater urban area called the Wasatch Front, home to just over 2
   million residents.

   Originally named Great Salt Lake City after nearby Great Salt Lake, it
   was founded in 1847 by a group of Mormon pioneers led by Brigham Young
   who fled hostility in the East. Salt Lake City is among the oldest
   cities in the region and is the world headquarters of The Church of
   Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (the LDS or Mormon Church). Mining
   and railroads initially brought economic growth, and the city became
   nicknamed the Crossroads of the West. In the 21st century the city has
   developed a strong tourism industry; it served as host to the 2002
   Winter Olympics.

   The Salt Lake City Metropolitan Area is the industrial banking centre
   of the United States, the centre of business along the rapidly-growing
   Wasatch Front, and the gateway to several national parks, ski resorts,
   and resort towns, perhaps most famously Park City.

History

   Before Western settlement, the Shoshone, Ute, and Paiute had dwelled in
   the Salt Lake Valley for thousands of years. The first Caucasian
   Europeans to settle in the valley were the Latter-day Saints on July
   24, 1847. They had traveled beyond the boundaries of the United States
   seeking an isolated area to practice their religion, away from the
   hostility they had faced in the East. Upon arrival, President of the
   Church Brigham Young is recorded as stating, "this is the right place,"
   later abbreviated to simply "this is the place," after reportedly
   seeing the area in a vision.

   Only four days after arriving in the Salt Lake Valley, Brigham Young
   designated the site for the Salt Lake Temple, the largest temple of The
   Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Constructed on Temple
   Square, in the centre of the city, the temple took 40 years to
   complete, being dedicated on April 6, 1893. The temple has become
   iconic of the city.
   Salt Lake City circa 1920
   Enlarge
   Salt Lake City circa 1920

   The Mormon pioneers organized a new state called Deseret and petitioned
   for its recognition in 1849. The United States Congress rebuffed the
   settlers in 1850 and established the Utah Territory, vastly reducing
   its size (it formerly encompassed all of Nevada and a great deal of
   southern California). Great Salt Lake City replaced Fillmore as the
   territorial capital in 1858, and the name was subsequently abbreviated
   to Salt Lake City. The city's population swelled with an influx of
   religious converts, making it one of the most populous cities in the
   Old American West.

   Disputes with the federal government ensued over the widespread Mormon
   practice of polygamy. A climax occurred in 1857 when President James
   Buchanan declared the area in rebellion when Brigham Young refused to
   step down as governor. The conflict called the Utah War began. A
   division of the United States Army marched through the city and found
   that it had been evacuated. This division set up Camp Floyd
   approximately 40 miles (65 km) southwest of the city. Another military
   installation, Fort Douglas, was established in 1862 to maintain Union
   allegiance during the American Civil War. Many area leaders were
   incarcerated at the territorial prison in Sugar House in the 1880s for
   violation of anti-polygamy laws. The LDS Church conceded in 1890,
   releasing "The Manifesto," which officially renounced polygamy in the
   church. This paved the way for statehood in 1896, when Salt Lake City
   became the state capital.

   The First Transcontinental Railroad was completed in 1869 at Promontory
   Summit on the north side of the Great Salt Lake. A railroad was
   connected to the city from the Transcontinental Railroad in 1870,
   making travel less burdensome. Mass migration of different groups
   followed. They found economic opportunities in the booming mining
   industries. These groups constructed the Greek Orthodox Holy Trinity
   Cathedral in 1905 and the Roman Catholic Cathedral of the Madeleine in
   1909. This time period also saw the creation of Salt Lake City's now
   defunct Red-light district that employed 300 courtesans at its height
   before being closed down in 1911.

   During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, an extensive streetcar
   system was constructed throughout the city. The first streetcar began
   service in 1872. Electrification of the system began in 1889. However,
   due to the rising automobile ownership in the early 20th century, the
   last tram line was dismantled in 1945. Rail transit was re-introduced
   when TRAX, a light rail system, opened in 1999.

   The city's population began to stagnate during the 20th century as
   population growth shifted to suburban areas north and south of the
   city. Few of these areas were annexed to the city, while nearby towns
   incorporated and expanded themselves. As a result, the population of
   the surrounding metropolitan area greatly outnumbers that of Salt Lake
   City. A major concern of recent government officials has been combating
   inner-city commercial decay. The city lost population from the 1960s
   through the 1980s, but experienced some recovery in the 1990s.
   Presently, the city is losing population again (though that of the
   metro area continues to grow), having lost an estimated 2 percent of
   its population since the year 2000.

   The city has experienced significant demographic shifts in recent
   years. Hispanics now account for approximately 19% of residents and the
   city has a large gay community. There is also a large Pacific Islander
   population, mainly made up of Samoans and Tongans.
   In the past 20 years the skyline has expanded greatly. Picture taken in
   2004.
   Enlarge
   In the past 20 years the skyline has expanded greatly. Picture taken in
   2004.

   Salt Lake City was selected to host the 2002 Winter Olympics in 1995.
   The games were plagued with controversy. A bid scandal surfaced in 1998
   alleging that bribes had been offered to secure the city for the 2000
   games location. During the games, other scandals erupted over contested
   judging scores and illegal drug use. Despite the controversies, the
   games were heralded as a financial success, being one of the few in
   recent history to profit. In preparation major construction projects
   were initiated. Local freeways were expanded and repaired, and a light
   rail system was constructed. Tourism has increased. , and the new
   Olympic venues are now used for local, national, and international
   sporting events and Olympic athlete training.

   Salt Lake City will host the 16th Winter Deaflympic games in 2007,
   taking place in the venues in Salt Lake City and Park City, and Rotary
   International has designated the city as the site of their 2007
   convention, which will be the largest single gathering since the 2002
   Winter Olympics and the U.S. Volleyball Association meeting in 2005.

Geography

   Salt Lake Valley from space, bounded on the west by the Oquirrh
   Mountains, the northwest by the Great Salt Lake, and on the east by the
   Wasatch Mountains. Salt Lake City occupies roughly the northern quarter
   of the valley.
   Enlarge
   Salt Lake Valley from space, bounded on the west by the Oquirrh
   Mountains, the northwest by the Great Salt Lake, and on the east by the
   Wasatch Mountains. Salt Lake City occupies roughly the northern quarter
   of the valley.
   The Wasatch Range and the east bench of Salt Lake County.
   Enlarge
   The Wasatch Range and the east bench of Salt Lake County.

   Salt Lake City is located at 40°45′N 111°53′W. The total area is
   110.4 square miles (285.9 km²). It sits in the Salt Lake Valley with an
   average elevation of 4,327 feet (1,320 m) above sea level.

   The Wasatch Range rises approximately 11,500 feet (3,500 m) above sea
   level 5 miles (8 km) to the east of Downtown. These mountains are the
   namesake of the Wasatch Front. The Oquirrh Mountains, located 7 miles
   (11 km) west of the city, rise to about 10,000 feet (3,050 m). The
   Traverse Mountains at the south end of the valley rise to 6,000 feet
   (1,830 m) above sea level, partially bridging the gap between the
   Wasatch and Oquirrh ranges. Within the city there is a sharp rise in
   elevation as one travels north or east from the city centre. There is
   an elevation range of approximately 1,000 feet (300 m), from about
   4,220 feet (1,285 m) at various points in the west near the Jordan
   River and Great Salt Lake to 5,200 feet (1,585 m) in the Upper Avenues
   and Federal Heights neighborhoods and the upper East Bench.

   Three major canyons cut through the Wasatch Range and open into Salt
   Lake City proper. The northernmost is City Creek Canyon that opens into
   Downtown, bordered on either side by Capitol Hill and The Avenues.
   Further to the east is Emigration Canyon, the canyon the Mormons
   initially used to enter the valley. It opens up on the East Bench just
   south of the University of Utah, near Hogle Zoo and This Is The Place
   Heritage Park. Traversed by Interstate 80, Parley's Canyon opens up at
   the very southeast corner of the city proper near Canyon Rim, an
   unincorporated residential suburb.

   The valley floor consists of the lakebed of ancient Lake Bonneville,
   which encompassed the entire eastern Great Basin in prehistoric times.
   Its largest remnant is the Great Salt Lake, located about 10 miles
   (12 km) northwest of the city. Great Salt Lake is separated from the
   city by marshlands and mudflats. The decay of plants and animals within
   the lake results in a phenomenon known as "lake stink," a smell
   resembling rotten eggs which occasionally (two to three times per year,
   and a few hours on those days) reaches the city, serving as one of the
   only reminders to Salt Lakers that they live near a major body of
   water. The stench from the lake usually accompanies lake-effect
   precipitation, especially lake effect snow.^ The Jordan River flows
   through the city west of downtown from Utah Lake to the Great Salt
   Lake.

   The Wasatch Fault is an active fault that runs under the city and is
   considered overdue for a major earthquake. Concerns have been voiced
   over possible damage resulting from the liquefaction of the clay and
   sandbased soil during an earthquake. It is noted that there are more
   non-reinforced structures just along the Wasatch Front than there are
   in the entire state of California. It is estimated that an earthquake
   as large as 7.5 could theoretically occur along the fault, and that an
   earthquake of at least magnitude 7.3 could cause the Great Salt Lake to
   permanently flood portions of the city.

Layout

   Plat of Salt Lake City, circa 1870s
   Enlarge
   Plat of Salt Lake City, circa 1870s

   The city, as well as the county, is laid out on a grid plan; Most major
   streets run very nearly north-south and east-west. There is about a
   fourteen to fifteen minute of arc variation of the grid from true
   north. Its origin is the southeast corner of Temple Square, the block
   containing the Salt Lake Temple of The Church of Jesus Christ of
   Latter-day Saints. Addresses are coordinates within the system. This is
   similar to latitude and longitude (most counties in Indiana use a
   similar scheme in designating county roads). One hundred units are
   equal to 1/8th of a mile (200 m), the length of blocks in downtown Salt
   Lake City. Locals often abbreviate the addresses when speaking. For
   instance, one might speak of the intersection of 700 East and 2100
   South as 7th East and 21st South. The streets are relatively wide, a
   vision of the original settlers, who wanted them wide enough that a
   wagon team could turn around.

   Joseph Smith, founder of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
   Saints, planned it in the "Plat of the City of Zion." In his plan the
   city was to be developed into 135 10-acre lots. However, the blocks
   became irregular during the late 19th century when the LDS Church lost
   authority over growth and before zoning ordinances in the 1920s. The
   original 10-acre blocks allowed for large garden plots, and many were
   supplied with irrigation water from ditches that ran approximately
   where modern curb and gutter is laid. The original water supply was
   from City Creek. Subsequent development of water resources was from
   successively more southern streams flowing from the mountains to the
   east of the city. Some of these irrigation ditches are still visible in
   the eastern suburbs.

   There are three distinct street patterns in Salt Lake City, the first
   of which are the initial square blocks crisscrossed by later small
   streets. The second distinct pattern are the 2.5 acre (10,100 m²)
   blocks in the Avenues. The final section is the rectangular blocks
   south from 900 South.

Neighborhoods

   Map of modern Salt Lake City and its suburbs.
   Enlarge
   Map of modern Salt Lake City and its suburbs.

   Salt Lake City has many informal neighborhoods. The eastern portion of
   the city has higher property values than its western counterpart. This
   is a result of the railroad being built in the western half as well as
   scenic views from inclined grounds in the eastern portion. Immigrants
   find housing more affordable on the west side, which results in
   demographic differences. Interstate 15 further solidified these
   divisions.

   Salt Lake City is divided into distinct east and west sides. The west
   side of the city has historically been poorer and more crime-ridden,
   but recently the demographics have evened themselves out somewhat. For
   example, the small, increasingly trendy Marmalade District on the west
   side of Capitol Hill, once considered seedy as few as 5–10 years ago,
   has experienced a magnificent recovery to become an eclectic and
   desirable location. During the 1980s, Sugar House, the upbeat and
   youthful neighbourhood located near and along 2100 South in the
   southeast portion of the city, was poor and downtrodden, and much of
   the crime was centered in the western neighborhoods of Rose Park,
   Poplar Grove, and Glendale. Recently, however, both of these areas have
   made amazing recoveries while other areas of town, such as the Central
   City, have come to be known as the poorer areas of town, despite the
   more balanced demographics.

   Just northeast of Downtown is The Avenues, a neighbourhood outside of
   the regular grid system on much smaller blocks. This area is nearly
   entirely residential, and contains much of the young student-aged
   population. The Avenues lies along the southern slope of the Wasatch
   Range, however, and the further one climbs the mountains, the more
   elegant the residences become. The Upper Avenues, along with Federal
   Heights, just to the east and north of the University of Utah, and the
   East Bench, south of the University, contain gated communities, large,
   elegant, multi-million dollar houses, and fantastic views of the
   valley.

Climate

   A rare F2 tornado rips through downtown Salt Lake City on August 11,
   1999 (orange fireball is substation exploding)
   Enlarge
   A rare F2 tornado rips through downtown Salt Lake City on August 11,
   1999 (orange fireball is substation exploding)
   The flood of City Creek in 1983 occurred from snowmelt after record
   snow fell in nearby mountains the previous winter.
   Enlarge
   The flood of City Creek in 1983 occurred from snowmelt after record
   snow fell in nearby mountains the previous winter.

   The climate of Salt Lake City is characterized by four distinct
   seasons. Both summer and winter are long, with hot, dry summers and
   cold, snowy winters, with spring and fall serving as brief but
   comfortable transition periods. The city receives 16.50 in (419 mm) of
   precipitation annually. Spring is the wettest season, and another
   "rainy season" occurs in fall. Snow occurs on average from November 6
   to April 18, producing a total average of 62.7 in (159 cm), while the
   city's watersheds in nearby mountains accumulate averages as high as
   500 in (1,270 cm). The period without freezing temperatures usually
   lasts an average of 167 days, from April 30 to October 15.

   During the winter months cold fronts typically originate in the Gulf of
   Alaska and move southeastward into the area. The nearby Great Salt Lake
   produces lake-effect snow approximately 6-8 times per year, some of
   which can drop excessive snowfalls. The lake-effect also contributes to
   some rain storms, and it is estimated that about 10% of the annual
   precipitation in the city can be attributed to the lake-effect. During
   mid-winter, strong areas of high pressure often situate themselves over
   the Great Basin, leading to strong temperature inversions. This causes
   air stagnation and thick smog in the valley for several days to weeks
   at a time and can also lead to health issues. The all-time record low
   temperature is -30 °F (-34 °C), which occurred on February 9, 1933.

   In the spring, most of the storms originate in the Pacific Ocean from
   the Pineapple Express, bringing in the most moisture of the entire
   year. Larger and cooler storms in the spring can lead to heavy
   overnight snowfall. Measurable snow has occurred as late as May 18.

   The summers of the city are marked by hot weather and are mostly dry.
   The monsoon rises from the Gulf of California from approximately
   mid-July into September, producing localized severe afternoon
   thunderstorms. Due to the low daytime humidity, virga, lightning, and
   microbursts can lead to wildfire problems. During active monsoon
   periods, widespread thunderstorms carrying excessive precipitation are
   common. Temperatures of at least 100°F(38°C) occur on average five
   times a year, but usually on days with low humidity. The record high
   temperature is 107 °F (41 °C), which occurred first on July 26, 1960
   and again on July 13, 2002.

   During October, the Pacific Ocean once again becomes active, bringing
   in more precipitation, occasionally in the form of the remnants of
   tropical cyclones. The remnants of Hurricane Olivia helped bring the
   record monthly precipitation of 7.04 in (179 mm) in September 1982. The
   first measurable snowfall usually occurs in early November, but has
   occurred as early as September 17.

                          Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
    Record Daily High  °F 63  69  78  86  99  104 107 106 100 89  75  69
    Average Daily High °F 37  43  53  61  71  82  91  89  78  64  49  38
    Average Daily Low  °F 21  26  33  39  47  56  63  62  52  41  30  22
    Record Daily Low   °F -22 -30  2  14  25  35  40  37  27  16  -14 -21
                Data is for Salt Lake International Airport

               Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
    Record Precipitation in. 3.23 4.89 3.97 4.90 4.76 3.84 2.57 3.66 7.04
                               3.91 3.34 4.37
   Average Precipitation in. 1.37 1.33 1.91 2.02 2.09 0.77 0.72 0.76 1.33
                               1.57 1.40 1.23
   Average Snowfall in. 13.6 9.9 9.1 4.9 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 1.3 7.0 12.0
    Record Snowfall in. 50.3 32.1 41.9 26.4 7.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.0 20.4 33.3
                                    35.2
                 Data is for Salt Lake International Airport

Demographics

   As of the census^ GR2 of 2000, there are 181,743 people (up from
   159,936 in 1990), 71,461 households, and 39,803 families residing in
   the city. This amounts to 8.1% of Utah's population, 20.2% of Salt Lake
   County's population, and 13.6% of the Salt Lake metropolitan
   population. Salt Lake City proper covers 14.2% of Salt Lake County.
   Salt Lake City is more densely populated than the surrounding metro
   area with a population density of 643.3/km² (1,666.1/mi²). There are
   77,054 housing units at an average density of 272.7/km² (706.4/mi²).

   The Salt Lake City- Ogden metropolitan area, which included Salt Lake,
   Davis, and Weber counties, had a population of 1,333,914 in 2000, a
   24.4% increase over the 1990 figure of 1,072,227. Since the 2000
   Census, the Census Bureau has added Summit and Tooele counties to the
   Salt Lake City metropolitan area, but removed Davis and Weber counties
   and designated them as the separate Ogden- Clearfield metropolitan
   area. Together with the Provo- Orem metropolitan area, which lies to
   the south, a roughly continuous urban corridor along the Wasatch Front
   is formed, which has a combined population of just over 2 million.

   There are 71,461 households, out of which 27.0% have children under the
   age of 18 living with them, 41.1% are married couples living together,
   10.2% have a female householder with no husband present, and 44.3% are
   nonfamilies. Of the 71,461 households, 3,904 were reported to be
   unmarried partner households: 3,047 heterosexual, 458 same-sex male,
   and 399 same-sex female. 33.2% of all households are made up of
   individuals, and 9.7% have someone living alone who is 65 years of age
   or older. The average household size is 2.48, and the average family
   size is 3.24.

   In the city the population is spread out with:
     * 23.6% under the age of 18
     * 15.2% from 18 to 24
     * 33.4% from 25 to 44
     * 16.7% from 45 to 64
     * 11.0% who are 65 years of age or older

   The median age is 30 years. For every 100 females there are 102.6
   males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there are 101.2 males.
   The median income for a household in the city is $36,944, and the
   median income for a family is $45,140. Males have a median income of
   $31,511 versus $26,403 for females. The per capita income for the city
   is $20,752. 15.3% of the population and 10.4% of families are below the
   poverty line. Out of the total population, 18.7% of those under the age
   of 18 and 8.5% of those 65 and older are living below the poverty line.

   Large family sizes and low housing vacancy rates, which have inflated
   housing costs along the Wasatch Front, have led to one out of every six
   residents living below the poverty line.

   About 50% of Salt Lake City's current residents are members of The
   Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This rises to about 80%
   for the state's more rural municipalities; altogether, LDS members make
   up about 60% of Utah's population.

   The Rose Park and Glendale sections are predominantly Spanish-speaking
   with Latinos accounting for 60% of public school-children. The Centro
   Civico Mexicano acts as a community gathering point for the Wasatch
   Front's estimated 300,000 Latinos, Mexican President Vicente Fox began
   his U.S. tour in the city in 2006, and the largest supermarket chain of
   Mexico, Supermercados Gigante, is planning a location, the first in the
   U.S. outside of California. Bosnian, Sudanese, Afghani, Somali, and
   Russian refugees have settled in the city under government programs.
   There is also a large Pacific Islander population, mainly made up of
   Samoans and Tongans. Many of the Pacific Islanders are members of the
   LDS Church.

   Salt Lake City has been considered one of the top 51 "gay-friendly
   places to live" in the U.S. The city is home to a large, business
   savvy, organized, and politically supported gay community. Leaders of
   the Episcopal Church's Diocese of Utah, Utah's largest Jewish
   congregation, the Salt Lake Kol Ami, and two elected representatives of
   the city, a member of the state house and senate, all identify as gay.
   These developments have attracted controversy from socially
   conservative officials representing other regions of the state. State
   Senator Chris Buttars of West Jordan publicly denounced Mayor Rocky
   Anderson for having "attracted the entire gay community to come and
   live in Salt Lake County" after a Dan Jones poll indicated strong
   support for allowing domestic partnerships. In the 2004 election, 63%
   of the city population voted against banning same-sex marriage, in
   agreement with Mayor Anderson.

Economy

   Part of Downtown Salt Lake 2005
   Enlarge
   Part of Downtown Salt Lake 2005

   The modern economy of Salt Lake City is service-oriented. In the past,
   steel, mining and railroad operations provided a strong source of
   income with Geneva Steel, Kennecott Copper Mine, and oil refineries.
   Today the city's major industries are government, trade,
   transportation, utilities, and professional and business services. The
   city is known as the "Crossroads of the West" for its central geography
   in the western United States. As a result, Interstate 15 is a major
   corridor for freight traffic and the area is host to many regional
   distribution centers.

   Local, state, and federal governments have their largest presence in
   the city proper itself, and trade, transportation, and utilities also
   take up a significant portion of employment, with the major employer
   being the western North America Delta Air Lines hub at Salt Lake City
   International Airport. Equally significant are the professional and
   business services, while health services and health educational
   services also serve as significant areas of employment. Other major
   employers include the University of Utah, Sinclair Oil Corporation, and
   The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

   Besides its central offices, the LDS Church owns and operates a profit
   division, Deseret Management Corporation and its subsidiaries, which
   are headquartered in the city. Other notable firms headquartered in the
   city include AlphaGraphics and Smith's Food and Drug (owned by national
   grocer Kroger). Notable firms based in the metropolitan area include
   Arctic Circle Restaurants, Franklin-Covey, and Overstock.com.
   Metropolitan Salt Lake was also once the headquarters of Kentucky Fried
   Chicken (the first ever KFC is located in South Salt Lake), American
   Stores, the Skaggs Companies, and ZCMI, one of the first-ever
   department stores; it is currently owned by Federated Department
   Stores. Former ZCMI stores now operate under the Macy's label. Suburban
   Salt Lake was also the first location for Sears Grand (at the Jordan
   Landing shopping centre in West Jordan).

   Since Utah is one of seven states that allow the establishment of
   commercially-owned industrial banks, the vast majority of industrial
   banks in the U.S. have established their headquarters in the Salt Lake
   City area. High-tech firms with a large presence in the suburbs include
   e-Bay, Unisys, Siebel, Micron and 3M.

   Other economic activities include tourism, conventions, and major
   suburban call centers. Tourism was stimulated by the 2002 Olympic
   Winter Games, and many hotels and restaurants were built for the
   events. The convention industry has expanded since the construction of
   the Salt Palace convention centre in the late 1990s, which hosts trade
   shows and conventions, including the annual Outdoor Retailers meeting
   and Novell's annual BrainShare convention.

   In 2006 the largest potato producer in Idaho, the United Potato Growers
   of America, announced that it would re-locate its headquarters to Salt
   Lake City, citing its need for a large international airport, being
   that Salt Lake City International is the 18th busiest in the world in
   terms of combined freight and passengers. The announcement led some
   members of the Idaho legislature to propose legislation changing the
   state license plate, which currently reads "Famous Potatoes".

   In 2005, it was found that the city, especially downtown, was
   experiencing increased population growth. The number of residential
   units in the central business district has increased by 80% since 1995,
   and is forecasted to nearly double in the next decade. Office vacancy
   rates are also low in the downtown region. In response, two new large
   buildings are being constructed. The first is eight stories and located
   in the Gateway District, while the second will be 22 stories high and
   is currently under construction on Main Street. Construction of the
   Gateway District, light rail, and planned commuter rail service have
   supported the revival of downtown.

Law and government

   City and County Building, seat of city government since 1894.
   Enlarge
   City and County Building, seat of city government since 1894.

   Since 1979 Salt Lake City has had a nonpartisan mayor-council form of
   government. The mayor and the seven councilors are elected to four-year
   terms. Mayoral elections are held the same year as three of the
   councilors. The other four councilors are staggered two years from the
   mayoral. Council seats are defined by geographic population boundaries.
   Each councilor represents approximately 26,000 citizens. Officials are
   not subject to term limits. The most recent election was held in 2005.

   The city has elected Democratic Party mayoral candidates since the
   1970s. Councilors are elected under specific issues and are usually
   well-known. Labor politics play no significant role. The city has
   elected an openly gay woman and an openly gay man, representing the
   city in the State House and Senate, respectively.

   The separation of church and state was the most heated topic in the
   days of the Liberal Party and People's Party of Utah, when many
   candidates would be LDS Bishops and Mark Twain referred to Brigham
   Young as "the only monarch in America." Non-Mormons were commonly
   called gentiles. This tension is still reflected today with the
   Bridging the Religious Divide campaign. This campaign was initiated
   when some city residents complained that the Utah political
   establishment was unfair in its dealings with non-LDS residents by
   giving the LDS Church preferential treatment, while LDS residents
   perceived a growing anti-Mormon bias in city politics.

   Party platforms are centered on education, economic development, and
   transportation. The city's political demographics are liberal and
   Democratic. This stands in stark contrast to the majority of Utah where
   Republican and conservative views generally dominate.

   The current mayor is Rocky Anderson, who gained international attention
   for actively organizing a protest against President George W. Bush
   during his visit to Salt Lake City for the 2005 Veterans of Foreign
   Wars convention. He again held a protest against President Bush when he
   visited for the convention in 2006. He is supportive of same-sex
   marriage, the Kyoto Treaty, transit-oriented urban planning,
   alternative energy sources, and the relaxation of Utah state liquor
   laws.^[ citations needed] He has also been accused of abusive and
   demanding working conditions by former staffers and inflammatory
   remarks towards the LDS Church, and has been criticized for spending
   city funds on the purchase of alcohol for dignitaries and guests. He
   also worked with environmentalists to block construction of the Legacy
   Highway, accusing UDOT of a sloppy environmental impact statement,
   which was ruled as incomplete. Rocky maintains wide public support
   within Salt Lake City. He has supported civil rights and hate crimes
   legislation.

   The city is home to several non-governmental think-tanks and advocacy
   groups such as the conservative Sutherland Institute, the gay-rights
   group Equality Utah, and the quality-growth advocates Envision Utah.
   Salt Lake hosted many foreign dignitaries during the 2002 Winter
   Olympics, and in 2006 the President of Mexico began his U.S. tour in
   the city and Israel's ambassador to the United States opened a cultural
   centre. President George W. Bush visited in 2005 and again in 2006 for
   the aforementioned Veterans of Foreign Wars convention, both visits of
   which were protested by Mayor Rocky Anderson. Other political leaders
   such as Howard Dean and Harry Reid gave speeches in the city in 2005.

Education

   The Salt Lake City Public Library. The American Library Association
   called it the best in the U.S. in 2006.
   Enlarge
   The Salt Lake City Public Library. The American Library Association
   called it the best in the U.S. in 2006.

   In 1847 pioneer Jane Dillworth held the first classes in her tent for
   the children of the first LDS families. In the last part of the 1800s,
   there was much controversy over how children in the area should be
   educated. LDS and non-LDS could not agree on the level of religious
   influence in schools. Today, many LDS youths in grades 9 through 12
   attend some form of religious instruction, referred to as seminary.

   Because of high birth rates and large classrooms, Utah spends less per
   student than any other state yet simultaneously spends more per capita
   than any state with the exception of Alaska. Money is always a
   challenge, and many businesses donate to support schools. Several
   districts have set up foundations to raise money. Recently, money was
   approved for the reconstruction of more than half of the elementary
   schools and one of the middle schools in the Salt Lake City School
   District, which serves most of Salt Lake City proper. There are
   twenty-three elementary schools, five middle schools, three high
   schools (Highland, East, and West, with the former South High School
   (Salt Lake City) being converted to South City campus of the Salt Lake
   Community college), and an alternative high school (Horizonte) located
   within the school district. In addition, Highland has recently been
   selected as the site for the charter school Salt Lake School for the
   Performing Arts (SPA), while Salt Lake City proper also holds many
   Catholic schools, including Judge High School.

   Postsecondary educational options in Salt Lake City include the
   University of Utah, , Westminster College, Salt Lake Community College,
   BYU Salt Lake Centre, and LDS Business College. There are also many
   trade and technical schools such as the Utah College of Massage
   Therapy.

Culture

Arts

   Gateway District, where the Clark Planetarium is located.
   Enlarge
   Gateway District, where the Clark Planetarium is located.

   The Utah Museum of Fine Arts, Utah Museum of Natural History, and the
   Museum of Church History and Art are some of the museums located in
   Salt Lake City. Other museums include the Utah State Historical
   Society, Daughters of Utah Pioneer Memorial Museum, Fort Douglas
   Military Museum, and the Social Hall Heritage Museum. Clark Planetarium
   at the Gateway Mall houses an IMAX theatre.

   Salt Lake City provides many venues for both professional and amateur
   theatre. The city attracts many traveling Broadway and off-Broadway
   performances. Local professional acting companies include the Pioneer
   Theatre Company, Salt Lake Acting Company, and Plan-B Theatre Company.

   Salt Lake City is the home of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir, founded in
   1847. The Choir's weekly program, called Music and the Spoken Word, is
   the longest-running continuous network broadcast in the world. Salt
   Lake City is also the home to the Utah Symphony Orchestra, which was
   founded in 1940 by Maurice Abravanel and has become widely renowned.
   The orchestra's original home was the Salt Lake Tabernacle, but since
   the 1990s has performed at Abravanel Hall in the western downtown area.

   The city also has a local music scene featuring blues, rock and roll,
   punk, and emo groups. There are also many clubs which offer musical
   venues. Popular groups or persons who started in the Wasatch Front area
   or were raised and influenced by it include The Used, Shedaisy, and the
   lead singer of The Killers, Brandon Flowers. In 2004 over 200 bands
   submitted tracks for a compilation by a local music zine, SLUG ("Salt
   Lake Underground"). The 15-year-old free monthly zine trimmed the
   submissions to 59 selections featuring diverse music types such as
   hip-hop, jazz, jazz-rock, punk, and a variety of rock and roll.

   The University of Utah is home to two highly-ranked dance departments,
   the Ballet Department and the Department of Modern Dance. Professional
   dance companies in Salt Lake City include Ballet West, Rire Woodbury,
   and Repertory Dance Theatre.

   Many films, music videos, commercials, and sitcoms have been recorded
   in the Salt Lake metropolitan area; they include, Touched By An Angel,
   Everwood, Big Love, Dawn of the Dead, Drive Me Crazy, High School
   Musical, Unaccompanied Minors, Dumb and Dumber, Independence Day,
   Poolhall Junkies, The Brown Bunny, The World's Fastest Indian, Carnival
   of Souls, and The Postal Service's " Such Great Heights". In 2006 it
   was revealed that Dan Brown, the author of The DaVinci Code, was in the
   city studying the symbols on the Salt Lake LDS Temple and the Masonic
   Temple, among other historical buildings, for inclusion in an upcoming
   book.

Events

   The Olympic flame burns at Rice-Eccles Stadium. Salt Lake City hosted
   the 2002 Winter Olympics.
   Enlarge
   The Olympic flame burns at Rice-Eccles Stadium. Salt Lake City hosted
   the 2002 Winter Olympics.

   Although the city is often stereotyped as a predominantly LDS city, it
   is culturally and religiously diverse. The city is the location of many
   cultural activities, Mormon and otherwise. A major state holiday is
   Pioneer Day, July 24, the anniversary of the Mormon pioneers' entry
   into the Salt Lake Valley. It is celebrated each year with a week's
   worth of activities, including a children's parade, a horse parade, the
   featured Days of '47 Parade (one of the largest parades in the United
   States), a rodeo, and a large fireworks show at Liberty Park.

   Salt Lake City has a significant gay population, and the second-largest
   parade in the city is a gay pride parade, part of the annual Utah Pride
   Festival held every June. First Night on New Year's Eve, a celebration
   emphasizing family-friendly entertainment and activities held at
   Rice-Eccles Stadium at the University of Utah, culminates with a
   fireworks display at midnight.

   The Greek Festival, held the weekend after Labor Day, celebrates Utah's
   Greek heritage and is located at the downtown Greek Orthodox Church.
   The 3-day event includes Greek music, dance groups, Cathedral tours,
   booths and a large buffet. Attendance ranges from 35,000 - 50,000.

   The Utah Arts Festival has been held annually since 1977 with an
   average attendance of 80,000. About 130 booths are available for visual
   artists and there are five performance venues for musicians.

   Salt Lake City also hosts portions of the Sundance Film Festival. The
   festival, which is held each year, brings many cultural icons, movie
   stars, celebrities, and thousands of film buffs to see the largest
   independent film festival in the United Sates. However, the main
   location of the event is in nearby Park City.

   Beginning in 2004, Salt Lake City has been the host of the
   international Salt Lake City Marathon. In 2006 Real Madrid and many of
   the nation's best cyclist had engagements.

   Salt Lake City was host to the 2002 Winter Olympics. At the time of the
   2002 Olympics, Salt Lake City was the most populated area to hold a
   Winter Olympic games. The event put Salt Lake City in the international
   spotlight and is regarded upon many as being the most successful winter
   olympics ever.

Sites of interest

   The Salt Lake City Public Library was named Library of the Year by the
   American Library Association and features a distinctive, unique
   architectural style. The roof of the building serves as a viewpoint for
   the Salt Lake Valley. The Utah State Capitol Building offers marble
   floors and a dome similar to that of the building that houses the U.S.
   Congress. Other notable historical buildings include the City and
   County Building, built in 1894, and the Roman Catholic Cathedral of the
   Madeleine, built in 1909.

   Near the mouth of Emigration Canyon lies This Is The Place Heritage
   Park, which re-creates typical 19th-century LDS pioneer life. Hogle Zoo
   is located across the street from the park. The city’s largest public
   park, at over 100 acres, Liberty Park features a lake with an island in
   the middle and the Tracy Aviary. The park is home to a large number of
   birds, both wild and in the aviary.

   Salt Lake City is also home to a few major shopping centers. Trolley
   Square is an indoor and outdoor mall with many independent art
   boutiques, restaurants, and national retailers. The buildings housing
   the shops are renovated trolley barns with cobblestone streets. The
   Gateway District, an outdoor shopping mall, is the city’s newest major
   shopping center and has many national restaurants, clothing retailers,
   a movie theatre, the Clark Planetarium, a music venue called The Depot,
   and a 2002 Olympic Park.
   Liberty Park.
   Enlarge
   Liberty Park.

   There are two major malls across from each other on Main Street: the
   ZCMI Centre Mall and Crossroads Mall. On October 3, 2006, the LDS
   Church, who owns the malls, announced plans to demolish the malls, two
   skyscrapers, and several other buildings to make way for the $1 billion
   City Creek Centre redevelopment. It will combine several new office and
   residential buildings around an outdoor shopping centre featuring a
   stream, fountain, and other outdoor amenities, and is expected to be
   complete in 2011. Sugar House is a neighbourhood with a small town main
   street shopping area and numerous old parks. Sugar House Park is the
   second largest park in the city, and is host to frequent outdoor events
   and the primary Fourth of July fireworks in the city.

   Other attractions within proximity of Salt Lake City include the Golden
   Spike National Historic Site (where the world's first transcontinental
   railroad was joined), the Lagoon Amusement Park, the Great Salt Lake,
   the Bonneville Salt Flats, Gardner Historic Village, ski resorts such
   as Park City Mountain Resort and Snowbird, resort towns such as Park
   City, one of the largest dinosaur museums in the U.S. at Thanksgiving
   Point in Lehi, and the world’s largest man-made excavation at Kennecott
   Copper Mine.

Sports and recreation

   Winter sports, such as skiing and snowboarding, are popular activities
   in the Wasatch Mountains east of Salt Lake City. Eight ski resorts lie
   within 50 miles (80 km) of the city. Alta, Brighton, Solitude, and
   Snowbird are located in Big and Little Cottonwood Canyons to the
   southeast, Deer Valley, The Canyons, and Park City Resort are located
   to the east, near Park City in Summit County, and Sundance is located
   to the southeast in Utah County. The ski resorts see frequent storms
   that deposit light, dry snow due to a phenomenon known as the lake
   effect, where storms amplified by the warm waters of the Great Salt
   Lake precipitate in the Wasatch Mountains. Alta and Deer Valley only
   allow skiing, while the others allow both skiing and snowboarding. The
   popularity of the ski resorts has increased nearly 29% since the 2002
   Winter Olympics.

   Most of the ski resorts also offer summer activities. The mountains
   surrounding Salt Lake City are very popular for hiking, camping, rock
   climbing, mountain biking, and other related outdoor activities. In
   addition, the many small reservoirs and rivers in the Wasatch Mountains
   are popular for boating, fishing, and other water-related activities.
   Salt Lake City is the primary jumping-off point for exploring the
   national parks and monuments and rugged terrain of the southern half of
   the state, as it contains the only international airport in the state.

   Salt Lake City is home to the NBA team Utah Jazz and Real Salt Lake, a
   new Major League Soccer franchise that began play in 2005 and currently
   plays at Rice-Eccles Stadium at the University of Utah. An as-of-yet
   unnamed soccer-specific stadium for Real Salt Lake has been approved
   for the suburb of Sandy and will finish construction by the 2008
   season. Salt Lake City also received an Arena Football League team
   known as the Utah Blaze in 2006, who were popular in their first season
   in Utah, recording the highest average attendance in the league. It is
   also the home of the Salt Lake Bees minor league baseball team, a Los
   Angeles Angels Triple A affiliate that plays in the Pacific Coast
   League. Nearby West Valley City has the Utah Grizzlies of the ECHL and
   had also received an expansion team from the revived American
   Basketball Association, known as the Utah Snowbears, in the 2005
   season. That team folded after going 25–1 in the regular season and
   being well on their way to a championship. A new ABA team known as the
   Salt Lake Dream will begin play for the 2006-07 season, along with a
   Continental Basketball Association (CBA) team known as the Utah Eagles.
   The Utah Starzz of the WNBA were once located within the city, but
   moved to San Antonio and became the Silver Stars.

   Because Utah lacks a professional football team of its own, college
   football is very popular in the state. The University of Utah and
   Brigham Young University both maintain large and faithful followings in
   the city, and rivalries are intense during the annual game between the
   two universities, sometimes referred to as the Holy War.

Transportation

Roads

   Utah State Capitol Building. State Street begins at the structure.
   Enlarge
   Utah State Capitol Building. State Street begins at the structure.

   There are four major freeways located within Salt Lake City. Interstate
   15 runs north-south just west of downtown, while Interstate 80 enters
   near the airport and briefly merges with I-15 west of downtown before
   heading east through residential neighborhoods into Parley's Canyon.
   Utah State Route 201 (the 2100 South freeway) runs east-west along the
   border with West Valley City; and Interstate 215, a beltway, traverses
   the city's northwest and west neighborhoods and encircles the city's
   southern suburbs. SR-201, I-15, and I-80 bisect one another at the
   "spaghetti bowl" just south of the city in neighboring South Salt Lake.

   An additional freeway, known as the Mountain View Corridor, which is
   part of the Legacy Highway system, is proposed to reduce growing
   congestion and accommodate rapidly-growing population along the west
   side of the Salt Lake Valley, with construction set to begin as early
   as 2008 and completion after 2015. The first portion of the Legacy
   Highway system, known as Legacy Parkway, has begun construction as of
   November 2006 and will connect into I-215 just north of the city
   borders by 2008. This highway is expected to significantly reduce
   congestion on I-15 into Davis County. Utah State Route 154 (Bangerter
   Highway) is an expressway that provides access to the rapidly growing
   western and southern cities of the Salt Lake Valley, beginning at Salt
   Lake City International Airport. U.S. Highway 89 enters from Davis
   County parallel to I-15 before heading southeast into downtown. In
   downtown, U.S. 89 becomes State Street and extends south as the main
   surface street through the centre of the city. Both S.R. 154 and U.S.
   89 connect to I-15 at the far south end of the valley.

Public transportation

   TRAX on Main Street. The light rail system connects the city to its
   southern suburbs.
   Enlarge
   TRAX on Main Street. The light rail system connects the city to its
   southern suburbs.

   Salt Lake City's mass transit service is operated by the Utah Transit
   Authority (UTA) and includes light rail and bus routes (with the
   addition of commuter rail in 2008). The 19-mile light rail system,
   called TRAX, consists of two lines originating downtown. Daily
   ridership averages 53,400, nearly four times original projections, and
   is the ninth-most ridden light rail system in the country.

   Both lines begin at the EnergySolutions Arena near the western edge of
   downtown and head east to Temple Square. From there they turn south;
   near the courthouse, the University Line heads east to the University
   of Utah. The Sandy Line continues south to Sandy, and has a total of 18
   stations. The University Line heads east to the University of Utah and
   ends at the University Medical Centre. The line has a total of seven
   stations.

   TRAX began service on December 4, 1999, and the University Line opened
   in 2001 and was extended in 2003 to its current terminus at the
   University Medical Centre. The Mid-Jordan Line to the Daybreak
   Community in South Jordan and the Draper lines have been approved, as
   well. An additional two stations were recently approved west of the
   EnergySolutions Arena through the Gateway District and will end at the
   Intermodal Hub located on 600 West between 200 South and 300 South. A
   sales tax hike for road improvements, light rail, and commuter rail was
   approved on November 7, 2006. A commuter rail line, FrontRunner,
   running north from Salt Lake City into Davis and Weber Counties, is
   currently under construction and is expected to be completed in the
   spring of 2008.

   In addition, a non-UTA, non-profit vintage rail trolley system is being
   planned for the Sugar House neighbourhood.

   UTA also operates an extensive bus system that extends throughout the
   Wasatch Front from Brigham City in the north to Santaquin in the south
   and as far west as Grantsville. UTA also operates routes to the ski
   resorts in Big and Little Cottonwood Canyons during the ski season
   (typically November to April).

   Amtrak, the national passenger rail system, provides service to Salt
   Lake City, operating its California Zephyr daily in both directions
   between Chicago and Emeryville, California across the bay from San
   Francisco. Greyhound Bus Lines serves Salt Lake City as well, providing
   access north-to-south through Utah along the I-15 corridor. Salt Lake
   City International Airport is located 7 mi (11 km) west of downtown.
   Delta Air Lines has hub operations at the airport and is currently
   expanding its Salt Lake City service. Ute Cab, City Cab, and Yellow Cab
   are the major taxi services.

Sister cities

   Salt Lake City has several sister cities, including:
     * Chernivtsi (Ukraine)
     * Keelung City (Taiwan)
     * Matsumoto (Japan)
     * Oruro (Bolivia)
     * Quezon City (Philippines)
     * Thurles (Ireland)
     * Turin (Italy)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salt_Lake_City%2C_Utah"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
