   #copyright

Samoa

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; Geography of
Oceania (Australasia)

               Independent State of Samoa

   Flag of Samoa Coat of arms of Samoa
   Flag          Coat of arms
   Motto: Fa'avae i le Atua Samoa
   ( Samoan: "Samoa is founded on God")
   Anthem: The Banner of Freedom
   Location of Samoa
   Capital
   (and largest city)    Apia
                         13°35′S 172°20′W
    Official languages   Samoan, English
   Government            Monarchy
    - O le Ao o le Malo  Malietoa Tanumafili II
    - Prime Minister     Tuila'epa Sailele Malielegaoi
       Independence      from New Zealand
    - Date               1 January 1962
                          Area
    - Total              2,831 km² ( 174th)
                         1093 sq mi
    - Water (%)          0.3%
                       Population
    - July 2005 estimate 185,000 ( 185th)
    - Density            65/km² ( 126th)
                         169/sq mi
        GDP ( PPP)       2002 estimate
    - Total              $1.16 billion ( 166th)
    - Per capita         $6,344 ( 94th)
       HDI  ( 2003)      0.776 (medium) ( 74th)
         Currency        Tala ( WST)
         Time zone       ( UTC-11)
       Internet TLD      .ws
       Calling code      +685

   Samoa, officially the Independent State of Samoa, is a country
   comprising a group of islands in the South Pacific Ocean. Previous
   names were German Samoa from 1900 to 1919, and Western Samoa from 1914
   to 1997. It was recognized by the United Nations on 15 December 1976 (
   UN members) as Samoa. The entire group was known as Navigators Islands
   before the 20th century because of the Samoans' seafaring skills. It
   has a population of 176,710 (2001 census).

History

   Some historians hypothesize that the first Polynesians to arrive in the
   Pacific came from Southern Taiwan. A group of people called the
   "Lapita" are thought to have travelled south from Taiwan through
   South-East Asia, eventually reaching Papua New Guinea and Vanuatu. It
   is also believed that Polynesians are the result of a mix of Lapita
   people from Asia, and Melanesians who were already in countries such as
   Vanuatu and Fiji. From linguistic evidence, it is believed that Samoa
   was the first place discovered by the Polynesians: Tonga, a country
   just south of Samoa means "South" in many Pacific languages; and
   Tokelau, a country to the north of Samoa means "North" in many Pacific
   languages. Also, in Polynesian legends the homeland of all Polynesians
   is called "Hauaiki" in Tongan, "Hawaiki" in Māori, and "Hawaiʻi" in
   Hawaiian. This is thought to be Savai'i, one of the main islands in
   Samoa. Samoa enjoys a rich history, preserved in folklore and myth, of
   voyages across the ocean, conquests of different islands, and
   inter-island warfare with other West Polynesian polities, mainly the
   Kingdom of Tonga and certain Fijian chieftainships. Some people believe
   that a temple on the island of Manono has a record, using a system of
   stone cairns, commemoratating more than 150 wars. Robert Louis
   Stevenson, who spent the last four years of his life in Samoa, remarked
   that "War is Samoa's favourite pastime." (It is fair to say that in
   contemporary times team competition, particularly rugby, volleyball,
   kirikiti, traditional song and dance, and traditional water sports,
   have replaced war.)

   Contact with Europeans began in 1722, but intensified after the 1830s,
   when English missionaries and traders began arriving. Mission work in
   Samoa was begun in late 1830 by John Williams, of the London Missionary
   Society. By that time, the Samoans had gained a reputation of being
   savage and warlike, as they had clashed with French, British, German
   and American forces, who, by the late nineteenth century, valued Samoa
   as a refuelling station for coal-fired shipping.

   As Germany began to show more interest in the Samoan Islands, the
   United States laid its own claim to them. Britain also sent troops to
   express its interest. There followed an eight-year civil war, where
   each of the three powers supplied arms, training, and in some cases
   combat troops, to the warring Samoan parties. All three sent warships
   into Apia harbour, and a larger-scale war seemed imminent, until a
   massive storm damaged or destroyed the warships, ending the military
   conflict. At the turn of the twentieth century, the Treaty of Berlin
   split the Samoan Islands into two parts: the eastern group became a
   territory of the United States (the Tutuila Islands in 1900 and
   officially Manu'a in 1905), and are today known as American Samoa; the
   western islands, by far the greater landmass, became known as German
   Samoa after the British gave up claims to the islands in return for
   Fiji and some Melanesian territories. New Zealand troops landed in
   'Upolu on 29 August 1914 and seized control from the German
   authorities, following a request by Britain that New Zealand forces
   take over a German radio station there.

   From the end of World War I until 1962, New Zealand controlled Samoa as
   a Class "C" Mandate under trusteeship through the League of Nations.
   There followed a series of highly unqualified white New Zealand
   administrators, who formed their own agendas without consulting with
   the native Samoans. As one example, administrators might remove titles
   related to Mata'i (Samoan Chieftainship) for political reasons, where
   such action was customarily the responsibility of a Chief’s family.
   Approximately one fifth of the Samoan population died in the Influenza
   epidemic of 1918-1919, due to the mismanagement, ignorance, and
   corruption of the New Zealand administration.

   In the early 1920's, the Western Samoans began a campaign known as the
   Mau ("Strongly held Opinion"), a non-violent popular movement to
   protest the mistreatment of the Samoan people by the New Zealand
   administration. The Mau was initially lead by Olaf Nelson, who was half
   Samoan and half Swedish. (He continued to assist the organization
   financially and politically, though in exile, during the late 1920's
   and early 1930's.) In following the Mau's non-violent philosophy, the
   newly elected leader, High Chief Tupua Tamasese lealofi, led his fellow
   uniformed Mau in a peaceful demonstration in downtown Apia. The New
   Zealand police attempted to arrest one of the leaders in the
   demonstration. When he resisted, a struggle developed between the
   police and the Mau. The officers began to fire randomly into the crowd
   and a Lewis machine gun, mounted in preparation for this demonstration,
   was used to disperse the Mau. Chief Tamasese was shot from behind and
   killed while trying to bring calm and order to the Mau demonstrators,
   screaming "Peace, Samoa". 10 others died that day and approximately 50
   were injured by gunshot wounds and police batons. That day , December
   28, 1929, would come to be known in Samoa as Black Saturday. The Mau
   grew, remaining steadfastly non-violent, and expanded to include a
   highly influential women's branch. After repeated efforts by the Samoan
   people, Western Samoa finally gained independence in 1962.

   In July 1997, the constitution was amended to change the country's name
   from Western Samoa to Samoa, as it had been designated by the United
   Nations since joining the organization in 1976. The U.S. territory of
   American Samoa protested the move, asserting that the change diminished
   its own identity. American Samoans still use the terms Western Samoa
   and Western Samoans to describe the independent State of Samoa and its
   inhabitants. While the two Samoas share language and ethnicity, their
   cultures have recently followed different paths, with American Samoans
   often emigrating to Hawaiʻi and the U.S. mainland, and adopting many
   U.S. customs, such as the playing of American football and baseball.
   Western Samoans have tended to emigrate instead to New Zealand, whose
   influence has made the sports of rugby and cricket more popular in the
   western islands.

Politics

   Politics of Samoa takes place in a framework of a parliamentary
   representative democratic monarchy, whereby the Prime Minister of Samoa
   is the head of government, and of a pluriform multiparty system. The
   Head of State, His Highness Mālietoa Tanumafili II. Executive power is
   exercised by the government. Federal legislative power is vested in
   both the government and the Fono. The judiciary is independent of the
   executive and the legislature.

Districts

   Samoa is made up of eleven districts, some of which are split between
   different parts of the islands.
      District      Population
                   (2001 census)
   A'ana           20,167
   Aiga-i-le-Tai   4,508
   Atua            21,168
   Fa'asaleleaga   12,949
   Gaga'emauga     7,108
   Gaga'ifomauga   4,770
   Palauli         8,984
   Satupa'itea     5,556
   Tuamasaga       83,191
   Va'a-o-Fonoti   1,666
   Vaisigano       6,643

Geography

   Map of Samoa
   Enlarge
   Map of Samoa

   The country is located east of the international dateline and south of
   the equator, about halfway between Hawai'i and New Zealand in the
   Polynesian region of the Pacific Ocean. The Samoas are of volcanic
   origin, and the total land area is 2934 km², consisting of the two
   large islands of Upolu and Savai'i which account for 96% of the total
   land area, and eight small islets: Manono, Apolima, Nu'utele, Nu'ulua,
   Namua, Fanuatapu, Nu'usafe'e, and Nu'ulopa. While all of the islands
   have volcanic origins, only Savai'i has had recent eruptions and could
   be considered volcanically active: the last major eruption occurred in
   the 1700s, and smaller eruptions occurred in the first decade of the
   twentieth century. The highest point in Samoa is Mauga Silisili, at
   1858 m. The main island of Upolu is home to nearly three-quarters of
   Samoa's population, and its capital city is Apia. The climate is
   tropical, with an average annual temperature of 26.5 °C, and a rainy
   season from November to April.

Economy

   The economy of Samoa has traditionally been dependent on development
   aid, private family remittances from overseas, and agricultural
   exports. The country is vulnerable to devastating storms. Agriculture
   employs two-thirds of the labour force, and furnishes 90% of exports,
   featuring coconut cream, coconut oil, noni [sic] (juice of the nonu
   [sic] fruit), and copra. Outside of a large automotive wire-harness
   factory, the manufacturing sector mainly processes agricultural
   products. Tourism is an expanding sector; more than 70,000 tourists
   visited the islands in 1996. The Samoan government has called for
   deregulation of the financial sector, encouragement of investment, and
   continued fiscal discipline. Observers point to the flexibility of the
   labor market as a basic strength for future economic advances.

   Samoa is a fertile, fruitful, productive country. In the period before
   German colonization, it produced mostly copra. German merchants and
   settlers were active in introducing large scale plantation operations
   and developing new industries, notably cocoa and rubber, relying on
   imported laborers from China and Melanesia. When the value of natural
   rubber fell drastically, about the end of the Great War (World War I),
   the New Zealand government encouraged the production of bananas, for
   which there is a large market in New Zealand.

   Because of variations in altitude, a large range of tropical and
   subtropical crops can be cultivated, but land is not generally
   available to outside interest. Of the total land area of 2,934 km²
   (725,000 acres), about 24.4% is in permanent crops and another 21.2% is
   arable. About 4.4% is Western Samoan Trust Estates Corporation (WESTC).

   The staple products of Samoa are copra (dried coconut meat), cocoa (for
   chocolate), and bananas. The annual production of both bananas and
   copra has been in the range of 13,000 to 15,000 metric tons. If the
   rhinoceros beetle in Samoa were eradicated, Samoa could produce in
   excess of 40,000 metric tons of copra. Cocoa is of very high quality
   and used in fine New Zealand chocolates. Most cocoa trees are
   Criollo-Forastero hybrids. Coffee grows well, but production has been
   uneven. WSTEC is the biggest coffee producer. Rubber has been produced
   in Samoa for many years, but its export value has little impact on the
   economy.

   Other agricultural industries have been less successful. Sugarcane
   production, originally established by Germans in the early 20th
   century, could be successful. Old train tracks for transporting cane
   can be seen at some plantations east of Apia. Pineapples grow well in
   Samoa, but beyond local consumption have not been a major export.

   In the late 1960s, Potlatch Forests, Inc. (a U.S. company), upgraded
   the harbour and airport at Asau on the northern coast of Savai'i and
   established a timber operation, Samoa Forest Products, for harvesting
   tropical hardwoods. Potlatch invested about US$2,500,000 in a
   state-of-the-art sawmill and another US$6,000,000 over several years to
   develop power, water, and haul roads for their facility. Asau, with the
   Potlatch sawmillers and Samoa Forest Products, was one of the busiest
   parts of Savai'i in the 1960s and 1970s; however, the departure of
   Potlatch and the scaling down of the sawmill has left Asau a ghost town
   in recent years.

   Fishing has had some success in Samoan waters, but the biggest
   fisheries industry (headed by Van Camp and StarKist) has been based in
   American Samoa. StarKist Management announced that it was going ahead
   with setting up at Asau a blast-freezer project to be operational by
   2002. This announcement dispelled a growing suspicion about the genuine
   motives of StarKist to move to Samoa. The proposed blast-freezer
   operations in Asau were expected to bring this village back to life.

Sports

   The main sports played in Samoa are Rugby Union and Samoan cricket.

   Rugby Union is very popular in Samoa and the national team is
   consistently competitive against teams from vastly more populous
   nations. Samoa have competed at every Rugby World Cup since 1991, and
   have made the quarter finals in 1991, 1995 and 1999. Samoa also play in
   the Pacific Nations Cup and the Pacific Tri-Nations The sport is
   governed by the Samoa Rugby Football Union, who are members of the
   Pacific Islands Rugby Alliance, and thus, also contribute to the
   international Pacific Islanders rugby union team. At club level there
   is the National Provincial Championship and Pacific Rugby Cup Prominent
   Samoan players include Douglas Faaee, Pat Lam and Brian Lima. In
   addition there are many Samoans that have played for or are playing for
   the All Blacks.

   Rugby League is also popular amongst Samoans, with Samoa reaching the
   quarter finals of the 2000 Rugby League World Cup.

   Samoans have been very visible in American professional wrestling,
   despite the relatively small population of the islands. The Rock, Peter
   Maivia, Jimmy "Superfly" Snuka, Umaga/Jamal, Rosey, Samoa Joe, Wild
   Samoans, The Headshrinkers, Rikishi, Sonny Siaki, and the late Yokozuna
   all share Samoan heritage.

Demographics

   Only the Māori of New Zealand outnumber Samoans among Polynesian
   groups, but a larger portion of Māori identify with more than one
   ethnic group.

   Roughly 98% of Samoans are Christians, divided among many different
   churches, including: Congregationalist, originally called the London
   Missionary Society Church (L.M.S.) 34.8%, Roman Catholic 19.6%,
   Methodist 15%, Latter-Day Saints 12.7%, Assembly of God 6.6%,
   Seventh-day Adventist 3.5%, other Christian 4.5%. The Head of State,
   His Highness Mālietoa Tanumafili II, is a Bahá'í. Samoa hosts one of
   seven Bahá'í Houses of Worship in the world; completed in 1984 and
   dedicated by the Head of State, it is located in Tiapapata, 8 km from
   Apia.

   According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Samoa has a large gender
   imbalance. . The cause of this imbalance is uncertain, but large-scale
   emigration of women may be relevant.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samoa"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
