   #copyright

San Marino

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; European
Countries

   Serenissima Repubblica di San Marino
   Most Serene Republic of San Marino

   Flag of San Marino Coat of arms of San Marino
   Flag               Coat of arms
   Motto: Latin: Libertas
   (English: "Liberty")
   Anthem: Inno Nazionale della Repubblica
   Patron saint: St. Marinus
   Location of San Marino
   Capital San Marino
   43°56′N 12°27′E
   Largest city Serravalle
   Official languages Italian
   Government Republic
    - Captains Regent Antonio Carattoni
   and Roberto Giorgetti
    - Secretary of State for Foreign and Political Affairs Fiorenzo Stolfi
   Foundation
    - Date September 3, 301
   Area
    - Total 61 km² ( 224th)
   23.5 sq mi
    - Water (%) negligible
   Population
    - January 2005 estimate 28,117 ( 212th)
    - Density 481/km² ( 20th)
   1,225/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2001 estimate
    - Total $904 million ( 195th)
    - Per capita $34,600 ( 12th)
   HDI  (2003) n/a (unranked) ( n/a)
   Currency Euro (€) ( EUR)
   Time zone CET ( UTC+1)
    - Summer ( DST) CEST ( UTC+2)
   Internet TLD .sm
   Calling code +378 (0549 from Italy)

   The Most Serene Republic of San Marino ( Italian: Serenissima
   Repubblica di San Marino) is the third smallest nation in Europe (after
   Monaco and the Holy See). Located in southern Europe, it is an enclave
   surrounded by Italy, and is one of the European microstates. San Marino
   is the oldest constitutional republic in the world still in existence
   today. It was founded in A.D.   301 by Marinus of Rab, a Christian
   stonemason fleeing the religious persecution of Roman Emperor
   Diocletian.

   San Marino is the fifth least-populous sovereign country in the world
   (larger only than the Vatican City, Tuvalu, Nauru, and Palau). It is
   the smallest member of the Western European and Others Group (WEOG)
   unofficial political-geographical grouping of the United Nations. It is
   also the smallest non-English speaking member of the United Nations. It
   is the smallest country or other jurisdiction participating in European
   football competitions.

History

   According to legend, Marino left the Adriatic island of Rab with his
   lifelong friend Leo and went to the town of Rimini as a stone worker.
   After persecution because of his Christian sermons, he escaped to the
   nearby Monte Titano, where he built a small church and thus founded
   what is now the city and the state of San Marino. The official date of
   foundation of the Republic is 3 September A.D.  301.

   During the early phase of the Italian unification process of the 19th
   century, San Marino served as a haven of refuge for numerous persons
   who were persecuted because of their support for Italian unity. In
   memory of this support, Giuseppe Garibaldi accepted the wish of San
   Marino not to be incorporated into the new Italian state.

   During World War II San Marino was able to officially remain neutral
   during World War II. Axis forces retreated through the country and were
   persued by the US and Great Britan. The allied troops left the country
   a few weeks later.

   The head of state is a committee (council) of two captains-regent. San
   Marino also holds the record for the world's first democratically
   elected communist government, which held office between 1945 and 1957.

   San Marino became a member of the Council of Europe in 1988 and of the
   UN in 1992. It is not a member of the European Union.

Politics

   The Consiglio Grande e Generale ("Grand and General Council") is
   elected by popular vote every five years. This parliament selects two
   of its members to serve as Capitani Reggenti ("Captains Regent") for
   periods of six months. The Capitani Reggenti and the cabinet form the
   executive branch of the government.

   The Council also elects the Consiglio dei XII (Council of Twelve),
   which forms the judicial branch during the period of legislature of the
   Council.

Municipalities

   San Marino is divided into the following nine municipalities, known
   locally as castelli or castles (sing. castello, each on a different
   hill, as depicted on the republic's coat of arms), that are also towns
   to the world.
     * The City of San Marino (Città di San Marino) is the eponymous
       capital. There are also eight minor municipalities:
     * Acquaviva
     * Borgo Maggiore
     * Chiesanuova
     * Domagnano
     * Faetano
     * Fiorentino
     * Montegiardino
     * Serravalle

   Administrative division.
   Enlarge
   Administrative division.

          + The largest town of the Republic is Dogana, which is not an
            autonomous castello but rather belongs to the castello of
            Serravalle.

   Each castello, like Italian comuni, includes a main town that is the
   seat of the castello, called capoluogo, and some even smaller
   localities known as frazioni.

Geography

   Much of the Republic can be seen from the top of Mount Titano
   Enlarge
   Much of the Republic can be seen from the top of Mount Titano

   San Marino is an enclave in Italy, on the border between the regioni of
   Emilia Romagna and Marche. Its topography is dominated by the Apennines
   mountain range, and it has a rugged terrain. The highest point in the
   country, Monte Titano, is situated at 749 metres (2,457  ft) above sea
   level. There are no bodies of water of any significant size.

   The climate is Mediterranean, with warm summers and mild winters.

   San Marino is the third-smallest country in Europe, with only Vatican
   City and Monaco being smaller.

Economy

   Although San Marino is not an official European Union member, it is
   allowed to use the euro as its currency by virtue of arrangements with
   the council of the European Union; it is also granted the right to use
   its own designs on the national side of the euro coins. Before the
   Euro, the Sammarinese lira was coupled to and exchangeable with the
   Italian lira. The small number of Sammarinese euro coins, as was the
   case with the lira before it, are primarily of interest to coin
   collectors.

   The tourist sector contributes over 50% of San Marino's GDP, with more
   than 3.3 million tourists visiting in 1997. Other key industries are
   banking, electronics, and ceramics. The main agricultural products are
   wine and cheese.

   San Marino's postage stamps, which are only valid for mail posted
   within the country, are mostly sold to philatelists and also form a
   source of income.

   The per capita level of output and standard of living are comparable to
   those of Italy, which supplies much of its food.

Transport

   San Marino's closest airport, located in Italy, is Federico Fellini
   International Airport close to the city of Rimini.

Demographics

   There is no significant difference between the demographics of San
   Marino and Italy.

   The state has a population of approximately 29,000, including 1,000
   foreigners, most of whom are Italians. About 5,000 Sammarinese live in
   foreign countries, predominantly in Italy.

   The language spoken is Italian, with the Emiliano-Romagnolo dialect,
   and Roman Catholicism is the predominant religion.

Neighbouring countries

   Flag of Italy  Italy Flag of Italy  Italy Flag of Italy  Italy
   Flag of Italy  Italy North Flag of Italy  Italy
   West    Flag of San Marino  San Marino     East
   South
   Flag of Italy  Italy Flag of Italy  Italy Flag of Italy  Italy

   Countries of Europe

   Albania · Andorra · Armenia^1 · Austria · Azerbaijan^2 · Belarus ·
   Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus^1 ·
   Czech Republic · Denmark · Estonia · Finland · France · Georgia^2 ·
   Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy · Kazakhstan^2 ·
   Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Republic of Macedonia
   · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands · Norway · Poland
   · Portugal · Romania · Russia^2 · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia ·
   Slovenia · Spain · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey^2 · Ukraine · United
   Kingdom · Vatican City

   (1) Entirely in Asia but having socio-political connections with
   Europe. (2) Has significant territory in Asia.
   Latin Union

   Angola • Argentina • Bolivia • Brazil • Cape Verde • Chile • Colombia •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Costa Rica • Cuba • Dominican Republic • Ecuador •
   France • Guatemala • Guinea-Bissau • Haiti • Honduras • Italy • Mexico
   • Moldova • Monaco • Mozambique • Nicaragua • Panama • Paraguay • Peru
   • Philippines • Portugal • Romania • San Marino • São Tomé and Príncipe
   • Senegal • Spain • Timor Leste • Uruguay • Vatican City • Venezuela
   Romance-speaking nations in Europe

   Flag of Andorra  Andorra · Flag of Belgium  Belgium · Flag of France
   France · Flag of Italy  Italy · Flag of Monaco  Monaco · Flag of
   Moldova  Moldova · Flag of Portugal  Portugal · Flag of Romania
   Romania · Flag of San Marino  San Marino · Flag of Spain  Spain · Flag
   of Switzerland  Switzerland

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/San_Marino"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
