   #copyright

Saudi Arabia

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; Middle Eastern
Countries

   المملكة العربية السعودية
   Al-Mamlakah al-'Arabiyyah as-Sa'ūdiyyah
   Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

   Flag of Saudi Arabia Coat of arms of Saudi Arabia
   Flag                 Coat of arms
   Motto: لا إله إلا الله محمد رسول الله  (Arabic)
   Lā ilāhā illā-llāhu; muhammadun rasūlu-llāhi  ( transliteration)
   "There is no god but The God; Muhammad is the Messenger of The God"
   Anthem: Aash Al Maleek ("Long live the King")
   Location of Saudi Arabia
   Capital
   (and largest city) Riyadh
   24°39′N 46°46′E
   Official languages Arabic
   Government Absolute monarchy
    - King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz
    - Crown Prince Sultan bin Abdul Aziz
   Establishment
    - Kingdom declared January 8, 1926
    - Recognized May 20, 1927
    - Unified September 23, 1932
   Area
    - Total 2,149,690 km² ( 14th)
   829,996 sq mi
    - Water (%) negligible
   Population
    - 2006 estimate 27,019,731^1 ( 46th ^2)
    - Density 11/km² ( 205th)
   29/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total $351.996 billion ( 27th)
    - Per capita $15,338 ( 46th)
   HDI  (2003) 0.772 (medium) ( 77th)
   Currency Riyal ( SAR)
   Time zone ( UTC+3)
   Internet TLD .sa
   Calling code +966
   ^1 Population estimate includes 5,576,076 non-nationals
   ^2 Rank is based on 2005 figures.

   The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (Arabic: المملكة العربية السعودية‎) is the
   largest country on the Arabian Peninsula. It borders Jordan on the
   northwest, Iraq on the north and northeast, Kuwait, Qatar, Bahrain, and
   the United Arab Emirates on the east, Oman on the southeast, and Yemen
   on the south, with the Persian Gulf to its northeast and the Red Sea to
   its west. It is called "the land of the two holy mosques", a reference
   to Mecca and Medina, Islam's two holiest places. In English, it is most
   commonly referred to as Saudi Arabia (pronounced /ˈsɒdɪ/ or /ˈsaudɪ
   əˈɹeɪ̯bɪə/), often as just Saudi by many English-speaking expatriates
   in the kingdom, or, less commonly (as in international football events
   or in its national press) as KSA. (Arabia is sometimes also used to
   refer to the nation, but the term can also refer to the entire
   Peninsula and its varied nations and is thus ambiguous.)

History

   The founder of modern Saudi Arabia, King Abdul Aziz, converses with
   President Franklin Delano Roosevelt on board a ship returning from the
   Yalta Conference in 1945.
   Enlarge
   The founder of modern Saudi Arabia, King Abdul Aziz, converses with
   President Franklin Delano Roosevelt on board a ship returning from the
   Yalta Conference in 1945.

   The emergence of a Saudi state began in central Arabia in 1744. A
   regional ruler, Muhammad bin Saud, joined forces with an Islamic cleric
   and reformer, Muhammad Abd Al-Wahhab, to create a new political entity.
   Over the next one hundred and fifty years, the fortunes of the Saud
   family rose and fell several times as Saudi rulers contended with
   Egypt, the Ottoman Empire, and other Arabian families for control on
   the peninsula. The Saudi state was founded by the late King Abdul Aziz
   Al-Saud (known internationally as Abdul Aziz bin Saud).

   In 1902, Abdul Aziz Ibn Saud captured Riyadh, the Al-Saud dynasty's
   ancestral capital, from the rival Al-Rashid family. Continuing his
   conquests, Abdul Aziz subdued Al-Ahsa, Al-Qatif, the rest of Najd, and
   the Hejaz between 1913 and 1926. On 8 January 1926 Abdul Aziz bin Saud
   became the King of Hejaz. On 29 January 1927 he took the title King of
   Najd (his previous Najdi title was Sultan). By the Treaty of Jedda,
   signed on May 20, 1927, the United Kingdom recognized the independence
   of Abdul Aziz's realm, then known as the Kingdom of Hejaz and Nejd. In
   1932, these regions were unified as the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

   The discovery of oil in March 1938 transformed the country
   economically, and has given the kingdom great prosperity.

Politics

   The central institution of Saudi Arabian Government is the Saudi
   monarchy. The Basic Law adopted in 1992 declared that Saudi Arabia is a
   monarchy ruled by the sons and grandsons of the first king, Abd Al Aziz
   Al Saud, and that the Qur'an is the constitution of the country, which
   is governed on the basis of Islamic law ( Shari'a). It is interesting
   to note that Shari'a Law actually prohibits monarchy of any kind.
   King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia.
   Enlarge
   King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia.

   There are no recognized political parties or national elections, except
   the local elections which were held in the year 2005. The king's powers
   are theoretically limited within the bounds of Shari'a and other Saudi
   traditions. He also must retain a consensus of the Saudi royal family,
   religious leaders ( ulema), and other important elements in Saudi
   society. The Saudi government spreads Islam by funding construction of
   mosques and Qur'an schools around the world. The leading members of the
   royal family choose the king from among themselves with the subsequent
   approval of the ulema.

   Saudi kings have gradually developed a central government. Since 1953,
   the Council of Ministers, appointed by and responsible to the king, has
   advised on the formulation of general policy and directed the
   activities of the growing bureaucracy. This council consists of a prime
   minister, the first prime minister and twenty ministers.

   Legislation is by resolution of the Council of Ministers, ratified by
   royal decree, and must be compatible with the Shari'a. Justice is
   administered according to the Shari'a by a system of religious courts
   whose judges are appointed by the king on the recommendation of the
   Supreme Judicial Council, composed of twelve senior jurists. The
   combination of relatively high oil prices and exports led to a revenues
   windfall for Saudi Arabia during 2004 and early 2005. For 2004 as a
   whole, Saudi Arabia earned about $116 billion in net oil export
   revenues, up 35 percent from 2003 revenue levels. Saudi net oil export
   revenues are forecast to increase in 2005 and 2006, to $150 billion and
   $154 billion, respectively, mainly due to higher oil prices. Increased
   oil prices and consequent revenues since the price collapse of 1998
   have significantly improved Saudi Arabia's economic situation, with
   real GDP growth of 5.2 percent in 2004, and forecasts of 5.7 percent
   and 4.8 percent growth for 2005 and 2006, respectively.

   For fiscal year 2004, Saudi Arabia originally had been expecting a
   budget deficit. However, this was based on an extremely conservative
   price assumption of $19 per barrel for Saudi oil and an assumed
   production of 7.7 million bbl/d. Both of these estimates turned out to
   be far below actual levels. As a result, as of mid-December 2004, the
   Saudi Finance Ministry was expecting a huge budget surplus of $26.1
   billion, on budget revenues of $104.8 billion (nearly double the
   country's original estimate) and expenditures of $78.6 billion (28
   percent above the approved budget levels). This surplus is being used
   for several purposes, including: paying down the Kingdom's public debt
   (to $164 billion from $176 billion at the start of 2004); extra
   spending on education and development projects; increased security
   expenditures (possibly an additional $2.5 billion dollars in 2004; see
   below) due to threats from terrorists; and higher payments to Saudi
   citizens through subsidies (for housing, education, health care, etc.).
   For 2005, Saudi Arabia is assuming a balanced budget, with revenues and
   expenditures of $74.6 billion each.

   In spite of the recent surge in its oil income, Saudi Arabia continues
   to face serious long-term economic challenges, including high rates of
   unemployment (around 13 percent of Saudi nationals, possibly higher),
   one of the world's fastest population growth rates, and the consequent
   need for increased government spending. All of these place pressures on
   Saudi oil revenues. The Kingdom also is facing serious security
   threats, including a number of terrorist attacks (on foreign workers,
   primarily) in 2003 and 2004. In response, the Saudis reportedly have
   ramped up spending in the security area (reportedly by 50 percent in
   2004, from $5.5 billion in 2003). Saudi Arabia's per capita oil export
   revenues remain far below high levels reached during the 1970s and
   early 1980s. In 2004, Saudi Arabia earned around $4,564 per person,
   versus $22,589 in 1980. This 80 percent decline in real per capita oil
   export revenues since 1980 is in large part due to the fact that Saudi
   Arabia's young population has nearly tripled since 1980, while oil
   export revenues in real terms have fallen by over 40 percent (despite
   recent increases). Meanwhile, Saudi Arabia has faced nearly two decades
   of heavy budget and trade deficits, the expensive 1990-1991 war with
   Iraq, and total public debt of around $175 billion. On the other hand,
   Saudi Arabia does have extensive foreign assets (around $110 billion)
   which provide a substantial fiscal "cushion."

   Independence of the judiciary is protected by law. The king acts as the
   highest court of appeal and has the power to pardon. Access to high
   officials (usually at a majlis; a public audience) and the right to
   petition them directly are well-established traditions.

   Saudi municipal elections took place in 2005 and some commentators saw
   this a first tentative step towards the introduction of democratic
   processes in the Kingdom, including the legalisation of political
   parties. Other analysts of the Saudi political scene were more
   skeptical.

Human rights

   Saudi courts impose capital punishment and corporal punishment,
   including amputations of hands and feet for serious robbery and
   homosexuality and floggings for lesser crimes such as "sexual deviance"
   (e.g. drunkenness). These punishments are often carried out in public,
   to add humiliation. The number of lashes is not clearly prescribed by
   law and varies according to the discretion of the presiding judges. The
   number ranges from dozens to several thousand, usually applied over a
   period of weeks or months. However, there are certain prescriptions of
   lashes for certain crimes: Theft is punishable by the amputation of the
   right hand. If the right hand has already been amputated, the left hand
   is chosen instead. Drinking, selling, or buying alcohol and sniffing
   drugs or injecting drugs is punished by a sentence of eighty lashes.
   Fornication - if proven by four righteous witnesses - is normally
   punished with forty lashes, as is adultery. During flogging, the face,
   head and vital organs of the person are protected. Murder, accidental
   death and bodily harm are open to punishment from the victim's family.
   Retribution may be sought in kind or through blood money. The blood
   money payable for a woman's accidental death is half as much as that
   for a man. In 2002, the United Nations Committee against Torture
   criticized Saudi Arabia over the amputations and floggings it carries
   out under the Shari'a. The Saudi delegation responded defending "legal
   traditions" held since the inception of Islam in the region 1400 years
   ago and rejected "interference" in its legal system.

Provinces

   Provinces of Saudi Arabia

   Saudi Arabia is divided into thirteen provinces (manaatiq, sing.
   mintaqah), many named after the major city found in each:

   1 Al-Bahah
   2 Al Hudud ash Shamaliyah^a
   3 Al Jawf
   4 Al Madinah^b
   5 Al Gassim
   6 Ar-Riyad
   7 Ash-Sharqiyah^c

                                8 'Asir
                                9 Ha'il
                              10 Jizan
                              11 Makkah^d
                              12 Najran
                              13 Tabuk

   ^a Northern Border Province; ^b  Medina; ^c Eastern Province; ^d Mecca

Cities

   Downtown Riyadh.
   Enlarge
   Downtown Riyadh.

   Population over 1 million
   Riyadh         capital
   Jeddah         second largest city; pilgrimage gateway to Mecca; main Red Sea
                  port
   Dammam         Eastern Province capital; third largest metropolitan area
   Makkah         Mecca, the holiest city in Islam
   Other major cities
   Madinah        second holiest city in Islam (traditionally spelled Medina in
                  English)
   Ta'if          mountain resort above Mecca
   Tabuk          northwestern border city near Jordan
   Buraydah       city in north central Arabia
   Hofuf          major urban centre of the Al-Hasa oasis
   Qatif          large coastal oasis city and oilfield
   Khamis Mushayt western Arabian mountain city and military base

Geography

   Map of Saudi Arabia
   Enlarge
   Map of Saudi Arabia

   The kingdom occupies eighty percent of the Arabian Peninsula. Most of
   the country's boundaries with the United Arab Emirates, Oman, and Yemen
   are not precisely defined, so the exact size of the country remains
   unknown. The Saudi government's estimate is 2,217,949  km² (856,356
   mi²). Other reputable estimates vary between 1,960,582 km²
   (756,934 mi²) and 2,240,000 km² (864,869 mi²). The kingdom is commonly
   listed as the world's fifteenth-largest nation (after Mexico) and is
   comparable in size to Indonesia.

   Its geography is surprisingly varied. From the western coastal region (
   At-Tihamah), the land rises from sea level to a peninsula-long mountain
   range (jabal al-Hijaz) beyond which are plateaus. The southwestern
   'Asir region has mountains as high as 3,000 metres (9,840  ft) and is
   known for having the greenest and freshest climate in all of the
   country, one that attracts many Saudis to resorts such as Ta'if and
   Abha in the summer months. The east is primarily rocky or sandy lowland
   continuing to the shores of the Persian Gulf. The infamous "Empty
   Quarter" along the country's imprecisely defined southern borders
   contains the nearly lifeless Rub' al-Khali desert.

   In line with common stereotypes, much of the nation's landmass consists
   of desert and semi-desert, which, except for its dwindling traditional
   bedouin population, is mostly uninhabited. In these parts of the
   country, vegetation is limited to weeds, xerophytic herbs and shrubs.
   Less than 2% of the kingdom's total area is suitable for cultivation.
   Population centers are mainly located along the eastern and western
   coasts and densely populated interior oases such as Hofuf and Buraydah.
   In some extended areas, primarily the Rub' al-Khali and the Arabian
   Desert and East Sahero-Arabian xeric shrublands, there is no population
   whatsoever, although the petroleum industry is constructing a few
   planned communities there. Saudi Arabia has no permanent year-round
   rivers or lakes; however, its coastline extends for 2,640 kilometers
   (1,640  mi) and, on the Red Sea side, offers world-class coral reefs,
   including those in the Gulf of Aqaba.

   Native animals include the ibex, wildcats, baboons, wolves, and hyenas
   in the mountainous highlands. Small birds are found in the oases. The
   coastal area on the Red Sea with its coral reefs has a rich marine
   fauna.

Climate

   Extreme heat and aridity are characteristic of most of Saudi Arabia. It
   is one of the few places in the world where summer temperatures above
   50°C (120°F) are common, while in winter frost or snow can occur in the
   interior and the higher mountains, although this does not occur
   annually. The average winter temperature range is 8° to 20°C (47° to
   68°F) in January in interior cities such as Riyadh and 19° to 29°C (66°
   to 83°F) in Jeddah on the Red Sea coast. The average summer range in
   July is 27° to 43°C (81° to 109°F) in Riyadh and 27° to 38°C (80° to
   100°F) in Jeddah. Nighttime temperatures in the mid desert can be
   famously chilly even in summer, as sand gives up daytime heat rapidly
   once the sun has set.

   Annual precipitation is usually sparse (up to 100 millimetres (4  in)
   in most regions), although sudden downpours can lead to violent flash
   floods in wadis. Annual rainfall in Riyadh averages 100 mm (4 in) and
   falls almost exclusively between January and May; the average in Jeddah
   is 54 mm (2.1 in) and occurs between November and January. Plants can
   still survive in Saudi Arabia, mostly in the south-east mountains and
   lowlands. They bloom mid-March through mid-May. The plants provide food
   for birds and insects.

Economy

   Aramco, the Saudi national oil company, whose main offices are in
   Dhahran.
   Enlarge
   Aramco, the Saudi national oil company, whose main offices are in
   Dhahran.

   Saudi Arabia's economy is petroleum-based; roughly 75% of budget
   revenues and 90% of export earnings come from the oil industry. The oil
   industry comprises about 45% of Saudi Arabia's gross domestic product,
   compared with 40% from the private sector (see below). Saudi Arabia has
   claimed to be in possession of 260.1 billion barrels of oil reserves
   (about 24% of the world's proven total petroleum reserves) as of 2003.
   Moreover, according to the Saudi government, the proven reserves
   increase gradually as more oil fields are discovered, unlike most other
   oil-producing countries. It must be noted, however, that, those figures
   have been contested and that Saudi Arabia's actual reserves may be
   notably lower. Saudi Arabia was a key player in the successful efforts
   of OPEC and other oil producing countries to raise the price of oil in
   1999 to its highest level since the Gulf War by reducing production.

   The government is attempting to promote growth in the private sector by
   privatizing industries such as power and telecom. Saudi Arabia
   announced plans to begin privatizing the electricity companies in 1999,
   which followed the ongoing privatization of the telecommunications
   company. Shortages of water and rapid population growth may constrain
   government efforts to increase self-sufficiency in agricultural
   products.

   In the 1990s, Saudi Arabia experienced a significant contraction of oil
   revenues combined with a high rate of population growth. Per capita
   income has fallen from $25,000 in 1980 to $8,000 in 2003, up from about
   $7,000 in 1999. The decline in inflation-adjusted per-capita income
   from 1980 to 1999 set a record, being by far the worst such decline
   suffered by any nation-state in history.

   In 2003, the price of oil jumped to record high of 40 to 50 dollars,
   which triggered a second oil boom. Saudi Arabia's budget surplus has
   crossed $28 billion (110SR billion) in 2005. Tadawul (the Saudi stock
   market Index) finished 2004 with a massive 76.23% to close at 4437.58
   points. Market capitalization was up 110.14% from a year earlier to
   stand at $157.3 billion (589.93SR billion), which makes it the biggest
   stock market in the Middle East.‏

   OPEC limits its members oil production based on its "proven reserves."
   The higher their reserves, the more OPEC allows them to produce.
   Because of this, Saudi Arabia does not allow independent verification
   of their claimed "proven reserves." Over the past fifteen years, Saudi
   Arabia's claimed reserves have been flat, with the exception of an
   increase of about 100 billion barrels between 1987 and 1988. Many
   experts now believe that Saudi Arabia is greatly exaggerating its
   reserves and may soon show production declines (see Peak Oil).

   To diversify the economy, Saudi Arabia launched a new city on the
   western coast with investments exceeding 26.6 billion dollars. The city
   which is named " King Abdullah Economic City" will be built near
   al-Rabegh industrial city north to Jeddah. The new city, where
   construction work started in December 2005, includes a port which is
   ten times larger than Rotterdam, the world's largest port of Rotterdam.
   Extending along a coastline of 35 km, the city will also include
   petrochemical, pharmaceutical, tourism, finance and education and
   research areas.

   Saudi Arabia officially became a WTO member in December 2005.

Foreign labour

   Saudi Arabia is a country in which many men and women from South, South
   East, and East Asia, East Africa and the Middle East seek work. There
   are also some people from North America, South America, and Europe.
   Hundreds of thousands of low- skilled workers and skilled workers from
   regions of the developing world migrate to Saudi Arabia, sometimes only
   for a short period of time, to work. Although exact figures are not
   known, skilled experts in the banking and services professions seek
   work in the Kingdom.

   It is reported that some guest workers present in the country (like in
   many countries) are sometimes subject to mistreatment, as documented by
   Human Rights Watch: Template:Quoatation

Demographics

   Saudi Arabia's population as of July 2006 is estimated to be about
   27,019,731, including about 5,576,076 resident foreigners. Until the
   1960s, most of the population was nomadic or semi-nomadic; due to rapid
   economic and urban growth, more than 95% of the population now is
   settled. The birth rate is 29.56 births per 1,000 people. The death
   rate is only 2.62 deaths per 1,000 people. Some cities and oases have
   densities of more than 1,000 people per square kilometre (2,600/sq mi).

   Around 90% of Saudis are ethnically Arab. In addition, there are some
   citizens of Asian and sub-Saharan/East African ancestry. There are some
   7 million migrants from countries all around the world, including:
   Indian: 1.4 million, Bangladeshi: 1 million, Pakistani: 900,000,
   Filipino: 800,000, and Egyptian: 750,000. Many Arabs from nearby
   countries are employed in the kingdom. There are around 100,000
   Westerners in Saudi Arabia, most of whom live in compounds or gated
   communities.

   The Saudi government states that all citizens must be Muslim. The
   majority of the population adheres to a strict theological
   interpretation within Islam most commonly known as Salafi or Wahhabism.
   The Shia Population of the country is estimated at around 15%,
   primarily in the Eastern provinces, and larger cities.

   The country allows religious minorities such as Christians and Hindus
   to enter the country as temporary workers. The U.S. State departments
   suggest that there are 500,000 to 1 million people who adhere to the
   Catholic faith.

   The exit and entry visa card requirements ask applicants for their
   religious affiliation.

Education

   At the time the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was founded in 1932, education
   was not accessible to everyone and limited to individualized
   instruction at religious schools in mosques in urban areas. These
   schools taught Islamic law and basic literacy skills. By the end of the
   century, Saudi Arabia had a nationwide educational system providing
   free training from preschool through university to all citizens. The
   modern Saudi educational system provides quality instruction in diverse
   fields of modern and traditional arts and sciences. This diversity
   helps meet the Kingdom's growing need for highly-educated citizens to
   build on its rapid progress.

   Formal primary education began in Saudi Arabia in the 1930s. By 1945,
   King Abdulaziz bin Abdelrahman Al-Saud, the country's founder, had
   initiated an extensive program to establish schools in the Kingdom. Six
   years later, in 1951, the country had 226 schools with 29,887 students.
   In 1954, the Ministry of Education was established, headed by then
   Prince Fahd bin Abdulaziz as the first Minister of Education. The first
   university, now known as King Saud University, was founded in Riyadh in
   1957.

   Today, Saudi Arabia's nationwide public educational system comprises
   eight universities, more than 24,000 schools, and a large number of
   colleges and other educational and training institutions. Open to every
   citizen, the system provides students with free education, books and
   health services. Over 25 percent of the annual State budget is for
   education including vocational training. The Kingdom has also worked on
   scholarship programs to send students overseas, mainly to the United
   States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia, Japan, Malaysia and
   other nations. Over the past couple of years, thousands of students
   have been sent to higher-educations programs each year.

   The study of Islam remains at the core of the Saudi educational system.
   The Islamic aspect of the Saudi national curriculum is examined in a
   recent report by Freedom House. The report finds how, in religious
   education classes, children are taught to deprecate other religions, in
   addition to other branches of Islam. The discussion of other religions
   in a favourable light is forbidden. The anti-semitic book The Protocols
   of the Elders of Zion is taught as fact. The Saudi religious studies
   curriculum is taught outside the Kingdom in madrassas throughout the
   world.

Sports

   Sports are a very popular pastime for the young men and women in Saudi
   Arabia. Even though soccer is the most played game, Saudi Arabia has
   participated in many world games such as the summer Olympics,
   volleyball, basketball and other sports. The national football team is
   most known for qualifying in four consecutive times in the FIFA World
   Cup and six times at the Asian Cup, which the team won three times and
   was runner-up two times. Some popular soccer players include Majed
   Abdullah, Mohamed Al-Deayea, Sami Al Jaber, Saeed Al-Owairan,and Ahmed
   Jameel.

Culture

   Masjid Al Haram, Mecca.
   Enlarge
   Masjid Al Haram, Mecca.
   Masjid al-Nabawi, Medina.
   Enlarge
   Masjid al-Nabawi, Medina.
   A supplicant at Masjid Al Haram, Mecca.
   Enlarge
   A supplicant at Masjid Al Haram, Mecca.
   A recreation park in Riyadh.
   Enlarge
   A recreation park in Riyadh.

   Saudi Arabian culture revolves almost entirely around the religion of
   Islam. Islam's two holiest sites, Mecca and Medina, are located in the
   country. Every day, five times a day, Muslims are called to prayer from
   the minarets of mosques which dot the country. The weekend consists of
   Thursday and Friday. The public practice of any religion other than
   Islam, including Christianity and Judaism, the presence of churches,
   and open possession of Christian religious materials are outlawed in
   Saudi Arabia. Anyone breaking this law is sentenced to beheading (see
   Status of religious freedom in Saudi Arabia). Islam's holy book the
   Qur'an is Saudi Arabia's constitution, and Shari'ah (Islamic law) is
   the foundation of its legal system.

   One of Saudi Arabia's most compelling folk rituals is the Ardha, the
   country's national dance. This sword dance is based on ancient Bedouin
   traditions: drummers beat out a rhythm and a poet chants verses while
   sword-carrying men dance shoulder to shoulder. Al-sihba folk music,
   from the Hijaz, has its origins in Arab Andalusia, a region of medieval
   Spain. In Mecca, Medina and Jeddah, dance and song incorporate the
   sound of the al-mizmar, an oboe-like woodwind instrument. The drum is
   also an important instrument according to traditional and tribal
   customs.

   Saudi Arabian dress is strongly symbolic, representing the people's
   ties to the land, the past, and Islam. The predominantly loose and
   flowing, but covering garments reflect the practicalities of life in a
   desert country as well as Islam's emphasis on conservative dress.
   Traditionally, men usually wear an ankle-length shirt woven from wool
   or cotton (known as a thawb), with a shimagh (a large checkered square
   of cotton held in place by a cord coil) or a ghutra (a plain white
   square made of finer cotton, also held in place by a cord coil) worn on
   the head. For rare chilly days, Saudi men wear a camel-hair cloak (
   bisht) over the top. Women's clothes are decorated with tribal motifs,
   coins, sequins, metallic thread, and appliques. However, Saudi women
   must wear a long cloak ( abaya) and veil ( niqab) when they leave the
   house to protect their modesty. The law does not apply to foreigners at
   such a high degree, but both men and women are told to dress modestly.

   Islam forbids the eating of pork and the drinking of alcohol, and this
   law is enforced strictly throughout Saudi Arabia. Arabic unleavened
   bread, or khobz, is eaten with almost all meals. Other staples include
   cooked lamb, grilled chicken, falafel (deep-fried chickpea balls),
   shawarma (spit-cooked sliced lamb), and fuul (a paste of fava beans,
   garlic and lemon). Traditional coffee houses used to be ubiquitous, but
   are now being displaced by food-hall style cafes. Arabic tea is also a
   famous custom, which is used in both casual and formal meetings between
   friends, family and even strangers. The tea is black (without milk) and
   has herbal flavoring that comes in many variations.

   Public theatres and cinemas are prohibited, as Wahabbi tradition deems
   those institutions to be incompatible with Islam. However, in private
   compounds such as Dhahran and Ras Tanura public theaters can be found,
   but often are more popular for local music, arts, and theatre
   productions rather than the exhibition of motion pictures. Recently
   plans for some cinemas that will allow Arabic cartoons to be featured
   in cinemas for women and children were announced. Videos and DVDs of
   popular American movies are legal and widely available.

   The cultural heritage is celebrated at the annual Jenadriyah Cultural
   festival. During this event, the Saudi national cake, carrot cake, is
   handed out to visitors.

Geographic locale

   Flag of Jordan  Jordan Flag of Iraq  Iraq •  Flag of Kuwait  Kuwait
   Flag of Iran  Iran
   Image:Template CanadianCityGeoLocation North.png
   Persian Gulf
   Flag of Qatar  Qatar
   Flag of United Arab Emirates  United Arab Emirates
   Flag of Egypt  Egypt  Image:Template CanadianCityGeoLocation West.png
   Red Sea
   Flag of Sudan  Sudan  Image:Template CanadianCityGeoLocation West.png
   Red Sea North
   West    Flag of Saudi Arabia  Saudi Arabia     East
   South
   Red Sea
   Image:Template CanadianCityGeoLocation South.png
   Flag of Eritrea  Eritrea Flag of Yemen  Yemen Flag of Oman  Oman
   Countries and territories of the Middle East

   Bahrain • Cyprus • Egypt • Iran • Iraq • Israel • Jordan • Kuwait •
   Lebanon • Oman • Palestinian territories • Qatar • Saudi Arabia •
   Syria • Turkey ( disputed) • United Arab Emirates • Yemen
   Countries in Southwest Asia

   Armenia • Azerbaijan • Bahrain • Cyprus • Georgia • Iran • Iraq •
   Israel • Jordan • Kuwait Lebanon • Oman • Qatar • Saudi Arabia • Syria
   • Turkey • United Arab Emirates • Yemen
   Countries of Asia

   Afghanistan • Armenia • Azerbaijan ^1 • Bahrain • Bangladesh • Bhutan •
   Brunei • Cambodia • People's Republic of China ^2 • Cyprus • East Timor
   ^3 • Georgia ^1 • India • Indonesia ^3 • Iran • Iraq • Israel • Japan •
   Jordan • Kazakhstan ^1 • Kuwait • Kyrgyzstan • Laos • Lebanon •
   Malaysia • Maldives • Mongolia • Myanmar • Nepal • North Korea • Oman •
   Pakistan • Philippines • Qatar • Russia ^1 • Saudi Arabia • Singapore •
   South Korea • Sri Lanka • Syria • Tajikistan • Thailand • Turkey ^1 •
   Turkmenistan • United Arab Emirates • Uzbekistan • Vietnam • Yemen

   For dependent and other territories, see Dependent territory and List
   of unrecognized countries.

   ^1 Partly in Europe. ^2 The Republic of China (Taiwan) not officially
   recognized by the United Nations; see Political status of Taiwan.
   ^3 Partly or wholly reckoned in Oceania.
   Countries on the Red Sea

   Flag of Djibouti  Djibouti • Flag of Egypt  Egypt • Flag of Eritrea
   Eritrea • Flag of Israel  Israel • Flag of Jordan  Jordan • Flag of
   Saudi Arabia  Saudi Arabia • Flag of Somalia  Somalia •
   Flag of Sudan  Sudan • Flag of Yemen  Yemen
   Countries on the Persian Gulf

   Flag of Bahrain  Bahrain • Flag of Iran  Iran • Flag of Iraq  Iraq •
   Flag of Kuwait  Kuwait • Flag of Oman  Oman • Flag of Qatar  Qatar •
   Flag of Saudi Arabia  Saudi Arabia • Flag of United Arab Emirates
   United Arab Emirates
   Countries and territories on the Indian Ocean

   Eurasia: Bahrain • Bangladesh • Christmas Island • Cocos (Keeling)
   Islands • India • Indonesia • Iran • Iraq • Israel • Kuwait • Malaysia
   • Maldives • Myanmar • Oman • Pakistan • Qatar • Saudi Arabia • Sri
   Lanka • Thailand • United Arab Emirates • Yemen

   Africa: Comoros • Djibouti • Eritrea • Kenya • Madagascar • Mauritius •
   Mayotte • Mozambique • Seychelles • Somalia • Somaliland • South Africa
   • Sudan • Tanzania

   Oceania: Australia • Christmas Island • Cocos (Keeling) Islands

   Islands: Bahrain • Christmas Island • Cocos (Keeling) Islands •
   Madagascar • Maldives • Mauritius • Mayotte • Seychelles • Sri Lanka
     Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf

   Bahrain · Kuwait · Oman · Qatar · Saudi Arabia · United Arab Emirates
   Arab League
   Flag of the League of Arab States

   Algeria • Bahrain • Comoros • Djibouti • Egypt • Iraq • Jordan • Kuwait
   • Lebanon • Libya • Mauritania • Morocco • Oman • State of Palestine •
   Qatar • Saudi Arabia • Somalia • Sudan • Syria • Tunisia • United Arab
   Emirates • Yemen
   Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC)
   Flag of the OIC

   Afghanistan • Albania • Algeria • Azerbaijan • Bahrain • Bangladesh •
   Benin • Burkina Faso • Brunei • Cameroon • Chad • Comoros •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Djibouti • Egypt • Gabon • Gambia • Guinea •
   Guinea-Bissau • Guyana • Indonesia • Iran • Iraq • Jordan • Kuwait •
   Kazakhstan • Kyrgyzstan • Lebanon • Libya • Maldives • Malaysia •
   Mali • Mauritania • Morocco • Mozambique • Niger • Nigeria • Oman •
   Pakistan • State of Palestine • Qatar • Saudi Arabia • Senegal •
   Sierra Leone • Somalia • Sudan • Surinam • Syria • Tajikistan •
   Turkey • Tunisia • Togo • Turkmenistan • Uganda • Uzbekistan •
   United Arab Emirates • Yemen

   Observer countries: Bosnia and Herzegovina • Central African Republic •
   Russia • Thailand • Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus

   Observer Muslim organizations and communities:
   Moro National Liberation Front

   Observer international organizations:
   Economic Cooperation Organization • Organisation of African Unity •
   League of Arab States • Non-Aligned Movement • United Nations
   Monarchies of the World

   African: Lesotho • Morocco (⁂) • Swaziland (*)

   Asian: Bahrain (⁂) • Bhutan (*) • Brunei (*) • Cambodia (!) • Japan •
   Jordan (⁂) • Kuwait (⁂) • Malaysia ( !) • Nepal • Oman (*) • Qatar (*)
   • Saudi Arabia (*) • Thailand • Tonga • United Arab Emirates ( !)

   Commonwealth Realms: Antigua and Barbuda • Australia • Bahamas •
   Barbados • Belize • Canada • Grenada • Jamaica • New Zealand • Papua
   New Guinea • Saint Kitts and Nevis • Saint Lucia • Saint Vincent and
   the Grenadines • Solomon Islands • Tuvalu • United Kingdom

   Other European monarchies (including the EU): Andorra ( !) • Belgium •
   Denmark • Liechtenstein (⁂) • Luxembourg • Monaco (⁂) • Netherlands •
   Norway • Spain • Sweden • Vatican City ( Holy See) (*!)

   * absolute monarchy, ⁂ semi-constitutional monarchy, ! electoral
   monarchy
   Semitic-speaking nations

   Arabic and Maltese

   Flag of Algeria  Algeria • Flag of Bahrain  Bahrain • Flag of Egypt
   Egypt • Flag of Iraq  Iraq • Flag of Jordan  Jordan • Flag of Kuwait
   Kuwait • Flag of Lebanon  Lebanon • Flag of Libya  Libya • Flag of
   Malta  Malta • Flag of Mauritania  Mauritania • Flag of Morocco
   Morocco • Flag of Oman  Oman • Flag of Palestinian National Authority
   Palestine • Flag of Qatar  Qatar • Flag of Saudi Arabia  Saudi Arabia •
   Flag of Sudan  Sudan • Flag of Syria  Syria • Flag of Tunisia  Tunisia
   • Flag of United Arab Emirates  United Arab Emirates • Flag of Western
   Sahara  Western Sahara • Flag of Yemen  Yemen

   Northwest Semitic ( Aramaic and Hebrew)

   Flag of Iraq  Iraq • Flag of Israel  Israel • Flag of Syria  Syria

   South Semitic

   Flag of Eritrea  Eritrea • Flag of Ethiopia  Ethiopia • Flag of Oman
   Oman • Flag of Yemen  Yemen
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saudi_Arabia"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
