   #copyright

Scotland

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

   CAPTION: Scotland (English and Scots)
   Alba (Scottish Gaelic)


   Flag of Scotland Coat of arms of Scotland
   Flag of Scotland Coat of arms
   Motto: Nemo me impune lacessit
   (Latin for "No one provokes me with impunity")^1
   Anthem: Multiple unofficial anthems
   Location of Scotland
   Capital                     Edinburgh
                               55°51′N 4°15′W
   Largest city                Glasgow
   Official language(s)        English, Gaelic, Scots ^2
   Government                  Constitutional monarchy
    - Queen of the UK          Queen Elizabeth II
    - Prime Minister of the UK Tony Blair MP
    - First Minister           Jack McConnell MSP
   Unification
    - by Kenneth I             843
   Area
    - Total                    78,772 km² ( 2^nd in UK)
                               30,414 sq mi
    - Water (%)                1.9
   Population
    - 2005^4 est.              5,094,800 ( 2^nd in UK)
    - 2001 census              5,062,011
    - Density                  64/km² (4^th in UK)
                               167.5/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP)                  2002 estimate
    - Total                    US$130 billion
    - Per capita               US$25,546
   Currency                    Pound sterling ( GBP)
   Time zone                   GMT ( UTC0)
    - Summer ( DST)            BST ( UTC+1)
   Internet TLD                .uk^5
   Calling code                +44
   Patron Saint                St Andrew^6
   ^1Traditionally rendered in Scots as Wha daur meddle wi me?. The Royal
   motto of the United Kingdom is Dieu et mon droit (French for "God and
   my right") and is only used in Scotland by UK-wide bodies

   ^2 Officially recognised languages: In addition to English (whose use
   is established by precedent), Scottish Gaelic has the status of being
   officially developed to become "an official language of Scotland
   commanding equal respect to the English language" since 2005 Act.
   ^3From the General Register Office for Scotland^4Figures for the UK
   ^5 ISO 3166-1 is GB, but .gb is unused
   ^6By convention. St Andrew was the patron saint of the bishopric and
   archbishopric of St Andrews, the most powerful Scottish bishopric.
   Columba held higher status among the Scots until the later middle ages

   Scotland (Scottish Gaelic: Alba) is a nation in northwest Europe and
   one of the four constituent countries of the United Kingdom. It
   occupies the northern third of the island of Great Britain and shares a
   land border to the south with England. It is bounded by the North Sea
   to the east, the Atlantic Ocean to the north and west, and the North
   Channel and Irish Sea to the southwest. Apart from the mainland,
   Scotland consists of over 790 islands.

   Edinburgh, the nation's capital and second largest city, is one of
   Europe's largest financial centres. Scotland's largest city is Glasgow,
   which is the centre of the Greater Glasgow conurbation. Greater Glasgow
   is home to approximately 40% of Scotland's population. Scottish waters
   consist of a large sector of the North Atlantic and the North Sea,
   containing the largest oil reserves in the European Union.

   The Kingdom of Scotland was an independent state until 1 May 1707, when
   the Acts of Union resulted in a political union with the Kingdom of
   England to create the Kingdom of Great Britain. Scotland's legal system
   continues to be separate from those of England, Wales and Northern
   Ireland, therefore Scotland still constitutes a discrete jurisdiction
   in public and in private international law. The continued independence
   of Scots law, the Scottish education system and the Church of Scotland
   have been three cornerstones contributing to the continuation of
   Scottish culture and Scottish national identity since the Union.
   However, Scotland is no longer a sovereign state and does not enjoy
   direct membership of either the United Nations or the European Union.

Etymology

   The word Scotia was used by the Romans as the name of one of the tribes
   in what is now Scotland as early as the 1st Century AD. The Romans also
   used Scotia to refer to the Irish.

   The Venerable Bede (c. 672 or 673 – May 27, 735) uses the word
   "Scottorum" as the name of a nation from Ireland who settled part of
   the Pictish lands. "Scottorum nationem in Pictorum parte recipit." This
   we can infer to be the arrival of the people, also known as the Gaels,
   in the Kingdom of Dál Riata, in the Western edge of Scotland. It is of
   note that Bede used the word "nationem" ( nation) where he often refers
   to other peoples, such as the Picts, as "gens" (race).

   In the 10th century Anglo Saxon Chronicle, the word Scot is mentioned
   as a reference to the 'Land of the Gaels'. Word Scottorum was again
   used, by an Irish King, in 1005. The phrase Imperator Scottorum, was
   used after the name of Brian Bóruma, by his notary Mael Suthain, in the
   Book of Armagh. It is thought to imply that Brian Bóruma was overlord
   of the Scots.

   The style was subsequently copied by the Scottish kings. Basileus
   Scottorum is attributed to the great seal of King Edgar (1074 – 1107).
   Alexander I (c. 1078 – 1124) used the words Rex Scottorum on his great
   seal; So to did many of his successors up to and including James II..

   In modern times the words "Scot" and "Scottish" are applied mainly to
   inhabitants of Scotland. The ancient Irish connotations are largely
   forgotten. The language known as Ulster Scots, spoken in parts of North
   East Ireland, arose through 17th and 18th century immigrations from
   Scotland to Ireland.

History

Early civilisation

   Skara Brae, a neolithic settlement, is located in the Bay of Skaill on
   the west coast of mainland Orkney.
   Enlarge
   Skara Brae, a neolithic settlement, is located in the Bay of Skaill on
   the west coast of mainland Orkney.

   Prior to the Mesolithic period, Scotland was repeatedly glaciated. The
   ice covered the entire land mass of Scotland and so has destroyed any
   evidence of early human habitation. The earliest Scottish human
   settlement, dated to around 8500 BC, was found at Cramond, near
   Edinburgh.

   A well preserved Neolithic farmstead can been seen at Knap of Howar on
   Orkney. The building, dated to around 3500 BC, is claimed to be the
   oldest standing house in the country. An example of a complete
   Neolithic village can be seen nearby at the village of Skara Brae, on
   the Mainland of Orkney. There are many other Neolithic habitation,
   burial and ritual sites across the Northern and Western Isles such as
   Callanish on Lewis, Maeshowe and The Ring of Brodgar on Orkney. In
   southern, crannogs were a common form of dwelling.

   After the 8th century BC, Brythonic Celtic culture and language spread
   into Scotland. The Iron age brought numerous hill forts, brochs,
   crannogs and fortified settlements which support the image of
   quarrelsome tribes and petty kingdoms later recorded by the Romans,
   though evidence that at times occupants neglected the defences might
   suggest that symbolic power had as much significance as warfare.

   The written histories of Scotland began with the arrival of the Roman
   Empire. The Romans occupied what is now England and Wales. Parts of
   southern Scotland were controlled by Rome for brief periods as well.
   The Roman historian, Tacitus, calls Northern Scotland Caledonia. The
   name derives from one of the many Pictish tribes in the region who were
   called the Caledonii.

Union

   The Battle of Culloden saw the defeat of the Jacobite rising.
   Enlarge
   The Battle of Culloden saw the defeat of the Jacobite rising.

   In 1603, Elizabeth I of England died. Thus James VI King of Scotland
   also became King James I of England. With the exception of a short
   period under The Protectorate, Scotland remained a separate state.
   There was considerable conflict between the crown and the Covenanters
   over the form of church government. After the Glorious Revolution and
   the overthrow of the Roman Catholic James VII by William and Mary,
   Scotland briefly threatened to select a different Protestant monarch
   from that of England. The Alien Act of 1705 was a law passed by the
   Parliament of England, in 1705, as a response to the Parliament of
   Scotland's Act of Security of 1704, which in turn was a response to the
   English Act of Settlement 1701.

   The Alien Act provided that estates held by Scottish nationals in
   England were to be treated as alien property, making inheritance much
   less certain. It also had an embargo on the import of Scottish products
   into England and English colonies - about half of Scotland's trade,
   covering sectors such as linen, cattle and coal.

   The Act contained a provision that it would be suspended if the Scots
   entered into negotiations on the dispute between the two parliaments.
   Combined with English financial offers to refund Scottish losses on the
   Darién scheme, it achieved its aim, leading to the Act of Union 1707
   uniting the two countries as the Kingdom of Great Britain.

Jacobites

   The deposed Jacobite Stuart claimants had remained popular in the
   Highlands and north-east, particularly amongst non- Presbyterians. Two
   major Jacobite risings launched from the Highlands of Scotland in 1715
   and 1745. The latter uprising was lead by Bonnie Prince Charlie, aka
   "The Young Pretender". It climaxed with the defeat of the Jacobites at
   the Battle of Culloden on 16 April 1746.

The Industrial Revolution

   During the Scottish Enlightenment and the Industrial Revolution,
   Scotland became one of the commercial, intellectual and industrial
   powerhouses of Europe. After World War II, Scotland experienced an
   industrial decline.

Politics

   The Royal Arms of Queen Elizabeth II in Scotland. A version without the
   helm is used by the Scottish Executive.
   Enlarge
   The Royal Arms of Queen Elizabeth II in Scotland. A version without the
   helm is used by the Scottish Executive.

   As one of the constituent countries of the United Kingdom, the head of
   state in Scotland is the British monarch, currently Queen Elizabeth II
   (since 1952). Constitutionally the United Kingdom is a unitary state
   with one sovereign parliament and government. Under a system of
   devolution (or home rule) adopted after Scottish and Welsh referendums
   on devolution proposals in 1997, most of the constituent countries
   within the United Kingdom were given limited self-government, (except
   England). The British Parliament in Westminster retains the ability to
   amend, change, broaden or abolish the devolved governmental systems at
   will. As such the Scottish Parliament is not sovereign. However, it is
   thought unlikely that any British parliament would unilaterally abolish
   a home rule parliament and government without consultation via a
   referendum with the voters of the constituent country.

   Executive power in the United Kingdom is vested in the
   Queen-in-Council, while legislative power is vested in the
   Queen-in-Parliament (the Crown and the Parliament of the United Kingdom
   at Westminster in London). Under devolution executive and legislative
   powers in certain areas have been constitutionally delegated to the
   Scottish Executive and the Scottish Parliament at Holyrood in Edinburgh
   respectively. The United Kingdom Parliament retains active power over
   Scotland's taxes, social security system, the military, international
   relations, broadcasting, and some other areas explicitly specified in
   the Scotland Act 1998 as reserved matters. The Scottish Parliament has
   legislative authority for all other areas relating to Scotland, and has
   limited power to vary income tax, but has never exercised this power.
   The Scottish Parliament can refer devolved matters back to Westminster
   to be considered as part of United Kingdom-wide legislation by passing
   a Legislative Consent Motion if United Kingdom-wide legislation is
   considered to be more appropriate for certain issues. The programmes of
   legislation enacted by the Scottish Parliament have seen a divergence
   in the provision of public services compared to the rest of the United
   Kingdom. For instance, the costs of a university education, and care
   services for the elderly are free at point of use in Scotland, while
   fees are paid in the rest of the UK. Scotland is the first country in
   the UK to ban smoking in public places.

   The Scottish Parliament is a unicameral legislature comprised of 129
   Members, 73 of whom represent individual constituencies and are elected
   on a first past the post system; 56 are elected in eight different
   electoral regions by the additional member system, first elected on the
   6th May 1999 and serving for a four year period. The Queen appoints one
   of the members of the Parliament, on the nomination of the Parliament,
   to be First Minister. Other Ministers are also appointed by the Queen
   on the nomination of the Parliament and together with the First
   Minister they make up Scottish Executive, the executive arm of
   government. The current (since 2001) First Minister is Jack McConnell
   of the Labour Party, who forms the government on a coalition basis with
   the Liberal Democrats. The main opposition party is the Scottish
   National Party, which campaigns for Scottish independence. Other
   parties include the Conservative and Unionist Party, the Scottish Green
   Party and the Scottish Socialist Party.
   The debating chamber of the Scottish Parliament contains a shallow
   horseshoe of seating for the Members of the Scottish Parliament.
   Enlarge
   The debating chamber of the Scottish Parliament contains a shallow
   horseshoe of seating for the Members of the Scottish Parliament.

   Scotland is represented in the British House of Commons by 59 MPs
   elected from territory-based Scottish constituencies. The Scotland
   Office, a department of the United Kingdom government led by The
   Secretary of State for Scotland, is responsible for reserved matters.
   The Secretary of State for Scotland sits in the Cabinet of the United
   Kingdom and prior to devolution headed the system of government in
   Scotland. The current Secretary of State for Scotland is Douglas
   Alexander. Until 1999, Scottish peers were entitled to sit in the House
   of Lords.

   Political debate in Scotland has revolved around the constitution and
   this dominated the Scottish political scene in the latter half of the
   20th century. Under the pressure of growing support for Scottish
   independence all three UK-wide parties advocated a policy of devolution
   to some degree during their history (although Labour and the
   Conservatives have also at times opposed it). Now that devolution has
   occurred, debate continues over whether the Scottish Parliament should
   accrue additional powers (for example over fiscal policy), or seek to
   obtain full independence with full sovereign powers (either through
   independence, a federal United Kingdom or a confederal arrangement). It
   remains to be seen whether the current devolution system satisfies
   Scottish demands for self-government or will strengthen demands for
   full-blown independence.

Law

   Parliament House in Edinburgh is home to the High Court of Justiciary
   and the Court of Session which are the supreme courts of Scotland.
   Enlarge
   Parliament House in Edinburgh is home to the High Court of Justiciary
   and the Court of Session which are the supreme courts of Scotland.

   Scots law has a basis derived from Roman law combining features of both
   uncodified civil law, dating back to the Corpus Juris Civilis, and
   common law with mediaeval sources. The terms of the Treaty of Union
   with England in 1707, guaranteed the continued existence of a separate
   legal system in Scotland from that of England and Wales. Prior to 1611,
   there were several regional law systems in Scotland, most notably Udal
   Law in Orkney and Shetland — based on Old Norse Law. Various other
   systems derived from common Celtic or Brehon Laws survived in the
   Highlands until the 1800s.

   Scots law provides for three types of courts responsible for the
   administration of justice in Scotland: civil, criminal and heraldic.
   The supreme civil court is the Court of Session, although civil appeals
   can be taken to the House of Lords in London. The High Court of
   Justiciary is the supreme criminal court. Both courts are housed at
   Parliament House, Edinburgh which was the home of the pre-Union
   Parliament of Scotland. The sheriff court is the main criminal and
   civil court. There are 49 sheriff courts throughout the country.
   District courts were introduced in 1975 for minor offences. The Court
   of the Lord Lyon regulates heraldry in Scotland.

   Scots law is also unique in that it allows three verdicts in criminal
   cases including the controversial ' not proven' verdict.

Subdivisions

   The ornate Municipal Buildings in Greenock, the headquarters of
   Inverclyde Council, feature the Victoria Tower.
   Enlarge
   The ornate Municipal Buildings in Greenock, the headquarters of
   Inverclyde Council, feature the Victoria Tower.

   Historical subdivisions of Scotland include the mormaerdom, stewartry,
   earldom, burgh, parish, county and regions and districts. The names of
   these areas are still used as geographical descriptors.

   Modern Scotland is subdivided in different ways depending on the
   purpose. For local government, 32 council areas were set up in 1996.
   These are administered by 32 unitary authorities responsible for the
   provision of all local government services, including education, social
   work, environment and roads services. Some of the larger councils are
   further divided into area committees. Community councils are informal
   organisations that represent specific sub-divisions of a council area.

   There are 35 lieutenancy areas, for which the Queen appoints a Lord
   Lieutenant to represent her (except for Glasgow, Edinburgh, Dundee and
   Aberdeen — where the democratically elected Lord Provost is the Lord
   Lieutenant, ex officio). There are six sheriffdoms for administering
   justice. For the Scottish Parliament, there are 8 regions. These are
   then sub-divided into 73 constituencies. For the Parliament of the
   United Kingdom there are 59 constituencies. The Scottish fire brigades
   and police forces are still based on the system of regions introduced
   in 1975. For healthcare and postal districts, amongst others, Scotland
   is subdivided in various other ways. Non-governmental organisations,
   notably the churches, have other long-standing methods of subdividing
   Scotland for the purposes of administration.

   City status in the United Kingdom is determined by letters patent.
   There are six cities in Scotland: Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh, Glasgow,
   Inverness, and Stirling.
   Scottish Parliament constituencies and regions

   Regions

   Central Scotland • Glasgow • Highlands and Islands • Lothians • Mid
   Scotland and Fife • North East Scotland • South of Scotland • West of
   Scotland
   Constituencies

   Aberdeen Central • Aberdeen North • Aberdeen South • Airdie and
   Shotts • Angus • Argyll and Bute • Ayr • Banff and Buchan • Caithness,
   Sutherland and Easter Ross • Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley • Fife
   Central • Clydesdale • Clydebank and Milngavie • Coatbridge and
   Chryston • Cunninghame North • Cunninghame South • Cumbernauld and
   Kilsyth • Dumbarton • Dumfries • Dundee East • Dundee West •
   Dunfermline East • Dunfermline West • East Kilbride • East Lothian •
   Eastwood • Edinburgh Central • Edinburgh East and Musselburgh •
   Edinburgh North and Leith • Edinburgh Pentlands • Edinburgh South •
   Edinburgh West • Falkirk East • Falkirk West • Fife North East •
   Galloway and Upper Nithsdale • Glasgow Anniesland • Glasgow
   Baillieston • Glasgow Cathcart • Glasgow Govan • Glasgow Kelvin •
   Glasgow Maryhill • Glasgow Pollok • Glasgow Rutherglen • Glasgow
   Shettleston • Glasgow Springburn • Gordon • Greenock and Inverclyde •
   Hamilton North and Bellshill • Hamilton South • Inverness East, Nairn
   and Lochaber • Kilmarnock and Loudoun • Kirkcaldy • Linlithgow •
   Livingston • Midlothian • Moray • Motherwell and Wishaw • North
   Tayside • Ochil • Orkney • Paisley North • Paisley South • Perth •
   Ross, Skye and Inverness West • Roxburgh and Berwickshire • Shetland •
   Stirling • Strathkelvin and Bearsden • Tweeddale, Ettrick and
   Lauderdale • West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine • Western Isles • West
   Renfrewshire

   Council areas of Scotland

   Subdivisions created by the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994

   Aberdeen • Aberdeenshire • Angus • Argyll and Bute • Clackmannanshire •
   Dumfries and Galloway • Dundee • East Ayrshire • East Dunbartonshire •
   East Lothian • East Renfrewshire • na h-Eileanan Siar (Western Isles) •
   Edinburgh • Falkirk • Fife • Glasgow • Highland • Inverclyde •
   Midlothian • Moray • North Ayrshire • North Lanarkshire • Orkney •
   Perth and Kinross • Renfrewshire • Scottish Borders • Shetland •
   South Ayrshire • South Lanarkshire • Stirling • West Dunbartonshire •
   West Lothian

Geography

   Map of Scotland
   Enlarge
   Map of Scotland

   Scotland comprises the northern third of the island of Great Britain,
   off the coast of north west Europe. The total land mass is around
   78,772 square kilometres (30,414 mi²). Scotland's only land border is
   with England, and runs for 96 kilometres (60 miles) between the River
   Tweed on the east coast and the Solway Firth in the west. The island of
   Ireland lies around 30 kilometres (20 mi) off the south west tip of
   Scotland, Norway is around 400 kilometres (250 mi) to the north east,
   and the Faroes and Iceland lie to the north. Scotland lies between the
   Atlantic Ocean and the North Sea.

   The territorial extent of Scotland is generally that established by the
   1237 Treaty of York between Scotland and England and the 1266 Treaty of
   Perth between Scotland and Norway. Exceptions include the Isle of Man,
   which is now a crown dependency outside the United Kingdom, Orkney and
   Shetland, which are Scottish rather than Norwegian, and
   Berwick-upon-Tweed, which was defined as subject to the laws of England
   by the 1746 Wales and Berwick Act. Rockall was annexed by the United
   Kingdom in 1972 and administratively made part of the Isle of Harris in
   Scotland, although this is disputed by the Republic of Ireland,
   Iceland, and Denmark; both the UK (in 1997) and Ireland (in 1996) have
   since ratified the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
   which excludes Rockall from qualifying as land from which various
   territorial limits can be measured although it is claimed by both the
   UK and Ireland that it lies within their territorial limits.

   The country consists of a mainland area plus several island groups. The
   mainland can be divided into three areas: the Highlands in the north;
   the Central Belt and the Southern Uplands in the south. The Highlands
   are generally mountainous and are bisected by the Great Glen. The
   highest mountains in the British Isles are found here, including Ben
   Nevis, the highest peak at 1,344 metres (4,409 ft). All mountains over
   3,000 ft (914 m) are known as Munros. The Central Belt of Scotland is
   generally flat and is where most of the population reside. The Central
   Belt is often divided into the West, which contains the areas around
   Glasgow; and the East which includes the areas around the capital,
   Edinburgh. The Southern Uplands are a range of hills and mountains
   almost 200 km (125 miles) long, stretching from Stranraer by the Irish
   Sea to East Lothian and the North Sea.

   Scotland has over 790 islands, divided into four main groups: Shetland,
   Orkney, and the Hebrides, divided into the Inner Hebrides and Outer
   Hebrides. The Firth of Clyde and the Firth of Forth also contain many
   islands. St. Kilda is the most remote of all the inhabitable Scottish
   islands, being over 160 km (100 miles) from the mainland. Almost all
   the islands surrounding Scotland, no matter how small or remote, were
   formerly inhabited, as is shown by archaeological and documentary
   evidence. In general only the more accessible and larger islands retain
   human populations (though these are in some cases very small). Access
   to several islands in the Northern and Western groups was made easier
   in the course of the 20th century by the construction of bridges or
   causeways (e.g., the Churchill Barriers), installed for strategic
   reasons during the Second World War between several small islands on
   the east side of Scapa Flow in Orkney. Plans, some controversial, for
   more links between islands continue to be drawn up.

Climate

   Ben Nevis, the highest peak in the British Isles, is in Lochaber, the
   wettest district in the British Isles.
   Enlarge
   Ben Nevis, the highest peak in the British Isles, is in Lochaber, the
   wettest district in the British Isles.

   The climate of Scotland is temperate and oceanic, and tends to be very
   changeable. It is warmed by the Gulf Stream from the Atlantic, and as
   such has much milder winters (but cooler, wetter summers) than areas on
   similar latitudes, for example Oslo or Moscow. However, temperatures
   are generally lower than in the rest of the UK, with the coldest ever
   UK temperature of -27.2° C (-16.96° F) recorded at Braemar in the
   Grampian Mountains, on 11 February 1895 and 10 January 1982 and also at
   Altnaharra, Highland, on 30 December 1995. Winter maximums average 6°C
   (42.8°F) in the lowlands, with summer maximums averaging 18°C (64.4°F).
   The highest temperature recorded was 32.9°C (91.22°F) at Greycrook,
   Scottish Borders on 9 August 2003.

   In general, the west of Scotland is usually warmer than the east, due
   to the influence of the Atlantic ocean currents, and the colder surface
   temperatures of the North Sea. Tiree, in the Inner Hebrides, is the
   sunniest place in the country: it had 300 days of sunshine in 1975.
   Rainfall varies widely across Scotland. The western highlands of
   Scotland are the wettest place, with annual rainfall exceeding 3,000
   mm (120 inches). In comparison, much of lowland Scotland receives less
   than 800 mm (31 inches) annually. Heavy snowfall is not common in the
   lowlands, but becomes more common with altitude. Braemar experiences an
   average of 59 snow days per year, while coastal areas have an average
   of less than 10 days.

Economy

   The Scottish economy is closely linked with that of the rest of Europe
   and the wider Western world, with a heavy emphasis on exporting. It is
   essentially a market economy with some government intervention. After
   the Industrial Revolution, the Scottish economy concentrated on heavy
   industry, dominated by the shipbuilding, coal mining and steel
   industries. Scotland was an integral component of the British Empire
   which allowed the Scottish economy to export its output throughout the
   world.

   Heavy industry declined, however, in the later part of the 20th
   century, leading to a remarkable shift in the economy of Scotland
   towards a technology and service sector-based economy. The 1980s saw an
   economic boom in the Silicon Glen corridor between Glasgow and
   Edinburgh, with many large technology firms relocating to Scotland. The
   discovery of North Sea oil in the 1970s also helped to transform the
   Scottish economy.

   Edinburgh is the financial services centre of Scotland and the sixth
   largest financial centre in Europe, with many large finance firms based
   there, including: the Royal Bank of Scotland Group (the second largest
   bank in Europe); HBOS (owners of the Bank of Scotland); Standard Life;
   and Scottish Widows.

   Glasgow is Scotland's leading seaport and is the fourth largest
   manufacturing centre in the UK, accounting for well over 60% of
   Scotland's manufactured exports. Shipbuilding, although significantly
   diminished from its heights in the early 20th century, still forms a
   large part of the city's manufacturing base. The city also has
   Scotland's largest and most economically important commerce and retail
   district. Glasgow is also one of Europe's top 20 financial centres and
   is home to many of the UK's leading companies.

   Aberdeen, sometimes referred to as the Oil Capital of Europe, is the
   centre of the North Sea oil industry. Other important industries
   include textile production, chemicals, distilling, brewing, fishing and
   tourism.

   Only about one quarter of the land is under cultivation (principally in
   cereals and vegetables), but sheep farming is important in the less
   arable highland and island regions. Most land is concentrated in
   relatively few hands (some 350 people own about half the land). As a
   result, in 2003, the Scottish Parliament passed a Land Reform Act that
   empowered tenant farmers and local communities to purchase land even if
   the landlord did not want to sell.
   Scotland's North Sea oil platforms tap into the largest oil reserves in
   the European Union.
   Enlarge
   Scotland's North Sea oil platforms tap into the largest oil reserves in
   the European Union.

   In 2004, total Scottish exports (excluding intra-UK trade) were
   provisionally estimated to be £16.7 billion, of which 73% (£12.19
   billion) were attributable to manufacturing. The largest export
   products for Scotland are niche products such as whisky, electronics
   and financial services. The largest markets were the United States,
   Germany, and The Netherlands. In 2002, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
   of Scotland was just over £74 billion ($130 billion), giving a per
   capita GDP of £14,651 ($25,546).

   Although the Bank of England is the central bank for the UK, three
   Scottish clearing banks still issue their own Sterling banknotes: the
   Bank of Scotland; the Royal Bank of Scotland; and the Clydesdale Bank.
   These notes have no status as legal tender in England, Wales, or
   Northern Ireland, although they are fungible with the Bank of England
   banknotes. Despite this, Scottish-issued notes are often refused in
   England and they are not always accepted by banks and exchange bureaus
   outside the UK. The current value of the Scottish banknotes in
   circulation is around £2.5 billion.

Military

   The Thin Red Line of 1854. This painting by Robert Gibb is housed at
   the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders regimental museum at Stirling
   Castle.
   Enlarge
   The Thin Red Line of 1854. This painting by Robert Gibb is housed at
   the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders regimental museum at Stirling
   Castle.

   Although Scotland has a long military tradition that predates the Act
   of Union with England, its armed forces now form part of the British
   Armed Forces. In 2006, the regiments of the Scottish Division were
   amalgamated to form the Royal Regiment of Scotland.

   Due to their topography and perceived remoteness, parts of Scotland
   have housed many sensitive defence establishments, with mixed public
   feelings. Between 1960 and 1991, the Holy Loch was a base for the U.S.
   fleet of Polaris ballistic missile submarines. Today, Her Majesty's
   Naval Base Clyde, 25 miles (40 km) west of Glasgow, is the base for the
   four Trident-armed Vanguard class ballistic missile submarines that
   comprise the UK's nuclear deterrent. HMS Caledonia at Rosyth in Fife is
   the support base for navy operations in Scotland and also serves as the
   Naval Regional Office (NRO Scotland and Northern Ireland). The Royal
   Navy's submarine nuclear reactor development establishment, is located
   at Dounreay, which was also the site of the UK's fast breeder nuclear
   reactor programme. HMS Gannet is a search and rescue station based at
   Prestwick Airport in Ayrshire and operates three Sea King Mk 5
   helicopters. RM Condor at Arbroath, Angus is home to 45 Commando, Royal
   Marines.

   Three important Royal Air Force bases are in Scotland today. These are
   RAF Lossiemouth, the RAF's primary base for the Panavia Tornado GR4
   strike aircraft, RAF Kinloss, home to the Nimrod maritime patrol
   aircraft and RAF Leuchars, the most northerly air defence fighter base
   in the United Kingdom. The only open air live depleted uranium weapons
   test range in the British Isles is located near Dundrennan. As a
   result, over 7000 radioactive munitions lie on the seabed of the Solway
   Firth. This has led to many environmental concerns. The large amount of
   military bases in Scotland has led some to use the euphemism "Fortress
   Scotland". In 2004, the MoD land holdings in Scotland (owned, leased or
   with legal rights) was 115,200 hectares representing around 31% of the
   MoD's UK estate.

Demographics

   People on Buchanan Street in Glasgow.
   Enlarge
   People on Buchanan Street in Glasgow.

   The population of Scotland in the 2001 census was 5,062,011. This has
   risen to 5,094,800 according to July 2005 estimates. This would make
   Scotland the 112th largest country by population if it were a sovereign
   state. Although Edinburgh is the capital of Scotland it is not the
   largest city; Scotland's largest city, with a population of 629,501, is
   Glasgow. The highest concentration of population in Scotland is in the
   areas surrounding Glasgow with approximately 2.2 million people living
   in west central Scotland centred on the Greater Glasgow urban
   conurbation.

   Due to immigration since World War II, Glasgow, Edinburgh and Dundee
   have significant Asian and Scottish Asian populations. Since the recent
   Enlargement of the European Union there has been an increased number of
   people from Central and Eastern Europe moving to Scotland. For example,
   Aleksander Dietkow, Consul General of Poland, estimates that there are
   between 40,000 and 50,000 Poles living in Scotland. As of 2003, there
   are 16,315 Chinese people in Scotland and 18.2% of international
   students at Scottish Universities come from China, making them the
   largest international student group in Scotland.

Languages

   Place names in their original Gaelic are becoming increasingly common
   on road signs throughout the Scottish Highlands.
   Enlarge
   Place names in their original Gaelic are becoming increasingly common
   on road signs throughout the Scottish Highlands.

   Since the United Kingdom lacks a codified constitution, there is no
   official language. However, Scotland has three officially recognised
   languages: English, Scottish Gaelic and Scots. De facto English is the
   main language, and almost all Scots speak Scottish Standard English.

   Over the past century the number of native speakers of Gaelic, a Celtic
   sister language to Irish, has declined from around 5% to just 1% of the
   population, almost always on a fully bilingual basis with English.
   Gaelic is mostly spoken in the Western Isles, where the local council
   uses the Gaelic name - Comhairle nan Eilean Siar ("Council of the
   Western Isles"). The General Register Office for Scotland estimates
   that 30% of the population are fluent in Scots, a West Germanic sister
   language to English.

   Scots and Gaelic were recognised under the European Charter for
   Regional or Minority Languages ratified by the UK in 2001, and the
   Scottish Executive is committed, based on the UK's undertakings, to
   providing support for both Under the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act
   2005 which was passed by the Scottish Parliament to provide a statutory
   basis for a limited range of Gaelic language service provision, English
   and Gaelic receive "equal respect" but do not have equal legal status.
   State support for Scots is slowly growing with the Scottish Executive
   providing some funding to various Scots language projects and bodies,
   including the Dictionary of the Scots Language.

Religion

   The ruins of the Cathedral of St Andrew in St Andrews, Fife.
   Enlarge
   The ruins of the Cathedral of St Andrew in St Andrews, Fife.

   The Church of Scotland, also sometimes popularly known as The Kirk, is
   the national church and has a Presbyterian system of church government.
   It is not subject to state control nor is it " established" as is the
   Church of England within England. It was formally recognised as
   independent of the UK Parliament by the Church of Scotland Act 1921,
   settling centuries of dispute between church and state over
   jurisdiction in spiritual matters.

   The Scottish Reformation, initiated in 1560 and led by John Knox, was
   Calvinist, and throughout the 17th and 18th centuries, the Church of
   Scotland maintained this theology and kept a tight control over the
   morality of much of the population. The Church had a significant
   influence on the cultural development of Scotland in early modern
   times. Other Christian denominations in Scotland include the Free
   Church of Scotland, an off-shoot from the Church of Scotland adhering
   to a more conservative style of Calvinism, the Scottish Episcopal
   Church, which forms part of the Anglican Communion, the Methodists, the
   Congregationalists, and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
   Saints.

   Roman Catholicism in Scotland survived the Reformation, especially on
   islands like Uist and Barra, despite the suppression of the 16th to the
   late 18th centuries. Roman Catholicism was strengthened particularly in
   the west of Scotland during the 19th century by immigration from
   Ireland. This continued for much of the 20th century, during which
   significant numbers of Catholics from Italy and Poland also migrated to
   Scotland. Much of Scotland (particularly the West Central Belt around
   Glasgow) has experienced problems caused by sectarianism, particularly
   football rivalry between the traditionally Roman Catholic team, Celtic,
   and the traditionally Protestant team, Rangers.

   Islam is the largest non-Christian religion in Scotland (estimated
   population, 50,000) despite accounting for less than 1% of the
   population. There are also significant Jewish and Sikh communities,
   especially in Glasgow. At 28% of the population, Scotland has a
   relatively high proportion of persons who regard themselves as
   belonging to 'no religion'. Indeed, this was the second most common
   response in the 2001 census.

Education

   The education system in Scotland is distinct from the rest of the
   United Kingdom and was the first country since Sparta in classical
   Greece to implement a system of general public education. The early
   roots were in the Education Act of 1496 which first introduced
   compulsory education for the eldest sons of nobles. Then, in 1561, the
   principle of general public education was set with the Reformation
   establishment of the national Kirk which set out a national programme
   for spiritual reform, including a school in every parish. Education
   finally came under the control of the state rather than the Church and
   became compulsory for all children from the implementation of the
   Education Act of 1872 onwards. As a result, for over two hundred years
   Scotland had a higher percentage of its population educated at primary,
   secondary and tertiary levels than any other country in Europe. The
   differences in education have manifested themselves in different ways,
   but most noticeably in the number of Scots who went on to become
   leaders in their fields and at the forefront of innovation and
   discovery leading to many Scottish inventions during the 18th and 19th
   centuries.

   Today, children in Scotland sit Standard Grade exams at the age of 15
   or 16, sometimes earlier, for up to eight subjects (although some
   schools study for nine) including compulsory exams in English,
   mathematics, a foreign language, a science subject and a social
   subject. Each school may vary these compulsory combinations. The school
   leaving age is 16, after which students may choose to remain at school
   and study for Access, Intermediate or Higher Grade and Advanced Higher
   exams. A small number of students at certain private, independent
   schools may follow the English system and study towards GCSEs instead
   of Standard Grades, and towards A and AS-Levels instead of Higher Grade
   and Advanced Higher exams.
   The Geddes Quadrangle of University of Dundee.
   Enlarge
   The Geddes Quadrangle of University of Dundee.

   The Scottish Executive funds over forty further and higher education
   colleges where students can study for more vocational qualifications;
   degree-entry qualifications such as diplomas; and specialist courses in
   the arts or agriculture. Scotland has 13 universities and one
   university college, including the four ancient universities of
   Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Glasgow and St Andrews founded during the
   mediaeval period. Bachelor's degrees at Scottish universities are
   bestowed after four years of study, with the option to graduate with an
   ordinary degree after three years or continue with the fourth year of
   study to obtain an honours degree. Unlike the rest of the United
   Kingdom, Scottish students studying at a Scottish university do not
   have to pay for tuition fees. The Students Awards Agency for Scotland
   (SAAS) pay course fees for all Scottish students domiciled in Scotland
   and offer bursaries to eligible students. Scottish students have the
   option of accepting a loan from the Student Loans Company (SLC), and if
   eligible, this is paid back after graduation. Scottish students
   studying outside of Scotland but within the UK have to pay for tuition,
   but at a reduced rate depending upon how much their chosen institution
   charges. All Scottish universities attract a high percentage of
   overseas students, and many have links with overseas institutions.

Culture

   The culture of Scotland, although heavily influenced by that of
   neighbouring England is distinct and internationally recognised.
   Scotland has its own arts scene with both music and literature heavily
   influenced by unique Scottish sources and some Scottish sporting
   traditions are unique to the British Isles.

Cuisine

   Scottish cuisine has much in common with others in the UK, but has
   distinctive attributes and recipes of its own, thanks to foreign and
   local influences both ancient and modern. Traditional dishes exist
   alongside international foods brought by immigration and a Scottish
   public eager to try new dishes. The national food of Scotland is
   Haggis, which consists of minced offal, spices, suet and oatmeal,
   stuffed and cooked in a sheep's stomach. Pheasant is also attributed to
   Scotland along with many other types of game.

   Scottish cuisine is enjoying a renaissance, with a number of Michelin
   star restaurants operating in the country, serving traditional or
   fusion Scottish cuisine made with local ingredients. In most towns,
   Chinese and Indian take-away restaurants exist side-by-side with
   traditional fish and chip shops; larger towns and cities offer cuisine
   ranging from Thai and Japanese to Mexican.

Music

   A piper playing the Great Highland Bagpipe.
   Enlarge
   A piper playing the Great Highland Bagpipe.

   The Scottish music scene is a significant aspect of Scottish culture,
   with both traditional and modern influences. An example of a
   traditional Scottish instrument is the Great Highland Bagpipe, a wind
   instrument consisting of one or more musical pipes which are fed
   continuously by a reservoir of air in a bag. The Clàrsach, fiddle and
   accordion are also traditional Scottish instruments, the latter two
   heavily featured in Scottish country dance bands. Scottish emigrants
   took traditional Scottish music with them and it influenced early local
   styles such as country music in North America. Today, there are many
   successful Scottish bands and individual artists in varying styles.

Literature

   Robert Burns is Scotland's national poet.
   Enlarge
   Robert Burns is Scotland's national poet.

   Scottish literature includes literature written in English, Scottish
   Gaelic, Scots, Brythonic, French, Latin and any other language in which
   a piece of literature was ever written within the boundaries of modern
   Scotland. Some of the earliest literature known to have been composed
   in Scotland dates from the 6th century and includes Y Gododdin written
   in Brythonic (Old Welsh) and the Elegy for St Columba by Dallan
   Forgaill written in Middle Irish. Vita Columbae by Adomnán, the ninth
   Abbot of Iona, was written in Latin during the 7th century. In the 13th
   century, French flourished as a literary language long before Early
   Scots texts appeared in the fourteenth century. After the 17th century,
   anglicisation increased, though Lowland Scots was still spoken by the
   vast majority of the population of the Lowlands. The poet and
   songwriter Robert Burns wrote in the Scots language, although much of
   his writing is also in English and in a "light" Scots dialect which
   would have been accessible to a wider audience than simply Scottish
   people.

   The introduction of the movement known as the " kailyard tradition" at
   the end of the 19th century, brought elements of fantasy and folklore
   back into fashion. J. M. Barrie provides a good example of this mix of
   modernity and nostalgia. This tradition has been viewed as a major
   stumbling block for Scottish literature, focusing, as it did, on an
   idealised, pastoral picture of Scottish culture, becoming increasingly
   removed from reality of life in Scotland during that period. Some
   modern novelists such as Irvine Welsh, (of Trainspotting fame), write
   in a distinctly Scottish English that reflects the underbelly of
   contemporary Scottish culture.

Sport

   Murrayfield Stadium, with a seating capacity of 67,500 is the home of
   Scottish Rugby.
   Enlarge
   Murrayfield Stadium, with a seating capacity of 67,500 is the home of
   Scottish Rugby.

   Scotland has its own national governing bodies, such as the Scottish
   Football Association (the second oldest national football association
   in the world) and the Scottish Rugby Union; and its own national
   sporting competitions. As such, Scotland enjoys independent
   representation at many international sporting events such as the FIFA
   World Cup, the Rugby World Cup and the Commonwealth Games; although
   notably not the Olympic Games.

   Variations of football have been played in Scotland for centuries with
   the earliest reference being in 1424. Association football is now the
   national sport but earlier versions such as the ba game are still
   played. Scotland hosted the first ever international rugby union match
   in 1871 and 20 months later followed with the first ever international
   association football match. Both were played against England with the
   rugby union side winning and the association side drawing. The Scottish
   Cup is the world's oldest national trophy.
   The famous Old Course at St Andrews is an example of a links golf
   course found in coastal areas of Scotland.
   Enlarge
   The famous Old Course at St Andrews is an example of a links golf
   course found in coastal areas of Scotland.

   The Fife town of St Andrews is known internationally as the Home of
   Golf. To many people, the Old Course at St Andrews, an ancient links
   course dating to before 1574, may be considered a site of pilgrimage.
   There are many other famous golf courses in Scotland, including
   Carnoustie, Gleneagles, Muirfield and Royal Troon.

   Other distinctive features of the national sporting culture include the
   Highland Games, curling and shinty. Kingussie Camanachd, the dominant
   shinty team, is recognised by Guinness World Records as the most
   successful sporting club team in the world. Scotland has several ski
   resorts. These are Cairn Gorm, Glen Coe, Glen Shee, The Lecht, and
   Nevis Range. Scotland also hosts snowboarding and most other winter
   sports.

Transport

   A Loganair aircraft at Barra Airport, the only airport in the world
   where scheduled air services land on a beach runway.
   Enlarge
   A Loganair aircraft at Barra Airport, the only airport in the world
   where scheduled air services land on a beach runway.

   Scotland has four main international airports ( Glasgow, Edinburgh,
   Prestwick and Aberdeen) that serve a wide variety of European and
   intercontinental routes with scheduled and chartered flights. Highland
   and Islands Airports operate 10 regional airports serving the more
   remote locations of Scotland. There is technically no national airline,
   however various airlines have their base in Scotland including Loganair
   (operates as a franchise of British Airways), Flyglobespan, City Star
   Airlines, Air Scotland and ScotAirways.

   Scotland has a large and expanding rail network, which, following the
   Railways Act of 2005, is now managed independently from the rest of the
   UK. The East Coast and West Coast Main Railway lines and the Cross
   Country Line connect the major cities and towns of Scotland with the
   English network. First ScotRail operate services within Scotland. The
   Scottish Executive has pursued a policy of building new railway lines,
   and reopening closed ones. Operators to English destinations include
   First ScotRail, GNER and Virgin Trains.

   The Scottish motorways and major trunk roads are managed by the
   Scottish Executive. The rest of the road network is managed by the
   Scottish local authorities in each of their areas. The country's
   busiest motorway is the M8 which runs from the outskirts of Edinburgh
   to central Glasgow, and on to Renfrewshire.

   Regular ferry services operate between the Scottish mainland and island
   communities. These services are mostly run by Caledonian MacBrayne, but
   some are operated by local councils. Other ferry routes, served by
   multiple companies, connect to Northern Ireland, Belgium, Norway, the
   Faroe Islands and also Iceland.

National symbols

   The distinctive Royal Stewart Tartan is also the personal tartan of
   Queen Elizabeth II.
   Enlarge
   The distinctive Royal Stewart Tartan is also the personal tartan of
   Queen Elizabeth II.
     * The Flag of Scotland, the Saltire or St Andrew's Cross, dates (at
       least in legend) from the 9th century, and is thus the oldest
       national flag still in use, and it can be found flying all over
       Scotland. The Saltire now also forms part of the design of the
       Union Flag.
     * The Royal Standard of Scotland, a banner showing the Royal Arms of
       Scotland, is also frequently to be seen, particularly at sporting
       events involving a Scottish team. Often called the Lion Rampant
       (after its chief heraldic device), it is technically the property
       of the monarch and its use by anybody else is illegal, although
       this is almost universally ignored, and never enforced.
     * The unicorn is also used as a heraldic symbol of Scotland. The
       Royal Coat of Arms of Scotland, used prior to 1603 by the Kings of
       Scotland, incorporated a lion rampant shield supported by two
       unicorns. On the Union of the Crowns, the Arms were quartered with
       those of England and Ireland, and one unicorn was replaced by a
       lion (the supporters of England).
     * William Wallace, a national hero and a leader in the Scottish Wars
       of Independence.
     * The thistle, the floral emblem of Scotland, features in many
       Scottish symbols and logos, and on UK currency. Heather is also
       considered to be a symbol of Scotland.
     * Flower of Scotland is popularly held to be the National Anthem of
       Scotland, and is played at international events such as football or
       rugby matches involving the Scotland national team. However, since
       devolution, more serious discussion of a national anthem has led to
       this being disputed. Other candidates include Scots Wha Hae,
       Scotland the Brave and A Man's A Man for A' That.
     * Tartan is a specific woven textile pattern that often signifies a
       particular Scottish clan, as featured in a kilt.
     * St Andrew's Day, the 30th of November, is the national day,
       although Burns' Night tends to be more widely observed. Tartan Day
       is a recent innovation from Canada. There is currently a campaign
       within the Scottish Parliament to create a national holiday on
       Saint Andrew's Day.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scotland"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
