   #copyright

Serbia

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; European
Countries

                      Република Србија
   Republika Srbija
   Republic of Serbia

   Flag of Serbia Coat of arms of Serbia
   Flag           Coat of arms
   Motto: none
   Anthem: Bože pravde
   (English: God of Justice)
   Location of Serbia
   Capital
   (and largest city)            Belgrade
                                 44°48′N 20°28′E
        Official languages       Serbian, cyrillic script^1
   Government                    Republic
    - Prime Minister             Vojislav Koštunica
    - President                  Boris Tadić
           Establishment
    - Formation                  814
    - First Serbian Uprising     1804
    - Internationally recognized July 13, 1878
    - Kingdom of SCS created     December 1, 1918
    - SCG  dissolved             June 5, 2006
                                   Area
    - Total                      88,361 km² ( 113th)
                                 34,116 sq mi
    - Water (%)                  n/a
                                Population
    - 2006 estimate              9,396,411 ( 83th)
    - Density                    106/km² ( 94th)
                                 275/sq mi
            GDP ( PPP)           2006 estimate
    - Total                      $47,77 billion ( 77th)
    - Per capita                 $5,713 ( 97th)
            HDI  (n/a)           n/a (not ranked) ( n/a)
             Currency            Serbian dinar^2 ( RSD)
             Time zone           CET ( UTC+1)
           Internet TLD          .yu ( .rs)^3
           Calling code          +381^4
   ^1 In Vojvodina, the following languages are also official: Hungarian,
   Slovak, Romanian, Rusyn and Croatian.

   In Kosovo, Albanian and English are also official.
   ^2 The euro is used in Kosovo alongside the dinar.
   ^3 The .rs is official domain since September 2006, but former .yu is
   still in use until the current active leases expire.
   ^4 To be shared with Montenegro until 2007.

   Serbia, officially the Republic of Serbia ( Serbian: Република Србија
   or Republika Srbija, listen ), is a landlocked country in Central and
   Southeastern Europe, covering the central part of the Balkan Peninsula
   and the southern part of the Pannonian Plain. The capital is Belgrade.
   Serbia borders Hungary to the north; Romania and Bulgaria to the east;
   Albania and the Republic of Macedonia to the south; and Montenegro,
   Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina to the west.

   Invited by Byzantine emperor Heraclius Serbs settled the region by 630
   A.D. , fully converted to Christianity by 865 A.D. , formed three
   distinct independent kingdoms by the 14th century- in Dioclea , Rascia
   and Bosnia , as well as two distinct shortlasting Empires- Serbian
   Empire of Stefan Dusan and Empire of Jovan Nenad . The Medieval Serbian
   Kingdom, later Empire, rose from Byzantine, Bulgarian and Hungarian
   patronage to become a threat to the very existence of Constantinople
   itself.

   Placed under Ottoman occupation in the 15th century following the
   collapse of the Serbian Empire, the uprisings against Turkish
   occupation between 1804- 1815 reestablished Serbia as a state which
   obtained formal independence in 1878 . Victorious in Balkan wars and
   World War I , for nearly a century Serbia was part of various South
   Slavic states, including the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes
   from 1918 to 1941 (renamed to the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1929), the
   Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia from 1945 to 1992, the Federal
   Republic of Yugoslavia from 1992 to 2003, and the State Union of Serbia
   and Montenegro from 2003 to 2006 . After Montenegro voted independence
   from the State Union, Serbia officially proclaimed its independence on
   June 5, 2006, as the successor state to the State Union of Serbia and
   Montenegro.

Geography

   Serbia is located in the Balkans and in the Pannonian Plain (a region
   of central Europe). It is placed at the crossroads between Central,
   Southern and Eastern Europe. Serbian borders and regions are mostly
   determined by nature itself. Danube river (2850 km) flows through the
   northern third of the country in length of 588 km, forming the border
   with Croatia and partially, Romania. Sava river forms the southern
   border of the Vojvodina province, flowing into the Danube in central
   Belgrade, while bypassing the hills of the Fruska Gora ("Frankish
   Mountains") in the west. 60 km to the northeast of Belgrade Tisa river
   flows into the Danube, ending its 1350 km long journey from Ukraine,
   with partially navigable Tamis (60 km/350 km) also flowing into the
   Danube near Pancevo. Begej river (254km) flows into Tisa near Titel.
   All five rivers are navigable, connecting the country with Northern and
   Western Europe (through Rhine-Main-Danube Canal - North Sea route);
   Eastern Europe (via Tisa- Tamis- Begej and Danube- Black sea route);
   and Southern Europe ( Sava river - 990 km long - connects Belgrade with
   Zagreb and Ljubljana)- altogether making the strategic importance of
   Serbia invaluable.
   Serbia's geographic components
   Enlarge
   Serbia's geographic components

   Eastern border of the country is determined by the Carpathian Mountain
   range, which run through entire Central Europe, separating it from the
   East. Carpathians meet the Balkan Mountains, following the course of
   Velika Morava, 500 km long (partially navigable) river. Midzor peak
   tops Eastern Serbia at 2156 m. In the southeast Balkan Mountains meet
   the Rhodope Mountains, connecting the country with Greece. Sar
   Mountains of Kosovo form the border with Albania, with one of the
   highest peaks in the region- Djeravica {2656 m). Dinaric Alps of Serbia
   follow the flow of the Drina river -(at 350 km navigable for smaller
   vessels only)- overlooking the Dinaric peaks on the other side of the
   shore in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Climate

   The Serbian climate varies between a continental climate in the north,
   with cold winters, and hot, humid summers with well distributed
   rainfall patterns, and a more Adriatic climate in the south with hot,
   dry summers and autumns and relatively cold winters with heavy inland
   snowfall. Differences in elevation, proximity to the Adriatic sea and
   large river basins, as well as the exposure to the winds makes the
   range of climates within Serbia quite obvious . Vojvodina posseses
   typical continental climate, with airmasses from Northern and Western
   Europe which shape its climatic profile. South and Southwest Serbia is
   subject to Mediterranean influences, however the Dinaric Alps and other
   mountain ranges help in cooling down the biggest part of warm air
   masses. However traditionally these are the warmest parts of the
   country during the summer, while winters are quite harsh in Sandzak due
   to the mountains which encircle that platoue . Morava valley also shows
   signs of Mediterranean influences due to the "relative proximity" of
   the Aegean sea (*note that Serbia is a landlocked country).

Cities

   Map of Serbia
   Enlarge
   Map of Serbia

   Major cities (over 100,000 inhabitants) - 2002 census data, for Kosovo
   current World Gazetteer estimates (unofficial):
     * Beograd (Belgrade): 1,273,651 (inner city area); 1,576,124 (with
       suburbs)
     * Novi Sad: 215,659 (298,139 greater metropolitan area)
     * Priština: between 155,499 (1991 census) and 262,686 (2006
       calculation)
     * Niš: 194,790 (250,518 greater metropolitan area)
     * Kragujevac: 147.473 (180.252 greater metropolitan area)
     * Prizren: between 92,303 (1991 census) and 165,227 (2006
       calculation)
     * Subotica: 99,471 (147,758 greater metropolitan area)

National parks

   Serbia has five national parks:
     * Fruška Gora (250 km²)
     * Kopaonik (120 km²)
     * Tara (220 km²)
     * Đerdap ( Iron Gate) (640 km²)
     * Šar-planina (390 km²)

History

Medieval Serbia

   Tsar Stefan Dušan the Great of the Serbian Empire.
   Enlarge
   Tsar Stefan Dušan the Great of the Serbian Empire.

   The roots of the Serbian state date back to the 7th century and the
   House of Vlastimirović. A Serbian kingdom (centered around Duklja) was
   established in the 11th century. It lasted until the end of the 12th
   century.

   The medieval Serbian state was re-formed in the Raška region in the
   12th century by the Serbian Grand Župan Stefan Nemanja. In 1220, under
   Stefan the First Crowned, Serbia became a kingdom, and in 1346, Stefan
   Dušan established the Serbian Empire. Under a string of accomplished
   leaders, from Stefan Nemanja, through the Czar Stefan Dusan The Great,
   and culminating with the death of Prince Lazar at Kosovo in 1389, the
   medieval Serbs created a political entity which today still resonates
   strongly in the Serbian culture. The Empire was disintegrated and fell
   to the Ottoman Turks after the historic Battle of Kosovo in 1389. The
   northern Serbian territories (the Serbian Despotate) were conquered in
   1459 following the siege of the "temporary" capital Smederevo. Bosnia
   fell a few years after Smederevo, and Herzegovina in 1482. Belgrade was
   the last major Balkan city to endure Ottoman onslaughts, as it joined
   Catholic Royal Hungary, following heavy Turkish defeat in Siege of
   Belgrade of 1456. It held out for another 70 years, succumbing to the
   Ottomans in 1521, alongside greater part of Hungary that was soon
   conquered.

Ottoman Serbia

   Following the collapse of Serbian Empire in Battle of Kosovo, between
   1459 and 1804, Serbia was under the Ottoman occupation, despite three
   Austrian invasions and numerous rebellions (such as the Banat
   Uprising). Islam was in a period of expansion during this time,
   especially in Raska, Kosovo and Bosnia. Many Serbs (and Croats)
   converted to Islam, which eventually led to the forming of the Bosniak
   nation. The Ottoman period was a defining one in the history of the
   country; Slavic, Byzantine, Arabic and Turkish cultures suffused. Many
   contemporary cultural traits can be traced back to Ottoman period.
   However the majority of the Serbs managed to keep their culture and
   religion through the long period of Ottoman rule.

Modern Serbia

   Austrian and Ottoman Serbia in 1849
   Enlarge
   Austrian and Ottoman Serbia in 1849

   The First Serbian Uprising of 1804- 1813, led by Đorđe Petrović (also
   known as Karađorđe or "Black George"), and the Second Serbian Uprising
   of 1815 resulted in the establishment of the Principality of Serbia. As
   it was semi-independent from the Ottoman Empire, it is considered to be
   the precursor of the formation of modern Serbia.

   From 1815 to 1903, the Serbian state was ruled by the House of
   Obrenović, except from 1842 to 1858, when Serbia was ruled by Prince
   Aleksandar Karađorđević. In 1903, the House of Obrenović was replaced
   by the House of Karađorđević, who were descendants of Đorđe Petrović.

   In the northern part of present-day Serbia that was ruled by the
   Austrian Empire, the local Serbs created in 1848 their autonomous
   region known as the Serbian Vojvodina. The region was in 1849
   transformed into new Austrian crownland known as the Vojvodina of
   Serbia and Tamiš Banat. Although, the crownland was abolished in 1860,
   the Serbs from the Vojvodina region gained another opportunity to
   achieve their political demands in 1918.

   The struggle for a modern society, human rights and a nation-state in
   Serbia lasted almost three decades and was completed with the adoption
   of the constitution on 15th February 1835. In 1876, Montenegro, Serbia,
   and Bosnia declared war against the Ottoman Empire and proclaimed their
   unification. However, the Treaty of Berlin of 1878, which was signed at
   the Congress of Berlin by the Great Powers, granted complete
   independence only to Serbia and Montenegro, leaving Bosnia and Raška to
   Austria-Hungary, who blocked their unification until the Balkan Wars of
   1912 and 1913 and World War I.
   Karađorđe Petrović, leader of the First Serbian uprising in 1804.
   Enlarge
   Karađorđe Petrović, leader of the First Serbian uprising in 1804.

   On 28 June 1914 the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of
   Austria at Sarajevo in Austria-Hungary by Gavrilo Princip, a South Slav
   unionist, Austrian citizen and member of Young Bosnia, led to
   Austria-Hungary declaring war on Serbia. The Russian Empire started to
   mobilise its troops in defence of its ally Serbia, which resulted in
   the German Empire declaring war on Russia in support of its ally
   Austria-Hungary. However, as German military planners wished to avoid a
   war on two fronts against both Russia and France, they attacked France
   first. This eventually culminated in all the major European Powers
   being drawn into the war. The Serbian Army won several major victories
   against Austria-Hungary at the beginning of World War I, but it was
   overpowered by the joint forces of the German Empire, Austria-Hungary
   and Bulgaria in 1915. Most of its army and some people went to exile to
   Greece and Corfu where it healed, regrouped and returned to
   Thessaloniki front to lead a final breaktrough through enemy lines on
   15 September 1918, freeing Serbia again and ending the war on 11
   November. In World War I, Serbia had 1,264,000 casualties — 28% of its
   total population, and 58% of its male population.

   This article is part of the series on the
   History of Serbia
   Medieval Serbia
   Raška
   Serbian Empire
   Battle of Kosovo
   Serbian Despotate
   Ottoman Serbia
   First Serbian Uprising
   Second Serbian Uprising
   Modern Serbia
   Principality of Serbia
   Kingdom of Serbia
   Serbian Campaign (World War I)
   Kingdom of Yugoslavia
   Nedić's Serbia
   SFR Yugoslavia
   FR Yugoslavia
   Serbia and Montenegro
   Republic of Serbia

Between the wars

   After 1918, Serbia, along with Montenegro, was a founding member of the
   Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, later known as the Kingdom of
   Yugoslavia. During World War II, Serbia was a German-occupied puppet
   state that included present-day Central Serbia and Banat, popularly
   called Nedić's Serbia. However, parts of the present-day territory of
   Serbia were occupied by Croatian, Hungarian, Bulgarian, Albanian, and
   Italian armies. The occupying powers committed numerous crimes against
   the civilian population, especially against Serbs and Jews.

Post WWII

   In 1945, Serbia was established as one of the federal units of the
   second Yugoslavia, the Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia, led
   by Josip Broz Tito until his death in 1980.

   After the collapse of the second Yugoslavia in 1992 until the year
   2003, Serbia, together with Montenegro, was part of the Federal
   Republic of Yugoslavia. Despite civil wars in neighbouring Croatia and
   Bosnia and Herzegovina, while helping Serbs in Croatia and Bosnia try
   to remain a part of Yugoslavia, Serbia remained peaceful until 1998,
   when clashes with the Kosovo Liberation Army started in Kosovo.

   Between 1998 and 1999, continued clashes in Kosovo between Serbian and
   Yugoslav security forces and the K.L.A. prompted a NATO aerial
   bombardment which lasted for 78 days. The attacks were stopped when
   Yugoslav president Slobodan Milošević agreed to remove all security
   forces, including the military and the police, and have them replaced
   by a body of international police, in return for which Kosovo would
   formally remain within the Yugoslav Federation (See: Kosovo War).

   In September 2000, opposition parties claimed that Milošević committed
   fraud in routine federal elections. Street protests and rallies
   throughout Serbia eventually forced Milošević to concede and hand over
   power to the recently formed Democratic Opposition of Serbia (DOS), a
   broad coalition of anti-Milošević parties.

   The fall of Milošević led to end of the international isolation Serbia
   suffered during the Milošević years. Serbia's new leaders announced
   that Serbia would seek to join the European Union and NATO. In October
   2005, the EU opened negotiations with Serbia for a Stabilization and
   Association Agreement (SAA), a preliminary step towards joining the EU.

   From 2003 to 2006, Serbia was part of the State Union of Serbia and
   Montenegro, into which the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia had been
   transformed. On May 21, 2006, Montenegro held a referendum to determine
   whether or not to end the union with Serbia. The next day,
   state-certified results showed 55.5% of voters in favour of
   independence, which was just above the 55% required by the referendum.
   On June 3, the Parliament of Montenegro declared Montenegro independent
   of the State Union and on June 5, the National Assembly of Serbia
   declared Serbia the successor to the State Union.

Government and politics

   On 4 February 2003 the parliament of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
   agreed to a weaker form of cooperation between Serbia and Montenegro
   within a commonwealth called Serbia and Montenegro. The union ceased to
   exist following Montenegrin and Serbian declarations of independence in
   June 2006.

   After the ousting of Slobodan Milošević on 5 October 2000, the country
   was governed by the Democratic Opposition of Serbia. Tensions gradually
   increased within the coalition until the Democratic Party of Serbia
   (DSS) left the government, leaving the Democratic Party (DS) in overall
   control. Nevertheless, in March 2004 the DSS gathered enough support to
   form the new Government of Serbia, together with G17 Plus and coalition
   SPO- NS, and the support of the Socialist Party of Serbia, who do not
   take part in the government, but in exchange for the support hold minor
   government and justice positions and influence policies. The Prime
   Minister of Serbia is Vojislav Koštunica, leader of the Democratic
   Party of Serbia.

   The current President of Serbia is Boris Tadić, leader of the
   Democratic Party (DS). He was elected with 53% of the vote in the
   second round of the Serbian presidential election held on 27 June 2004,
   following several unsuccessful elections since 2002.

   Serbia held a two-day referendum on October 28-29, 2006, that ratified
   a new constitution replacing the Milošević-era constitution with a
   majority victory. As a result Serbia will hold new national elections
   on January 21, 2007.

Administrative subdivisions

   Political map of Serbia
   Enlarge
   Political map of Serbia

   Serbia is divided into 29 districts plus the City of Belgrade. The
   districts are further divided into municipalities. Serbia has two
   autonomous provinces: Kosovo (called Kosovo i Metohija, often
   abbreviated to Kosmet in Serbian) in the south (5 districts, 30
   municipalities), which is presently under the administration of the
   United Nations Mission in Kosovo, and Vojvodina in the north (7
   districts, 46 municipalities).

   The part of Serbia that is neither in Kosovo nor in Vojvodina is called
   Central Serbia. Central Serbia is not an administrative division,
   unlike the two autonomous provinces, and it has no regional government
   of its own. In English this region is often called " Serbia proper" to
   denote "the part of the Republic of Serbia not including the provinces
   of Vojvodina and Kosovo", as the Library of Congress puts it . This
   usage was also employed in Serbo-Croatian during the Yugoslav era (in
   the form of "uža Srbija", literally: "narrow Serbia"). Its use in
   English is purely geographical, without any particular political
   meaning being implied.

   Negotiations are currently underway to determine the final status of
   Kosovo. The Contact Group has postponed the completing of the status
   process until after Serbian parliamentary elections in January 2007.

Demographics

          See also: Demographic history of Serbia, Demographic history of
          Vojvodina, Demographic history of Kosovo, and Ethnic groups of
          Vojvodina

   Population statistics of Serbia (Estimate May 2005)

     * Serbia (total): 9,396,411
          + Vojvodina: 2,116,725
          + Central Serbia: 5,479,686
          + Kosovo: 1,800,000

   Serbia (excluding Kosovo) in 2002
   Serbs

                               82.86%
   Hungarians

                                3.91%
   Bosniaks

                                1.82%
   Roma

                                1.44%
   Yugoslavs

                                1.08%
   other

                                9.79%

   Serbia is populated mostly by Serbs. Significant minorities include
   Albanians (who are a majority in the province of Kosovo), Hungarians,
   Bosniaks, Roma, Croats, Slovaks, Bulgarians, Romanians, etc. The two
   provinces, Vojvodina and Kosovo, are ethnically and religiously
   diverse, as they were ruled by the Habsburg Empire and Ottoman Empire
   respectively for longer time than the Central Serbia.

   According to the last official census data collected in 2002, ethnic
          composition of Serbia is

     * Total: 7,498,001
          + Serbs: 6,212,838 (82.86%)
          + Hungarians: 293,299 (3.91%)
          + Bosniaks: 136,087 (1.82%)
          + Roma: 108,193 (1.44%)
          + Yugoslavs: 80,721 (1.08%)
          + Others (each less than 1%): 666,863 (8.89%)

   Slovaks in Serbia
   Enlarge
   Slovaks in Serbia

   Albanians in province Kosovo did not take part in official census.
   Their population is estimated to around 1,8 million, bounded only to
   the province.

Economy

   100 Serbian dinars banknote
   Enlarge
   100 Serbian dinars banknote

   Serbia has an economy based mostly on various services, industry and
   agriculture. In the late 1980s, at the beginning of the process of
   economic transition, its position was favourable, but it was gravely
   impacted by UN economic sanctions 1992- 1995, the damage to
   infrastructure and industry during the NATO airstrikes in 1999, as well
   as having problems from losing the markets of ex Yugoslavia and the
   SEV. Main economic problems include high unemployment (20.0% in 2005)
   and an insufficient amount of economic reforms.

   After the ousting of former Federal Yugoslav President Milosevic in
   October 2000, the country experienced faster economic growth (the
   amount of economic growth in 2006 was 6.3 percent), and has been
   preparing for membership in the European Union, its most important
   trading partner. Serbia suffers from high export deficit and
   considerable debt. The country expects some major economic impulses and
   high growth rates in the following years. Serbia has been occasionally
   called a "Balkan tiger" due to its recent high economic growth rates, a
   reference to the East Asian Tigers. Nevertheless, Serbia's GDP is still
   well below 1990 levels.

   Estimated GDP of Serbia for 2006 is $47.77 billion which is $5,713 per
   capita. GDP growth rate in 2005 was 5.9%.

Culture

   The Gusle, Serbian national music instrument
   Enlarge
   The Gusle, Serbian national music instrument

   Serbia is one of Europe's most culturally diverse countries. The
   borders between large empires ran through the territory of today's
   Serbia for long periods in history: between the Eastern and Western
   halves of the Roman Empire; between Royal Hungary and Byzantium; and
   between the Ottoman Empire and the Austrian Empire (later Austria
   Hungary). As a result, while the north is culturally Central European,
   the south is rather more Oriental. Of course, both regions have
   influenced each other, and so the distinction between north and south
   is artificial to some extent.

   The Byzantine Empire's influence on Serbia was perhaps the greatest.
   Serbs are Orthodox Christians, not Roman Catholics, with their own
   national church - the Serbian Orthodox Church. They use both the
   Cyrillic and Latin alphabets, as a result of both Eastern and Western
   influences. The monasteries of Serbia, built largely in the Middle
   Ages, are one of the most valuable and visible traces of medieval
   Serbia's association with the Byzantium and the Orthodox World, but
   also with the Romanic (Western) Europe that Serbia had close ties with
   back in middle ages. Most beloved queens in Serbian history were mostly
   of foreign origin: Helen d' Anjou (French), Anna Dondolo (Venetian),
   Catherine of Hungary, Symonide of Byzantium, Empress Milica of Rascia
   (Serbian), Maria Theresa (Austrian) etc.

Education

   Education in Serbia is regulated by the Serbian Ministry of Education
   and Sports.

   Education starts in either pre-schools or elementary schools. Children
   enroll in elementary schools ( Serbian: Osnovna škola) at age of 7 and
   it lasts for eight years.

Tourism

   Tourism in Serbia is mostly based in mountains and villages. The most
   famous mountain resorts are Zlatibor, Kopaonik, and the Tara. There
   also are a lot of spas in Serbia, one the biggest of which is the
   Vrnjačka Banja. There is also significant tourism in Belgrade and Novi
   Sad (the capital of the Vojvodina province), as well to the Exit
   Festival and the Guča trumpet festival.

Serbian holidays

   Date Name Notes
   January 1/ 2 New Year's Day
   January 7 Orthodox Christmas
   January 14 National Holiday (Orthodox New Year) "Српска Нова Година"
   "Srpska Nova Godina"
   January 27 Saint Sava's feast Day Day of Spirituality
   February 15 Sretenje Serbian National Day
   April 21 Orthodox Good Friday Date for 2006 only
   April 23 Orthodox Easter Date for 2006 only
   April 24 Orthodox Easter Monday Date for 2006 only
   May 1/ 2 Labour Day
   May 9 Victory Day
   June 28 Vidovdan ( Martyr's Day) In memory of soldiers fallen at the
   Battle of Kosovo

Infrastructure

Communications

Transportation

   Serbia, in particular the valley of the Morava, is often described as
   "the crossroads between East and West", which is one of the primary
   reasons for its turbulent history. The Morava valley route, which
   avoids mountainous regions, is by far the easiest way of travelling
   overland from continental Europe to Greece and Asia Minor.

   European routes E65, E70, E75 and E80, as well as the E662, E761, E762,
   E763, E771, and E851 pass through the country. The E70 westwards from
   Belgrade and most of the E75 are modern highways of motorway / autobahn
   standard or close to that.

   The Danube River, central Europe's connection to the Black Sea, flows
   through Serbia.

   There are three international airports in Serbia: Belgrade Nikola Tesla
   Airport, Niš Constantine the Great Airport, and Priština International
   Airport (last one is located in the Serbian province of Kosovo). Three
   regional airports are being reconstruct at the moment, and by the end
   of 2006, the number of international airports in Serbia will increase.

   The national carrier is Jat Airways and the railway system is operated
   by Beovoz in Belgrade and by Serbian Railways on the national level.

Gallery

                            Kalemegdan, Belgrade

                                   Užice

                                    Niš
                         Monument to the liberators

   Museum of Genocide in Kragujevac

                        National Theatre in Subotica

       City Hall and monument of king Peter I of Yugoslavia, Zrenjanin

                Petrovaradin fortress over Danube ( Novi Sad)

                         Medieval castle in Golubac

                       Centre of Priština/Prishtinë

                        Resavska cave near Despotovac

                           Zlatibor tourist centre

                Đurđevi Stupovi monastery, near Novi Pazar

Neighbouring countries

   Flag of Croatia  Croatia Flag of Hungary  Hungary Flag of Romania
   Romania
   Flag of Bosnia and Herzegovina  Bosnia and Herzegovina North
   West    Flag of Serbia  Serbia     East
   South
   Flag of Montenegro  Montenegro
   Flag of Albania  Albania Republic of Macedonia  Republic of Macedonia
   Flag of Bulgaria  Bulgaria

   Countries of Europe

   Albania · Andorra · Armenia^1 · Austria · Azerbaijan^2 · Belarus ·
   Belgium · Bosnia and Herzegovina · Bulgaria · Croatia · Cyprus^1 ·
   Czech Republic · Denmark · Estonia · Finland · France · Georgia^2 ·
   Germany · Greece · Hungary · Iceland · Ireland · Italy · Kazakhstan^2 ·
   Latvia · Liechtenstein · Lithuania · Luxembourg · Republic of Macedonia
   · Malta · Moldova · Monaco · Montenegro · Netherlands · Norway · Poland
   · Portugal · Romania · Russia^2 · San Marino · Serbia · Slovakia ·
   Slovenia · Spain · Sweden · Switzerland · Turkey^2 · Ukraine · United
   Kingdom · Vatican City

   (1) Entirely in Asia but having socio-political connections with
   Europe. (2) Has significant territory in Asia.
   European Union members and candidates

   Austria • Belgium • Cyprus • Czech Republic • Denmark • Estonia •
   Finland • France • Germany • Greece • Hungary • Ireland • Italy •
   Latvia • Lithuania • Luxembourg • Malta • Netherlands • Poland •
   Portugal • Slovakia • Slovenia • Spain • Sweden • United Kingdom

   Countries acceding on January 1, 2007: Bulgaria • Romania

   Candidate countries: Croatia • Turkey • Republic of Macedonia (referred
   to as the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia by the European Union)
   Francophonie
   Members: Belgium • Benin • Bulgaria • Burkina Faso • Burundi • Cambodia
   • Cameroon • Canada • New Brunswick • Quebec • Ontario • Cape Verde •
   Central African Republic • Chad • Comoros • Côte d'Ivoire • Cyprus •
   Democratic Republic of the Congo • Djibouti • Dominica • Egypt •
   Equatorial Guinea • France • French Guiana • Gabon • Ghana • Guadeloupe
   • Guinea • Guinea-Bissau • Haiti • Laos • Lebanon • Madagascar • Mali •
   Martinique • Mauritania • Mauritius • Morocco • Niger • Republic of the
   Congo • Romania • Rwanda • Saint Lucia • São Tomé and Príncipe •
   Senegal • Seychelles • Saint-Pierre and Miquelon • Switzerland • Togo •
   Tunisia • Ukraine • Vanuatu • Vietnam

   Observers: Armenia • Austria • Croatia • Czech Republic • Georgia •
   Hungary • Lithuania • Mozambique • Poland • Serbia • Slovakia •
   Slovenia • Ukraine
   Black Sea Economic Cooperation

   Albania • Armenia • Azerbaijan • Bulgaria • Georgia • Greece • Moldova
   • Romania • Russia • Serbia • Turkey • Ukraine
   Slavic-speaking nations

   West Slavic: Flag of Czech Republic  Czech Republic • Flag of Poland
   Poland • Flag of Slovakia  Slovakia

   South Slavic: Flag of Bosnia and Herzegovina  Bosnia and Herzegovina •
   Flag of Bulgaria  Bulgaria • Flag of Croatia  Croatia • Flag of
   Republic of Macedonia  Republic of Macedonia • Flag of Montenegro
   Montenegro • Flag of Serbia  Serbia • Flag of Slovenia  Slovenia

   East Slavic: Flag of Belarus  Belarus • Flag of Russia  Russia • Flag
   of Ukraine  Ukraine
   Republics and Autonomous Provinces of the former Yugoslavia (SFRY)
   Flag of SFR Yugoslavia

   Bosnia and Herzegovina • Croatia • Republic of Macedonia • Montenegro •
   Serbia (Kosovo • Vojvodina) • Slovenia

   The Danube
   Danube

   Countries: Germany · Austria · Slovakia · Hungary · Croatia · Serbia ·
   Romania · Bulgaria · Ukraine · Moldova

   Cities: Ulm · Ingolstadt · Regensburg · Passau · Linz · Vienna ·
   Bratislava · Győr · Esztergom · Budapest · Baja · Vukovar · Ilok ·
   Bačka Palanka · Novi Sad · Belgrade · Smederevo · Drobeta-Turnu
   Severin · Vidin · Rousse · Brăila · Galaţi · Tulcea

   Tributaries ( list): Iller · Lech · Regen · Isar · Inn · Morava ·
   Drava · Tisza · Sava · Timiş · Velika Morava · Jiu · Iskar · Olt ·
   Osam · Yantra · Vedea · Argeş · Ialomiţa · Siret · Prut

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serbia"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
