   #copyright

Sesame Street

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Television

   Sesame Street
   Sesame Street title card used since 2002. Here is one from an episode
   in season 36.
   Genre Children's television series
   Running time 60 minutes per episode
   Creator(s) Jim Henson
   Joan Ganz Cooney
   Starring Carroll Spinney
   Kevin Clash
   Alison Bartlett-O'Reilly
   Desiree Casado
   Emilio Delgado
   Olamide Faison
   Bill Irwin
   Eric Jacobson
   Loretta Long
   Bob McGrath
   Sonia Manzano
   Alan Muraoka
   Jerry Nelson
   Roscoe Orman
   Martin P. Robinson
   David Rudman
   Steve Whitmire
   (see also Puppeteers, crew)
   Country of origin Flag of United States  United States
   Original channel NET (1969 – 1970),
   PBS (1970 – present)
   Original run November 10, 1969–present
   No. of episodes 4,134 (as of season 37)

   Sesame Street is a long-running American educational children's
   television series for preschoolers and is a pioneer of the contemporary
   educational television standard, combining both education and
   entertainment, therefore making a masterpiece. Sesame Street is well
   known for its Muppet characters, created by the puppeteer Jim Henson.
   More than 4,134 episodes of the show (130 per season) have been
   produced in 36 seasons, which makes it one of the longest-running
   television shows in history.

   Sesame Street is produced in the United States by non-profit
   organization Sesame Workshop, formerly known as the Children's
   Television Workshop (CTW), founded by Joan Ganz Cooney and Ralph
   Rogers. It premiered on November 10th, 1969, on the National
   Educational Television network, and later that year it was moved to
   NET's replacement, the Public Broadcasting Service.

   With its positive influence, Sesame Street is the most highly regarded
   educational show for children in the world. No television series has
   matched its level of international recognition and success. The
   original series has been televised in 120 countries, and more than 20
   international versions have been produced, not including dubbed
   versions. The series has received 109 Emmy Awards, more than any other
   television series. An estimated 75 million Americans have watched the
   series as children; millions more have watched around the world, as
   have their parents.

Overview

   Sesame Street uses a combination of puppets, animation, and live actors
   to teach young children the basics of reading (letter and word
   recognition), mathematics (numbers, addition and subtraction), as well
   as geometric forms, and classification. Since the show's inception,
   other instructional goals have been basic life skills, such as how to
   cross the street safely, proper hygiene, and healthy eating habits.

   The show displays a subtle sense of humour that has appealed to older
   viewers since it first premiered; this was devised as a means to
   encourage parents and older siblings to watch the series with younger
   children, thus becoming involved in the learning process, rather than
   having Sesame Street act as a babysitter. A number of parodies of
   popular culture appear, especially ones aimed at the Public
   Broadcasting Service, the network that broadcasts the show. For
   example, the recurring segment Monsterpiece Theatre once ran a sketch
   called "Me Claudius". Children viewing the show might enjoy watching
   Cookie Monster and the Muppets, while adults watching the same sequence
   may enjoy the spoof of the Masterpiece Theatre production of I,
   Claudius on PBS.

   Several of the character names used on the program are puns or cultural
   references aimed at a slightly older audience, including Flo Bear
   (Flaubert), Sherlock Hemlock (a Sherlock Holmes parody), H. Ross Parrot
   (based on Reform Party founder H. Ross Perot), Dr. Feel based on Dr.
   Phil, Polly Darton ( Dolly Parton), and a Jack Bauer Muppet in a parody
   of 24. Over two hundred notable personalities have made guest
   appearances on the show, beginning with Carol Burnett on the first
   episode, and ranging from performers like James Brown to political
   figures such as Kofi Annan. By making a show that not only educates and
   entertains kids, but also keeps parents entertained and involved in the
   educational process, the producers hope to inspire discussion about the
   concepts on the show.

   In 1999, the series became the longest running American children's
   program, taking the title from Captain Kangaroo. The British series
   Blue Peter still retains the worldwide record. The series has made many
   published lists, including greatest all-time show compilations by TV
   Guide and Entertainment Weekly. Nielsen Media Research has found that
   99% of American preschoolers recognise the series' characters. Another
   study** found that 81% of kids under the age of six own a Sesame Street
   toy or game, and 87% own a book based on the series.

   The series' music has appeared on music charts around the world,
   including Ernie's "Rubber Duckie" song, which made #16 on the Billboard
   Hot 100 chart in 1970; the song achieved an even higher position in
   Germany. In 1992, British band Smart E's released Sesame's Treet, a
   techno dance track which sampled the "classic" version of the Sesame
   Street theme. It reached #2 on the UK singles chart. Sesame Street has
   won 11** Grammy Awards, most recently for 2001 release Elmo and the
   Orchestra.

History of the show

   The show's original format called for the humans to be intermixed with
   the segments of animation, live-action shorts and Muppets. These
   segments were created to be like commercials — quick, catchy and
   memorable — and made the learning experience much more like fun. The
   format became a model for what is known today as edutainment-based
   programming.

   CTW aired the program for test groups to determine if the revolutionary
   new format was likely to succeed. Results showed that test watchers
   were entranced when the ad-like segments aired, especially those with
   the jovial puppets, but were remarkably less interested in the street
   scenes. Psychologists warned CTW against a mixture of fantasy and
   reality elements, but producers soon decided to mix the elements. A
   simple dose of cartoon-like characters let the humans deliver messages
   without causing viewers to lose interest.

   Sesame Street, along with several other Sesame Workshop – produced
   shows (such as The Electric Company, which was produced when Sesame
   Workshop was still CTW) are all taped in New York City. Originally they
   were taped at the Teletape Studios at 81st and Broadway in Manhattan,
   but the bankruptcy of Teletape's parent company, Reeves Entertainment,
   forced these productions to move to Kaufman Astoria Studios in
   neighboring Queens.

   The brownstone architecture of Sesame Street, a fictional neighbourhood
   in New York City, as well as the concept of neighbors from different
   backgrounds living in the same area and sharing their life experiences,
   is based in a neighbourhood.

Broadcast history

   The show is broadcast worldwide; in addition to the U.S. version, many
   countries have locally-produced versions adapted to local needs, some
   with their own characters, and in a variety of different languages. In
   Canada, beginning in 1970, 15-minute shows called Canada's Sesame
   Street were broadcast, and by 1972 an edited version of the one-hour
   American program was airing but with specially filmed Canadian
   segments, which featured the French language. In 1995 the American
   version was replaced by a half-hour long all-Canadian version of the
   series entitled Sesame Park. Since the original Sesame Street was still
   accessible to Canadians, and more familiar, the format change didn't
   find acceptance with audiences and was taken off the air in 2002.
   Broadcasts in Australia and New Zealand began in 1971. In the United
   Kingdom, the show was first broadcast by various ITV regions in the
   early 1980s, after which it moved to Channel 4, where it was a
   lunch-time fixture for many years through to the early 2000s. Later
   broadcasts of the show featured the hour-long episodes in a format of
   two half-hour episodes. 120 countries have aired the show, many of
   which partnered with Sesame Workshop to create local versions.

   In recent years Sesame Street has made what area educators consider to
   be critical advances in its international versions. In the late 1990s
   versions appeared in China and Russia as these countries shifted away
   from communism. There is also a joint Israeli- Palestinian-Jordanian
   project, called Sesame Stories, which was created with the goal of
   promoting greater cultural understanding.

   The show has also spawned the spin-off series Play with Me Sesame, ESL
   program Sesame English, the "classics" show Sesame Street Unpaved, and
   the segment-only series Open Sesame. Elmo's World and Global Grover,
   both of which are segments of Sesame Street, have been distributed as
   individual series. Jennifer Monier-Williams, Vice President, Worldwide
   Television Distribution at Sesame Workshop commented "The expansion of
   the Sesame brand through wonderfully interactive shows like Play With
   Me Sesame and Elmo's World give children around the globe new ways to
   experience fun and learning in the way Sesame does it best."

Funding

   Funding for season 37 of Sesame Street is provided by a Ready To Learn
   grant in partnership with the No Child Left Behind Act, the McDonald's
   Corporation, Beaches Family Resorts, Pampers and EverydayKidz.com from
   Astra Zeneca. Major funding for Sesame Street is provided by The
   Corporation for Public Broadcasting (1972-1998, 2000) and by
   contributions to your PBS stations from " Viewers Like You." Previous
   donors of funding for Sesame Street included Chuck E. Cheese's, the
   Ford Foundation, Discovery Zone, AOL (2002), U.S. Department of
   Education, and the Carnegie Corporation of New York.

   Occasionally local businesses and organizations fund local telecasts of
   Sesame Street on PBS stations throughout the U.S. For example, the W.
   M. Keck Foundation underwrites the broadcast of Sesame Street on KCET
   in Los Angeles.

   Within the context of the show, and before the actual underwriting
   announcements, it is announced that "Sesame Street is brought to you
   by" the letters and numbers of the day, as though they too were
   sponsors.

Ratings

   As a result of its success in revolutionizing the standards of
   children's television, Sesame Street inadvertently diminished its own
   audience share. According to PBS Research, the show went from a 2.0
   average on Nielsen Media Research's "people meters" in 1995 – 96 to a
   1.3 average in 2000 – 01. Even with this decrease, Sesame Street's
   viewership in an average week came from roughly 5.6 million households
   with 7.5 million viewers. This placed Sesame at 8th place in the
   overall kids' charts, as of 2002. The program fares better among
   mothers aged 18 – 49 who had children under the age of 3, taking second
   place.

   A format change helped the show's ratings, boosting them up 31% in
   February 2002 among children aged 2 to 5, in comparison to its ratings
   in 2001. As of 2005, Sesame Street and three other PBS shows are in the
   top 10 shows for children aged 2 to 5. As of season 36 in 2005, there
   were eight million viewers daily.

Characters

   An Oscar the Grouch puppet (shown) and Sesame Street sign both reside
   in the Smithsonian National Museum of American History.
   Enlarge
   An Oscar the Grouch puppet (shown) and Sesame Street sign both reside
   in the Smithsonian National Museum of American History.

   Sesame Street is known for its multicultural element and is inclusive
   in its casting, incorporating roles for disabled people, young people,
   senior citizens, Hispanic actors, Black actors, and others. While some
   of the puppets look like people, others are animal or "monster" puppets
   of different sizes and colors. This encourages children to believe that
   people come in all different shapes, sizes, and colors, and that no
   particular physical "type" is any better than another. Jim Henson
   commented that "The only kids who can identify along racial lines with
   the Muppets have to be either green or orange."

   In harmony with its multiculturalist perspective, the show pioneered
   the idea of occasionally inserting very basic Spanish words and phrases
   to help young children become acquainted with the concept of a foreign
   language, doing so almost three decades before Dora the Explorer made
   her debut on Nickelodeon. Perhaps in response to the popularity of
   Dora, the recently revamped format gives Rosita, the bilingual muppet
   who "emigrated" in 1993 from the Mexican version of the show, more time
   in front of viewers, and also introduced the more formalized "Spanish
   Word of the Day" in every episode.

   Each of the puppet characters has been designed to represent a specific
   stage or element of early childhood, and the scripts are written so
   that the character reflects the development level of children of that
   age. This helps the show address not only the learning objectives of
   various age groups, but also the concerns, fears, and interests of
   children of different age levels.

The Muppets

   Big Bird is an 8-foot 2-inch-tall yellow canary who lives in a large
   nest on an abandoned lot which is located behind 123 Sesame Street's
   garbage heap. Big Bird is often visited by his friend Aloysius
   Snuffleupagus, who is a very large, brown woolly elephant-like creature
   and is known more popularly by his nickname "Snuffy". Various other
   snuffleupaguses have appeared on the show from time to time, most
   notably Snuffy's little sister Alice and his unnamed mother. Initially,
   Snuffy showed up when no one but Big Bird was around, leaving the rest
   of the neighbourhood to think he was imaginary. In the mid-1980s,
   however, Snuffy was revealed to be "real" and incorporated into the
   regular cast of the show.

   Oscar the Grouch, who loves trash, lives with his pet worm Slimey and
   his pet elephant Fluffy in a garbage can in the heap. Bert and Ernie,
   two of the most-recognized Muppets, are friends who room together in
   the basement apartment of 123 Sesame Street, and regularly engage in
   comic routines which showcase their odd-couple personalities. Ernie's
   flowerbox was once a hotspot for Twiddlebugs, a colorful family of
   insects.

   The Bear family, which resembles the bears of Goldilocks and the Three
   Bears, resides in Sesame Street. This family, headed by Papa Bear and
   Mama Bear, welcomed their second child Curly Bear, and Baby Bear became
   a good friend of the monsters Telly and Zoe, Mexico-born Rosita, and
   the furry, red preschooler Elmo. Elmo has his own segment near the end
   of each episode, in which viewers explore topics in Elmo's World, an
   imaginary version of his house. New to Sesame Street is Abby Cadabby, a
   fairy-in-training who attends Storybook Community School with Baby
   Bear.

   Grover's regular segment, Global Grover, follows the self-described
   "cute, furry monster" around the world as he explores local cultures
   and traditions. Grover has had several notable roles over the years,
   often as a waiter or a superhero (Super-Grover). Cookie Monster fights
   with his conscience daily during Letter of the Day, as he tries to
   control his urges to eat the letters, shown as icing on cookies.
   Prairie Dawn often attempts to help Cookie Monster refrain from eating
   the letters, but never succeeds and always leaves frazzled. Count von
   Count has fewer problems during the Number of the Day segment, where he
   indulges in counting until the mystery number is revealed by his pipe
   organ.

   Humphrey and Ingrid are a married couple who have a baby named Natasha,
   and they are the proprietors of the hotel known as The Furry Arms,
   which is located near the Sesame Street Subway station. The hotel's
   bellhop, Benny Rabbit, tends to be easily irritated, but begrudgingly
   helps out.

   Kermit the Frog hosted the segment Sesame Street News Flash. In other
   segments, Kermit would play straight man to the wacky antics of other
   Muppets. The Two-Headed Monster sounded out words coming together, and
   the Yip-Yip aliens discovered telephones and typewriters. For two
   seasons, Googel, Narf, Mel and Phoebe hung out in the Monster's
   Clubhouse.

   Incidental characters include television personality Guy Smiley,
   construction workers Sully and Biff, the large Herry Monster (who does
   not know his own strength), and The Big Bad Wolf, who is not a terror
   to the Street. Forgetful Jones, a cowboy with a short-term memory
   disorder, rode his trusty Buster the Horse with his girlfriend
   Clementine, and Rodeo Rosie was an early cowgirl.

The humans

   A slate of human regulars pull the zaniness of the Muppets back to
   reality. They were not always meant to serve this purpose. The show
   lost test viewers' attention during the Street Scenes, meaning Muppets
   needed to be added, to hide the fact it was educational.

   Music teacher Bob has been on Sesame Street since its inception. He
   dated Linda the local New York Library librarian, who was the first
   regular deaf character on television. Linda owns Barkley, a Muppet dog.
   The Robinson family are an African-American family that includes
   schoolteacher Gordon, nurse Susan, and adopted son Miles. The Puerto
   Rican Rodriguez Family include Maria and Luis, who ran the Fix-It Shop,
   which was turned into the Mail-It Shop; Maria gave birth to daughter
   Gabby in 1986, and her pregnancy was covered on the show.

   General store and restaurant operator Harold Hooper, played by actor
   Will Lee, was a mainstay at Mr. Hooper's Store. When Lee died in 1982,
   the producers opted to help their young viewers deal with the death of
   someone they loved rather than cast a new actor in the role, and the
   character's death was discussed in a landmark 1983 episode. Afterwards,
   Hooper's apprentice David took over, followed by later owners Gina, Mr.
   Handford, and Alan. Gina stopped running the store in the 1990s, to
   earn a PhD and became a veterinarian.

   Mr. Noodle and his brother and sister, who appear only in Elmo's World
   are meant to provide a vaudevillian perspective on subjects, contrary
   to most of the show's current human characters (though reminiscent of
   such earlier insert characters as Buddy and Jim, Larry and Phyllis, and
   The Mad Painter).

   Famous guest stars and various children from New York schools and
   day-care centers are a constantly changing part of the cast, including
   children who would later become celebrities, like actor Tyler James
   Williams, and rapper GM Grimm.

Cast and crew

   Over the 37 seasons of Sesame Street hundreds, if not thousands of
   people have worked on the show's cast and in their crew, producing
   Street scenes or segments, or working behind the scenes.
     * List of Sesame Street puppeteers
     * Human characters on Sesame Street
     * Crew of Sesame Street

Regional variations of the show

   Basil the Bear from Canada's Sesame Park, in a knight's armour. The
   puppet, as well as most of the series cast, is displayed at the CBC
   Museum.
   Enlarge
   Basil the Bear from Canada's Sesame Park, in a knight's armour. The
   puppet, as well as most of the series cast, is displayed at the CBC
   Museum.

   Some countries have co-produced their own unique versions of Sesame
   Street, in which the characters and segments represent their country's
   cultures. Other countries simply air a dubbed version of Sesame Street,
   or a dubbed version of Open Sesame. Among various other countries,
   Australia has and still does broadcast the American version on the ABC
   and the UK had broadcast the American show, on Channel 4 until 2001
   when it was replaced with Henson production The Hoobs.

   Dubbed versions include Seesamtie in Finnish, Boneka Sesame in
   Indonesian, Sesam Opnist Pû in Icelandic, Sesamo Apriti in Italian,
   Sezamé Otevri Se in Czech, and Malay Taman Sesame. In 2004, one
   Japanese network cancelled the dubbed American Sesame, while another
   created a local version. In New Zealand, locally produced segments
   entitled "Korero Māori" (in English: "let's speak Māori") were inserted
   into episodes to educate children in the Māori language. Spanish
   program La Cometa Blanca also includes segments from Sesame Street.

   Locally produced adaptations of Sesame Street include:
     * 1972: Vila Sésamo, Brazil
     * 1972: Plaza Sésamo, Mexico
     * 1973: Sesamstraße, Germany
     * 1973: Canadian Sesame Street, Canada (reformatted as Sesame Park in
       the 1990s)
     * 1976: Sesamstraat, Netherlands
     * 1978: 1, rue Sesame, France
     * 1979: Iftah Ya Simsim, Kuwait
     * 1979: Barrio Sésamo, Spain
     * 1981: Svenska Sesam, Sweden
     * 1983: Rechov Sumsum, Israel
     * 1984: Sesame! (Batibot), Philippines
     * 1986: Susam Sokağı, Turkey
     * 1989: Rua Sésamo, Portugal
     * 1991: Sesam Stasjon, Norway
     * 1996: Ulitsa Sezam, Russia
     * 1996: Ulica Sezamkowa, Poland
     * 1998: Rechov Sumsum and Shara'a Simsim, Israel and Palestinian
       Territories

     * 1998: Zhima Jie, China
     * 1999: Sesame English, Taiwan, China, Italy, Poland
     * 2000: Takalani Sesame, South Africa
     * 2000: Alam Simsim, Egypt
     * 2002: Play with Me Sesame, the Great Britiain
     * 2003: Open Sesame, Australia
     * 2004: Koche Sesame, Afghanistan
     * 2004: Sesame Street, Japan
     * 2005: Sisimpur, Bangladesh
     * 2005: 5, Rue Sésame, France
     * 2005: Sabai Sabai Sesame, Cambodia
     * 2006: Galli Galli Sim Sim, India
     * 2007: Sesame Indonesia (as announced by Condoleezza Rice during her
       visit to Indonesia in 2006)
     * 2007?: Sesame Brazil
     * 2007?: Sesame Street (Northern Ireland)
     * Hikayat Simsim, Jordan, Hikayat Simsim, Palestinian Territories,
       Sipurey Sumsum, Israel

   Note that dates solely refer to the year production on the series
   began.

Research

   Sesame Street has operated with a rigorous research standard since its
   foundation, to ensure that the programming is addressing the needs of
   its viewers. The Education and Research (E&R) department of Sesame
   Workshop is currently headed by Rosemarie T. Truglio, Ph. D. and
   Jeanette Betancourt, Ed. D. Truglio states that the level of
   interaction between E&R, Content, and Production is
   "[i]ntimately·hand-in-hand. They are not creating anything without our
   knowledge, our guidance and our review. We are involved in content
   development across all media platforms." This close-knit organizational
   structure has been an integral part of Sesame Workshop since it began.

   Writers create plots for Sesame Street scenes and segments, and the
   content is reviewed by the E&R team, which has authority to reject a
   script and force rewrites if the content is not acceptable. When a
   script is factually correct, but includes gray areas that may not be
   comprehensible to children, the writers and E&R work together to tweak
   everything. "A balance between content and humor" is always pursued,
   according to Truglio.

   In a national study of American mothers with children under age six,
   64% responded that they strongly believe Sesame Street is a leader and
   innovator in educational methods.

   Since 1998 Sesame Workshop has provided a great deal of content on its
   website and others such as Random House. The content is targeted at
   parents and children ranging in age from birth to school-age, and
   includes information on dozens of topics, such as appropriate parenting
   techniques, dealing with children's fears, development of literacy, and
   maintenance of good health.

   Research is funded by government grants, corporate and private
   donations (including, recently, The Prudential Foundation for the
   Sesame Beginnings program), and the profits gained from the sale of
   Sesame Workshop merchandise.

Healthy Habits for Life

   In 2005, Sesame Street launched its Healthy Habits for Life
   programming, to encourage young viewers to lead more active and
   nutritious lifestyles. A major catalyst for this was data published by
   the US Centers for Disease Control regarding obesity in children.

   Health content has existed on Sesame Street for years, but to a limited
   extent. In one instance press kits for a project were made available,
   news wires latched onto the story, and literally hundreds of newspapers
   reported that Cookie Monster was "going on a diet". In actuality there
   was no change to Cookie Monster's character. The new season featured a
   new segment with rapper Wyclef Jean singing the praises of fruits and
   vegetables, similar to segments in the 1990s which featured Cookie
   doing nearly the same.

   According to people from Sesame Workshop,


   Sesame Street

       Health has always been a part of our Sesame Street curriculum,
      therefore we will always be committed to ensuring kids are given
    information and messages that will help them become healthy and happy
     in their development. For season 36, we have turned up the dial in
            health, but it will always be part of our curriculum.


   Sesame Street

   The Workshop formed an Advisory Board consisting of experts such as
   Woodie Kessel, M.D., M.P.H., the Assistant Surgeon General of the
   United States. This board examines the research of other organizations,
   and also conducts pilot studies to determine which areas of research
   should be expanded, based on social, ethnic and socio-economic sections
   of the population.

   Characters Elmo and Rosita filmed public service announcements with
   various U.S. Governors in 2006.

Merchandising and endorsement

   Sesame Street is known for its extensive merchandising, which includes
   many books, magazines, video/audio media, and toys. A percentage of the
   money from any Sesame Workshop product goes to help fund Sesame Street
   or its international co-productions.

   Current licensors include Fisher-Price, Nakajima USA, Build-A-Bear
   Workshop (Build-An-Elmo and Build-A-Cookie Monster), Hasbro (Sesame
   Street Monopoly), Wooly Willy, Betty Crocker (Elmo Fruit Snacks), C&D
   Visionary (air freshners) and Children's Apparel Network. Former
   liscencees include Nintendo, Applause, Child Dimension, Gibson
   Greetings, Gorham Fine China, Ideal Toys, Milton Bradley Company,
   Palisades Toys, Questor, Radio Shack, Tyco, and the Western Publishing
   Company. Creative Wonders (a partnership between ABC and Electronic
   Arts) produced Sesame Street software for the PC, since at least 1996;
   Atari produced Sesame Street games in 1983. Before going bankrupt,
   Palisades Toys was to release a line of deluxe series action figures,
   for adults, as part of Sesame Workshop's push to expand into retro
   products for teens and adults.

   Tickle Me Elmo was one of the fastest selling toys of the 1996 season.
   Elmo starred in a Christmas special that year, in which he wished every
   day of the year was Christmas.

   Its fiction books are published on five continents, primarily by Random
   House in North America. Over 18 million Sesame Street books and
   magazines were purchased in 2005. The books often mention that children
   do not have to watch the show to benefit from its publications.

   Live touring show Sesame Street Live presents costumed actors and
   dancers as characters from the series, in original plots. In recent
   years, VEE has had four touring casts, each performing a unique
   multi-million dollar budget show. Each season, the tours reach 160
   different cities across North America, reaching 2 million people
   annually. Since the first production of Sesame Street Live on September
   17, 1980, 48 million children and their parents have seen the show
   performed, across the world.

   Langhorne, Pennsylvania, United States, is the long-time home to Sesame
   Street theme park Sesame Place. New to the park for summer 2006 are
   three new rides themed to the popular Elmo's World segments. Another
   theme park, Parque Plaza Sésamo, exists in Monterrey, Mexico, and
   Universal Studios Japan includes a three-dimensional movie based on the
   show.

   The Sesame Beginnings line, launched in mid-2005, consists of apparel,
   health and body, home, and seasonal products. The products in this line
   are designed to accentuate the natural interactivity between infants
   and their parents. Most of the line is exclusive to a family of
   Canadian retailers that includes Loblaws, Fortinos, and Zehrs.

   Although Sesame Street characters occasionally endorse non-educational
   products, they rarely appear in their puppet form, to limit the
   suggestion to children that the characters are formally endorsing the
   product. The Muppets do appear in puppet form to endorse select causes.
   Big Bird has promoted safe seating practices and the wearing of
   seatbelts, for the Ford Motor Company, while Grover promoted a new
   course on children's informal learning, created by Harvard University
   with Sesame Workshop. Elmo has appeared before the US Education
   Appropriations Subcommittee to urge more spending on music in schools.

Internationally

   Plaza Sésamo, Sesamstraße, and Sesamstraat have all had merchandise of
   their local characters. Shalom Sesame videos and books have also been
   released.

   The Licensing Company Ltd. owns the British rights to Sesame Street.
   Its licensees include Reed Books Children's Publishing for books. In
   2004, Copyright Promotions Licensing Group (CPLG) became Sesame
   Workshop's licensing representative for The Benelux.

Web site

   Sesame Street's Web site was one of the first to include educational
   materials, for both parents and children. "There are downloadable games
   plus number- and alphabet-coloring pages for the children. Their
   parents can consult references covering everything from how to comb
   their baby's hair to how to play with their 4-year-old." The Web site
   has been recommended by academic journals. It receives over 1 million
   visitors daily.

Movies, videos, and specials

   A series of Sesame Street telefilms have featured the characters on day
   trips or in foreign countries. Don't Eat the Pictures: Sesame Street at
   the Metropolitan Museum of Art (1983) saw the cast locked in the
   gallery overnight; Big Bird and Snuffy help a cursed boy pharaoh. NBC's
   Big Bird in China (1983) followed Big Bird, Barkley, and their new
   friend Xiao Foo traveling through China to find Feng Huang, the phoenix
   bird. In Big Bird in Japan (1988), the titular character gets lost. Out
   to Lunch (1974) features the cast of Sesame Street and The Electric
   Company taking over ABC News. Big Bird turned six in Big Bird's
   Birthday or Let Me Eat Cake (1991), despite being referred to as four
   years old previously. CinderElmo (1999) was a FOX special, with Keri
   Russell as the princess look for her match among the kingdom. Telly
   fears what the New Year will bring in Sesame Street Stays Up Late!
   (1993, DVD in 2004).

   Various strictly musical programs have been made. Julie Andrews and
   Perry Como performed with the Muppets on Julie on Sesame Street (1974).
   Evening at Pops: 1971 and Evening at Pops: 2001 are two special
   episodes of PBS series Evening at Pops variety show have featured
   Sesame Street characters. The Sesame Street Special (1988) also
   included many guest performances.

   Holiday special Christmas Eve on Sesame Street (1978) won an Emmy
   Award, while another special that year, A Special Sesame Street
   Christmas (1978), has mostly unfavourable reviews. Anniversary specials
   include A Walking Tour of Sesame Street with James Earl Jones (1979),
   Sesame Street: 20 And Still Counting (1989), All-Star 25th Birthday:
   Stars and Street Forever (1994) and Sesame Street Jam: A Musical
   Celebration (1994), and The Street We Live On (2004). Jon Stewart is
   set to host a "live" retrospective on the series on ABC, but is
   accidentally locked in his dressing room with the tapes. Elmo attempts
   to salvage the show, improvised, in Elmopalooza! (1998).

   In 1987 and 1992, episodes of Shalom Sesame were produced, focusing on
   introducing Jewish culture, customs, and language to Jewish-American
   children. International co-productions of Sesame Street have created
   many of their own specials as well.

   The characters have made appearance on television series including
   Between the Lions (2001), The Electric Company (1972, 1975), Emeril
   Live (2005), Fanfare, The Flip Wilson Show (1970), The Frugal Gourmet
   (1992, 1995, 1997), Hollywood Squares, Jeopardy!, Martha (2006), Martha
   Stewart Living, Mister Rogers' Neighbourhood (1981), Soul Man (1998),
   The Torkelsons (1991), The West Wing (2004), What's My Line?, and
   numerous talk shows and mornings shows, ranging from The Ed Sullivan
   Show to the The Today Show.

   Characters have also appeared on specials and videos not related to the
   series, including The Grover Monster and Jean Marsh Cartoon Special
   (1975), NBC Salutes the 25th Anniversary of the Wonderful World of
   Disney (1978), The Road to China (1979), I Love Liberty (1982), Kathie
   Lee Gifford's Lullabies for Little Ones (1996), and We Are Family
   (2005).

Feature films

   Two feature films based on the series have been made.

   Co-produced with Warner Bros., the 1985 film Sesame Street Presents:
   Follow that Bird revolved around authorities forcing Big Bird into
   adoption. Big Bird gets homesick and tired of his adoptive parents, and
   heads back to New York, when he is kidnapped by evil carnies ( Dave
   Thomas and Joe Flaherty); the residents of Sesame Street launch a
   cross-country search to find him.

   In the second Sesame Street theatrical film, called The Adventures of
   Elmo in Grouchland, fourteen years after Follow That Bird in 1999, Elmo
   spends time with his favorite blanket. After Zoe accidentally tears the
   blanket, when Elmo refuses to share, the blanket winds up in
   Grouchland, ruled by the Queen of Trash ( Vanessa Williams). Elmo
   ventures forth, to rescue his blanket from the villainous Huxley (
   Mandy Patinkin). Soon, the rest of the Sesame Street gang follow in
   pursuit.

   According to a rumor posted on /FILM, Elmo has suggested to TVguide.com
   that Elmo's World might later be turned into a movie.

Criticism

   Some educators criticized the show when it debuted, feeling that it
   would only worsen children's attention spans. This concern still exists
   today, although there is no conclusive proof of this being the case,
   even after more than 35 seasons of televised shows.

   In a letter to the Boston Globe, Boston University professor of
   education Frank Garfunkel commented "If what people want is for their
   children to memorize numbers and letters without regard to their
   meaning or use — without regard to the differences between children,
   then Sesame Street is truly responsive. To give a child 30 seconds of
   one thing and then to switch it and give him 30 seconds of another is
   to nurture irrelevance."

   In the magazine Childhood Education, Minnie P. Berson of SUNY Fredonia
   asked "Why debase the art form of teaching with phony pedagogy, vulgar
   sideshows, bad acting, and layers of smoke and fog to clog the eager
   minds of small children?"

   For an animation on the letter "J", the writers included "a day in
   jail." This drew criticism from San Francisco Chronicle columnist
   Terrence O'Flaherty, despite executive producer David Connell's
   assertion that kids are familiar with the word through shows like
   Batman and Superman, and that "when you're trying to come up with a lot
   of words starting with J, you soon run short" of words they are already
   familiar with.

   The series also met with criticism in its attempts to help the
   underprivileged. Educator Sister Mary Mel O'Dowd worried that the show
   might start to replace "personalized experiences". "If Sesame Street is
   the only thing ghetto kids have, I don't think it's going to do much
   good. It never hurts a child to be able to count to 10 or recognize the
   26 letters of the alphabet. But without the guidance of a teacher,
   he'll be like one of our preschoolers who was able to write 'CAUTION'
   on the blackboard after seeing it on the back of so many buses, and
   told me 'That says STOP.'"

   Though it is widely beloved, like a number of PBS shows (notably WGBH's
   Postcards From Buster) Sesame Street has long had to contend with those
   who disagree with its social content. Gerald S. Lesser comments in his
   book Children and Television: Lessons from Sesame Street that the show
   faced hostility in the southern United States when it first aired
   because it portrayed people of various races mingling peacefully.^[
   citations needed] At first the Commission for Educational Television in
   Mississippi refused to air the show. However, the commission had no
   choice but to allow their local public television stations to air the
   show when commercial stations in Mississippi said they would air the
   program themselves.

Rumors and urban legends

   While many rumors have been started about the series, a few have been
   widely promulgated and perpetuated over the years.

   It has widely been suggested that Bert and Ernie are a gay couple, as
   they are apparently adult human males portrayed sharing a bedroom,
   though with separate beds. A 1980 collection of humorous essays by Kurt
   Andersen, titled The Real Thing, made light of the growing rumor. "Bert
   and Ernie conduct themselves in the same loving, discreet way that
   millions of gay men, women and hand puppets do. They do their jobs well
   and live a splendidly settled life together in an impeccably decorated
   cabinet." The rumor was promulgated repeatedly, so much so that by
   1993, Sesame Workshop had a prepared statement to send out to people
   inquiring on the topic. In a 1994 effort to get the characters banned,
   Rev. Joseph Chambers stated on his radio show: "Bert and Ernie are two
   grown men sharing a house and a bedroom. They share clothes, eat and
   cook together and have blatantly effeminate characteristics. In one
   show Bert teaches Ernie how to sew. In another they tend plants
   together. If this isn't meant to represent a homosexual union, I can't
   imagine what it's supposed to represent." Both Steve Whitmire as Ernie
   and Eric Jacobson as Bert have stated publicly that the characters are
   not gay. The alleged relationship has been parodied on the adult
   animated series Family Guy, and by Ernest & Bertram. The latter, a 2002
   short film that ran at the Sundance Film Festival, was the subject of a
   cease and desist order from the legal department of Sesame Workshop.
   The Broadway musical Avenue Q includes two characters similar to Bert
   and Ernie, who explore the issue of homosexuality.

   The pair's relationship bears similarity to that of Laurel and Hardy,
   who were also occasionally shown sleeping together; this became such a
   comedy staple as to be adopted by Morecambe and Wise in the 1970s, all
   of whom were similarly asexual. The Odd Couple is another, more
   apposite, contemporary comparison. Some adult viewers are upset by the
   assertions, as in their view, Ernie and Bert act like children,
   teenagers at the oldest, and are no more different than brothers or
   cousins who share a room.

   In 1990, puppeteer Jim Henson's death spurred rumors that Ernie would
   be "killed off" the show, much the way the character of Mr. Hooper was
   after actor Will Lee's passing some years earlier. Rumor said that he
   would be either killed by a vehicle, AIDS, or cancer. There was no
   legitimacy to this rumor, but because producers took their time
   recasting a puppeteer for Ernie, the delay allowed the claims to
   burgeon. A spokesperson for the series was quoted as saying "Ernie is
   not dying of AIDS, Ernie is not dying of leukemia. Ernie is a puppet".

   In 2002, Sesame Workshop announced that an HIV-positive character would
   be introduced to Takalani Sesame, the South African version of the
   show. Many conservatives and religious groups wrongly presumed that the
   American version would be getting a "gay Muppet", presumably because of
   the early historical connection between gays and HIV in the U.S., but
   the HIV-positive character is only present on this international
   version of the show. The character, Kami, contracted HIV from a blood
   transfusion as an infant.

DVD release of early episodes

   On October 24, 2006, Sesame Workshop released the first in a series of
   DVD sets titled Sesame Street: Old School 1969–1974. Aimed primarily at
   adult viewers who grew up watching the series in the early 1970s, the
   first 3-DVD set includes the first episode from seasons one and two,
   selected episodes from seasons three though five, montages of clips
   from each of the first five seasons, and a half-hour promotional film
   from early 1969 that was created to sell the idea to potential
   sponsors. Each episode is preceded by a newly made animated segment
   introducing the episode; notably, the segment that precedes the first
   episode from November 1969 includes a disclaimer warning parents that
   the DVD is aimed at adults and that these early episodes no longer
   necessarily reflect the most commonly accepted practices in preschool
   programming. The episodes were also altered slightly to reflect the
   ownership of the word “Muppet” and Kermit the Frog by Muppets Holding
   Company LLC, a wholly owned entity of the Walt Disney Company, which
   purchased the non-Sesame Street Muppets and all related trademarks in
   2004. Several segments were replaced on the DVD versions of the
   episodes because of rights issues as well. The NET logo and the 1970
   PBS logo were replaced with the 1971 PBS logo at the end of the
   premiere episodes of seasons one and two as well.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sesame_Street"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
