   #copyright

Severn crossing

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

   Aerial view of both Severn Bridges. The older bridge is in the
   foreground.
   Enlarge
   Aerial view of both Severn Bridges. The older bridge is in the
   foreground.
   The Severn Bridge seen from the English side of the river. From 1966 to
   1996, the bridge carried the M4 motorway. On completion of the Second
   Severn crossing the motorway from Aust on the English side to Rogiet
   was renamed the M48
   Enlarge
   The Severn Bridge seen from the English side of the river. From 1966 to
   1996, the bridge carried the M4 motorway. On completion of the Second
   Severn crossing the motorway from Aust on the English side to Rogiet
   was renamed the M48
   The Second Severn crossing, seen here from the English side of the
   river, carries the M4 motorway between England and Wales. The shipping
   channel lies between the two towers
   Enlarge
   The Second Severn crossing, seen here from the English side of the
   river, carries the M4 motorway between England and Wales. The shipping
   channel lies between the two towers

   The term Severn crossing is used specifically to refer to two motorway
   crossings over the estuary of the River Severn between England and
   Wales, despite there being many other bridges upstream. The two
   crossings are:
     * The original Severn Bridge ( Welsh: Pont Hafren)
     * The Second Severn Crossing (Welsh: Ail Groesfan Hafren)

   The first motorway suspension bridge was inaugurated on 8 September
   1966, and the newer cable-stayed bridge, a few miles to the south, was
   inaugurated on 5 June 1996.

   The two Severn crossings are nowadays generally regarded (at least by
   people in the south of England and South Wales) as the main crossing
   points from England into Wales. Prior to 1966 road traffic between the
   southern counties of Wales and the southern counties of England –
   including London – either had to travel via Gloucester or take the Aust
   Ferry, which ran roughly along the line of the Severn Bridge, from Old
   Passage near Aust to Beachley. The ferry ramps at Old Passage and
   Beachley are still visible.

   Tolls are collected on both crossings from vehicles travelling in a
   westward direction only. As of September 2006, the toll for a car is
   £4.90.

Railway crossing

   The Severn Tunnel, carrying mainline trains under the Severn, follows a
   very similar route to the Second Severn Crossing.

The Future

   The proposed Severn Barrage will constitute a third crossing if it is
   ever built. It is generally presumed that it would carry a road
   crossing. Until recently, a rail link over it had been ruled out
   because the barrage would contain a huge set of shipping locks that the
   rails would need to traverse. However, it has been suggested that a
   rail bridge could carry smaller, modern trains over the locks, so a
   rail link is possible.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Severn_crossing"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
