   #copyright

Seychelles

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Countries

                      Repiblik Sesel
   République des Seychelles
   Republic of Seychelles

   Flag of Seychelles Coat of arms of Seychelles
   Flag               Coat of arms
   Motto: "Finis Coronat Opus"  ( Latin)
   "The End Crowns the Work"
   Anthem: Koste Seselwa
   Location of Seychelles
   Capital
   (and largest city) Victoria
                      4°35′S 55°40′E
   Official languages English, French, Seychellois Creole
   Government         Republic
    - President       James Michel
      Independence    from the United Kingdom
    - Date            29 June 1976
                           Area
    - Total           455 km² ( 197th)
                      176 sq mi
    - Water (%)       negligible
                        Population
    - 2005 estimate   80,654 ( 199th)
    - Density         178/km² ( 60th)
                      458/sq mi
       GDP ( PPP)     2005 estimate
    - Total           $626 million ( 203rd)
    - Per capita      $11,818 ( 57th)
      HDI  ( 2003)    0.842 (high) ( 47th)
        Currency      Seychelles rupee ( SCR)
       Time zone      SCT ( UTC+4)
    - Summer ( DST)   not observed ( UTC+4)
      Internet TLD    .sc
      Calling code    +248

   Seychelles, officially the Republic of Seychelles ( pronounced
   /seɪˈʃɛl/ or /seɪˈʃɛlz/; French: République des Seychelles, pronounced
   /seʃɛl/; Creole: Repiblik Sesel), is an archipelago nation of 115
   islands in the Indian Ocean, some 1,600 km east of mainland Africa,
   northeast of the island of Madagascar. Other nearby island countries
   and territories include Zanzibar to the north, Mauritius and Réunion to
   the south, Comoros and Mayotte to the southwest, and the Suvadives of
   the Maldives to the northeast.

   In terms of population, Seychelles is the smallest sovereign state of
   Africa.

History

   While Austronesian seafarers or Arab traders may have been the first to
   visit the uninhabited Seychelles, the first recorded sighting of them
   took place in 1505, by the Portuguese. As a transit point for trading
   between Africa and Asia, they were occasionally used by pirates until
   the French began to take control of the islands starting in 1756,
   naming them after Jean Moreau de Sechelles, the then French finance
   minister.

   The British contested control over the islands with the French between
   1794 and 1811, with the British eventually gaining the upper hand and
   being ceded the islands in 1814. The Seychelles became a crown colony
   separate from Mauritius in 1903 and independence was granted in 1976,
   as a republic within the Commonwealth. The 1979 constitution declared a
   socialist one-party state, which lasted until 1992.

Politics

   The Seychelles president, who is both head of state and head of
   government, is elected by popular vote for a five-year term of office.
   The previous president, France Albert René, was democratically elected
   after the constitutional reforms of 1992, though he had been in power
   since a coup d'état in 1977. He stood down in 2004 in favour of his
   vice-president, James Michel. The cabinet is presided over and
   appointed by the president, subject to the approval of a majority of
   the legislature.

   The unicameral Seychellois parliament, the National Assembly or
   Assemblée Nationale, consists of 34 members, of whom 25 are elected
   directly by popular vote, while the remaining 9 seats are appointed
   proportionally according to the percentage of votes received by each
   party. All members serve five-year terms.

   Politics is a topic of hot debate in the country - with many claiming
   there is a social and economic divide between the two leading parties
   and their supporters.

   The Seychelles are part of the Indian Ocean Commission.

Administrative divisions

   The famous clock tower in the centre of Victoria, capital of
   Seychelles.
   Enlarge
   The famous clock tower in the centre of Victoria, capital of
   Seychelles.

   Seychelles is divided into twenty-five administrative regions, called
   districts:
     * Anse aux Pins
     * Anse Boileau
     * Anse Etoile
     * Anse Royale
     * Au Cap
     * Baie Lazare
     * Baie Sainte Anne

     * Beau Vallon
     * Bel Air
     * Bel Ombre
     * Cascade
     * Glacis
     * Grand' Anse (Mahe)
     * Grand' Anse (Praslin)

     * La Digue
     * La Riviere Anglaise
     * Les Mamelles
     * Mont Buxton
     * Mont Fleuri
     * Plaisance
     * Pointe La Rue

     * Port Glaud
     * Roche Caiman
     * Saint Louis
     * Takamaka

Geography

   Map of the Seychelles.
   Enlarge
   Map of the Seychelles.

   The Seychelles constitute an archipelago in the Indian Ocean of
   forty-one islands, of which thirty-three are inhabited. The group of
   islands around Mahé consist of granite and are the largest and most
   populated of the country. The remaining outer group consists of smaller
   coralline atolls. The capital city, Victoria, is situated on Mahé,
   which is the largest island and home to about 80% of the total
   population, as well as the Seychelles' highest point, the Morne
   Seychellois at 905 m.

   The local climate is tropical, tempered by marine influences and fairly
   humid. The southwest monsoon is a generally cooler season which lasts
   from late May to September, while the warmer northwest monsoon lasts
   from October to May. The Seychelles are fortunate to lie outside the
   tropical cyclone belt.

   Seychelles largely escaped the Asian Tsunami of December 2004 spawned
   by an earthquake. However, the islands did see significant flooding and
   damage, as well as the loss of marine life and a death toll of three
   people.

   The Seychelles also claims the Glorioso Islands, considering them a
   part of the Seychellois Archipelago
   Anse Lazio on Praslin, an island of the Seychelles.
   Enlarge
   Anse Lazio on Praslin, an island of the Seychelles.
   25-cent coins from Seychelles.
   Enlarge
   25-cent coins from Seychelles.

Economy

   Since independence in 1976, per capita output has expanded to roughly
   seven times the old near-subsistence level. Growth has been led by the
   tourist sector, which employs about 30% of the labour force and
   provides more than 70% of hard currency earnings, and by tuna fishing.
   In recent years the government has encouraged foreign investment in
   order to upgrade hotels and other services.

   At the same time, the government has moved to reduce the dependence on
   tourism by promoting the development of farming, fishing, and
   small-scale manufacturing. The vulnerability of the tourist sector was
   illustrated by the sharp drop in 1991- 1992 due largely to the
   country's significantly overvalued exchange rate, the Gulf War and once
   again following the September 11, 2001 attacks on the U.S.. Other
   issues facing the government are the curbing of the budget deficit,
   including the containment of social welfare costs, and further
   privatisation of public enterprises. The government has a pervasive
   presence in economic activity, with public enterprises active in
   petroleum product distribution, insurance, banking, imports of basic
   products, telecommunications, and a wide range of other businesses.

   Growth slowed in 1998– 2001, due to sluggish tourist and tuna sectors.
   Also, tight controls on exchange rates and the scarcity of foreign
   exchange have impaired short-term economic prospects. The black market
   value of the Seychelles rupee is half the official exchange rate;
   without a devaluation of the currency the tourist sector should remain
   sluggish as tourists seek cheaper destinations such as nearby Comoros
   and Madagascar. A reduction in the number of flights serving the
   country, primarily due to the inability by airline companies to
   repatriate funds, has also constrained the growth of the tourism
   industry. The recent entry of Emirates and Qatar airlines has yet to
   result in increased growth.

   At official exchange rates Seychelles remains the richest country in
   Africa in terms of GDP per capita. (US$7,504 as of 2005), although if
   the parallel exchange rate, or purchasing power parity rates, are used,
   it ranks behind Mauritius and Botswana. Because of economic contraction
   (the economy declined by about 2% in 2004 and 2005 and is set to
   decline by at least the same level in 2006) the country is moving
   downwards in terms of per capita income.

   It is important to note that Seychelles is, per capita, the most highly
   indebted country in the world according to the World Bank, with total
   public debt around 122.8% of GDP. Approximately two thirds of this debt
   is owed domestically, with the balance due to multilaterals, bilaterals
   and commercial banks. The country is in arrears to most of its
   international creditors and has had to resort to pledged commercial
   debt to continue to be able to borrow. This high debt burden is a
   direct consequence of the overvalued exchange rate — in essence, the
   country is living beyond its means, and financing its lifestyle by
   borrowing domestically and internationally.

Demographics

   Victoria, Seychelles.
   Enlarge
   Victoria, Seychelles.

   As the islands of the Seychelles had no indigenous population, the
   current Seychellois are composed of immigrants, mostly of French,
   African, Indian, and Chinese descent. French and English are official
   languages along with a French-based Creole. Most Seychellois are
   Christians, mostly Catholics.

Fauna and flora

   Palm spider, Seychelles.
   Enlarge
   Palm spider, Seychelles.

   The early colonial history of Seychelles is infamous for the
   disappearance of most of the giant tortoises from the granitic islands,
   felling of coastal and mid-level forests and extinction of species such
   as the Chesnut flanked white eye, the Seychelles parakeet and the
   saltwater crocodile. The Seychelles today is known for success stories
   in protecting its flora and fauna. Conservation started in the 1960's
   by a small group of local enthusiasts. Although many of the
   conservation laws date back to British colonial days, the Seychelles
   government has strictly protected the natural heritage of the islands
   for many years. Flagship species, the Seychelles Magpie Robin and the
   Seychelles Warbler, have been spectacularly rescued from the brink of
   extinction by BirdLife International, Nature Seychelles, Islands
   Conservation Society, private islands and the government. These birds,
   once restricted to one island each, have been translocated to many
   others. Seychelles has 12 endemic bird species including the Seychelles
   Flycatcher, Scops Owl, White Eye, Swiftlet, Kestrel, Blue Pigeon and
   Sunbird.

   Seychelles is home to 2 UNESCO World Heritage Sites run by the
   Seychelles Islands Foundation. They are the island of Aldabra, which is
   the world's largest raised coral atoll and also the Vallée de Mai on
   Praslin island, billed as the original site of the Garden of Eden. The
   Cousin Island Special Reserve, purchased by Royal Society for Nature
   Conservation in 1968 and managed by Nature Seychelles, is an
   internationally-known bird and marine sanctuary which has won several
   awards for conservation and ecotourism. Seychelles has six national
   marine parks including the St. Anne National Marine Park located
   adjacent to the capital, Port Victoria which are managed by the
   government parastatal, Marine Parks Authority. Much of the land
   territory (about 40%) and a substantial part of the coastal sea around
   Seychelles are protected as National Parks, including Marine Parks, and
   Reserves.

   Several private island owners, especially those with up market hotel
   resorts, have collaborated with the government and NGOs to restore
   island habitats and to re-introduce threatened species. These islands
   include Fregate, Denis and Cousine. The management of these islands now
   employ full time conservation officers and fund conservation
   programmes. The island restoration program has now been taken to the
   outer islands by the Island Conservation Society.

   The Seychelles are home to 81 endemic plant species. Well-known is the
   Coco de mer, a species of palm that grows only on the islands of
   Praslin and Curieuse. Sometimes nicknamed the 'love nut' because of its
   suggestive shape, the coco-de-mer is the world's largest seed. The
   jellyfish tree is to be found in only a few locations today. This
   strange and ancient plant has resisted all efforts to propagate it.
   Other unique plant species include the Wrights Gardenia found only on
   Aride Island Special Reserve.

   The giant tortoises from Aldabra now populate many of the islands of
   the Seychelles. These unique reptiles can be found even in captive
   herds. The granitic islands of Seychelles supported distinct species of
   giant tortoises.

   Seychelles hosts some of the largest seabird colonies in the world.
   Islands such as Bird, Aride, Cousin, Aldabra and Cosmoledo host many
   species of seabirds including the Sooty Tern, Fairy Tern, White-tailed
   Tropicbird, Noddies and Frigatebirds.

   The marine life around the islands, especially the more remote coral
   islands, can be spectacular. More than 1000 species of fish have been
   recorded. Since the use of spearguns and dynamite for fishing was
   banned through efforts of local conservationists in the 1960's, the
   wildlife is unafraid of snorklers and divers. Coral bleaching in 1998
   has unfortunately damaged most reefs. The taking of marine turtles was
   completely stopped in 1994, turtle populations are now recovering on
   several islands, most notably Cousin Island and Aldabra. The use of
   gill nets for shark fishing as well as the practice of shark finning
   are now banned.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seychelles"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
