   #copyright

Shigin

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Literature types

   Example gin with vocal annotation to the right of each character
   Enlarge
   Example gin with vocal annotation to the right of each character

   Shigin (詩吟) is a form of poetry, used in both Japanese poetry and
   traditional Chinese poetry which is usually chanted, either
   individually or within a group.

   Individual poems are termed gin (吟), and are usually composed of four
   or more lines of Chinese characters, or kanji (漢字), each line having
   the same number of characters. Gin with four phrases each seven
   characters long (the most common) are classified as shichigon-zekku
   (七言絶句), literally seven-word quatrains.

   There is strictly only one standard melody, although many poems will be
   distinguished by minor variations from this theme.

   The example below illustrates a typical gin, from a Song Dynasty poem:

   楓橋夜泊

   月落烏啼霜満天
   江楓漁火對愁眠
   姑蘇城外寒山寺
   夜半鐘声到客船


   Night mooring at the maple bridge

   The moon sets, crows call, frosty mists fill the heavens,
   Sleepless, illuminated by fishing lamps on the river,
   Outside Koso city, from the temple high up in the mountain,
   The midnight's bell call reaches the cruising ship.

   (NB: Subject terms have been added to give a sense to the poem, but no
   such terms exist in the original Japanese.)

Performance

   Members of a Shigin group will usually gather to train in a washitsu,
   or Japanese-style room with tatami matting. Practicers kneel in the
   seiza position, thought to be the optimum posture to allow strong and
   steady projection during chanting.

   Pariticipants are encouraged to focus their energy in their gut
   (thought in Zen to be the locus of power) and sing by slowly expelling
   this energy. Conversely, singing from the chest, as would be encouraged
   in classical Western operatic style, is deemed unauthentic.

   During practice, members may refer to the written gin to aid memory.
   This is usually annotated, with marks to the right of each character
   denoting how the tone should vary through the length of its
   vocalisation.

   Breathing intervals are indicated by right-angular strokes to the left
   of the character (a typical gin will last approximately one and a half
   minutes, in four breaths). Finally, because Japanese and Chinese word
   orders differ, further (sino) numerical marks to the left of some
   characters indicate their correct sequence.
   A rising then falling tone
   Enlarge
   A rising then falling tone
   Falling tone, usually ending a phrase
   Enlarge
   Falling tone, usually ending a phrase
   Steady tone, breath and numeric
   Enlarge
   Steady tone, breath and numeric

   Gin are formally performed standing, and from memory. Because of this,
   recital of longer gin is sometimes seen as more accomplished (being
   harder to remember, and more likely to vary from the standard melodic
   form). The vocal may be accompanied by traditional Japanese instruments
   such as the Koto or Shakuhachi. Dress may be Western ( suit) or
   traditional ( kimono or yukata).

History

   Shigin are thought to have originated in China early in the first
   millennium AD, and may have entered Japan amongst other texts brought
   back from China in the 5th century. They were most likely sung
   originally in Chinese, but were later given Japanese readings, which
   are used in their contemporary recital. New gin were written, often
   detailing particular Japanese concepts or events, but the standard
   written layout has remained.

   Shigin are thus significantly older than other, more popular Japanese
   poetry forms, such as Haiku. Their practice is now a minority art,
   mostly confined to the elderly and little known amongst younger
   generations. Nevertheless, several Shigin festivals are held throughout
   the year, including the Autumn Shigin Festival (秋吟会) in Shiogama, in
   the North-East ( Tōhoku) region of Japan. Gin are also sung at Buddhist
   ceremonies and quasi-religious gatherings in Japan.

   Moreover, although largely in anonymity, Shigin continue to have a
   significant influence on Japanese culture. Individual poems are often
   studied in Japanese textbooks, and are regularly displayed at
   exhibitions of Japanese calligraphy.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shigin"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
