   #copyright

Sikkim

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Asia

   Sikkim
   Map of India with the location of Sikkim highlighted.
   Capital
    -  Coordinates         Gangtok
                            -  27.2° N 88.4° E
   Largest city            Gangtok
   Population (2001)
    -  Density             540,493 ( 28th)
                            - 76.17/km²
   Area
    -  Districts           7,096 km² ( 27th)
                            - 4
   Time zone               IST ( UTC+5:30)
   Establishment
    -  Governor
    -  Chief Minister
    -  Legislature (seats) 16 May 1975
                            -  V. Rama Rao
                            -  Pawan Kumar Chamling
                            -  Unicameral (32)
   Official language(s)    Nepali
   Abbreviation (ISO)      IN-SK
   Website: sikkim.nic.in
   Seal of Sikkim
   Seal of Sikkim

   Sikkim (also Sikhim) ( Devanāgarī: सिक्किम pronunciation ) is a
   landlocked Indian state nestled in the Himalayas. It is the least
   populous state in India, and the third smallest in area after Delhi and
   Goa. Sikkim was an independent state ruled by the Namgyal monarchy
   until 1975, when a referendum was held and the population voted to join
   India as its twenty-second state. The thumb-shaped state borders Nepal
   in the west, Tibet (the People's Republic of China) to the north and
   east, and Bhutan in the south-east. The Indian state of West Bengal
   borders Sikkim to its south. The official languages are English,
   Bhutia, Nepali, Lepcha, and Limbu and Hindi. It must be noted though
   that almost all written transactions are in English. The predominant
   religions are Hinduism and Vajrayana Buddhism. Gangtok is the capital
   and largest town.

   Despite its tiny size, Sikkim is geographically diverse, owing to its
   location on the Himalaya. The climate ranges from subtropical to high
   alpine. Kanchenjunga, the world's third highest peak is located in
   Sikkim, straddling its northern border with Nepal. Sikkim has become
   one of India's most visited states, owing to its reputation of
   cleanliness, scenic beauty and political stability.

Origin of name

   The most widely accepted origin of the name Sikkim is that it is a
   combination of two words in the Limbu Su, which means "new", and Khyim,
   which means "palace" or house, in reference to the palace built by the
   state's first ruler, Phuntsok Namgyal. The Tibetan name for Sikkim is
   'Denjong, which means the "valley of rice".

History

   Statue of Guru Rinpoche, the patron saint of Sikkim. The statue in
   Namchi is the tallest statue of the saint in the world at 118 feet.
   Enlarge
   Statue of Guru Rinpoche, the patron saint of Sikkim. The statue in
   Namchi is the tallest statue of the saint in the world at 118 feet.

   The earliest recorded event related to Sikkim is the passage of the
   Buddhist saint Guru Rinpoche through the land in the 8th century. The
   Guru is reported to have blessed the land, introduced Buddhism to
   Sikkim, and foretold the era of monarchy in the state that would arrive
   centuries later. In the 14th century, according to legend, Khye Bumsa,
   a prince from the Minyak House in Kham in Eastern Tibet, had a divine
   revelation one night instructing him to travel south to seek his
   fortunes. His descendants were later to form the royal family of
   Sikkim. In 1642, the fifth generation descendant of Khye Bumsa,
   Phuntsog Namgyal, was consecrated as the first Chogyal (king) of Sikkim
   by the three venerated Lamas who came from the north, west and south to
   Yuksom, marking the beginning of the monarchy.

   Phuntsog Namgyal was succeeded in 1670 by his son, Tensung Namgyal, who
   moved the capital from Yuksom to Rabdentse. In 1700, Sikkim was invaded
   by the Bhutanese with the help of the half-sister of the Chogyal, who
   had been denied the throne. The Bhutanese were driven away by the
   Tibetans, who restored the throne to the Chogyal ten years later.
   Between 1717 and 1733, the kingdom faced many raids by the Nepalese in
   the west and Bhutanese in the east, culminating with the destruction of
   the capital Rabdentse by the Nepalese.
   Flag of the former monarchy of Sikkim.
   Enlarge
   Flag of the former monarchy of Sikkim.

   In 1791, China sent troops to support Sikkim and defend Tibet against
   the Gurkhas. Following Nepal's subsequent defeat, Sikkim became a
   suzerainty of Qing Dynasty. But Nepal still gained a big piece of land
   at west of Teesta.

   Following the arrival of the British Raj in neighbouring India, Sikkim
   allied with them against their common enemy, Nepal. The Nepalese
   attacked Sikkim, overrunning most of the region including the Terai.
   This prompted the British East India Company to attack Nepal, resulting
   in the Gurkha War of 1814. Treaties signed between Sikkim and Nepal —
   the Sugauli Treaty — and Sikkim and British India — Titalia Treaty —
   returned the territory annexed by the Nepalese to Sikkim in 1817. Ties
   between Sikkim and the British administrators of India grew sour,
   however, with the beginning of British taxation of the Morang region.
   In 1849 two British doctors, Sir Joseph Dalton Hooker and Dr. Archibald
   Campbell, the latter being in charge of relations between the British
   and Sikkim Government, ventured into the mountains of Sikkim
   unannounced and unauthorised. The doctors were detained by the Sikkim
   government, leading to a punitive British expedition against the
   Himalayan kingdom, after which the Darjeeling district and Morang were
   annexed to India in 1835. The invasion led to the chogyal's becoming a
   puppet king under the directive of the British governor.
   The Dro-dul Chorten Stupa is a famous stupa in Gangtok.
   Enlarge
   The Dro-dul Chorten Stupa is a famous stupa in Gangtok.

   In 1947, a popular vote rejected Sikkim's joining the Indian Union and
   Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru agreed to a special protectorate status
   for Sikkim. After a period of unrest in 1972-1973, matters came to a
   head in 1975, when the Kazi (Prime Minister) appealed to the Indian
   Parliament for representation and change of Sikkim's status to a state
   of India. A referendum was held in which 97.5% of the people voted to
   join the Indian Union. A few weeks later on May 16, 1975, Sikkim
   officially became the 22nd state of the Indian Union, and monarchy was
   abolished. Some still feel that Sikkim is occupied by India,
   particularly people around the former Royal Family.

   In 2000, in a major embarrassment for China, the seventeenth Karmapa
   Urgyen Trinley Dorje, who had been proclaimed a Lama by China, made a
   dramatic escape from Tibet to the Rumtek Monastery in Sikkim. Chinese
   officials were in a quandary on this issue as any protests to India on
   the issue would mean an explicit endorsment of India's governance of
   Sikkim, which the Chinese still regarded as an independent state
   occupied by India. China eventually recognised Sikkim as an Indian
   state in 2003, which led to a thaw in Sino-Indian relations. In return,
   India announced its official recognition of Tibet as an integrated part
   of China. As part of a significant pact between India and China signed
   by the prime ministers of the two countries, Manmohan Singh and Wen
   Jiabao, China released an official map clearly showing Sikkim as part
   of the Republic of India. On July 6, 2006 the Himalayan pass of Nathula
   was opened to cross-border trade, a further evidence of improving
   sentiment over the region.

Geography

   Himalayan peaks, Western Sikkim
   Enlarge
   Himalayan peaks, Western Sikkim

   The thumb-shaped state of Sikkim is characterised by wholly mountainous
   terrain. Almost the entire state is hilly, with the elevation ranging
   from 280 metres (920 feet) to 8,585 metres (28,000 feet). The summit of
   the Kanchenjunga is the highest point. For the most part, the land is
   unfit for agriculture because of the precipitous and rocky slopes.
   However, certain hill slopes have been converted into farm lands using
   terrace farming techniques and is used for cultivation. Numerous
   snow-fed streams in Sikkim have carved out river valleys in the west
   and south of the state. These streams combine into the Teesta and its
   tributary, the Rangeet. The Teesta, described as the "lifeline of
   Sikkim", flows through the state from north to south. About a third of
   the land is heavily forested.
   The Himalayan mountain range in North Sikkim.
   Enlarge
   The Himalayan mountain range in North Sikkim.

   The lofty Himalayan ranges surround the northern, eastern and western
   borders of Sikkim in a crescent. The populated areas lie in the
   southern reaches of the state, in the Lower Himalayas. The state has
   twenty-eight mountain peaks, twenty-one glaciers, 227 high altitude
   lakes, including the Tsongmo Lake, Gurudongmar and Khecheopalri Lakes,
   five hot springs, and over 100 rivers and streams. Eight mountain
   passes connect the state to Tibet, Bhutan and Nepal.
   Cities and towns of Sikkim.
   Enlarge
   Cities and towns of Sikkim.

Geology

   The hills of Sikkim mainly consist of gneissose and half-schistose
   rocks, making their soil brown clay, and generally poor and shallow.
   The soil is coarse, with large amounts of iron oxide concentrations,
   ranging from neutral to acidic and has poor organic and mineral
   nutrients. This type of soil tends to support evergreen and deciduous
   forests.

   A large portion of the Sikkim territory is covered by the Precambrian
   rock and is much younger in age than the hills. The rock consists of
   phyllites and schists and therefore the slopes are highly susceptible
   to weathering and prone to erosion. This, combined with the intense
   rain, causes extensive soil erosion and heavy loss of soil nutrients
   through leaching. As a result, landslides are frequent, isolating the
   numerous small towns and villages from the major urban centres.

Climate

   The climate ranges from sub-tropical in the south to tundra in the
   northern parts. Most of the inhabited regions of Sikkim, however, enjoy
   a temperate climate, with the temperatures seldom exceeding 28 ° C
   (82 ° F) in summer or dropping below 0 °C (32 °F) in winter. The state
   enjoys five seasons: winter, summer, spring, and autumn, and a monsoon
   season between June and September. The average annual temperature for
   most of Sikkim is around 18 °C (64 °F). Sikkim is one of the few states
   in India to receive regular snowfall. The snow line is around 6,000
   metres (19,600  feet).

   During the monsoon months, the state is lashed by heavy rains that
   increase the number of landslides. The state record for the longest
   period of non-stop rain is eleven days. In the northern region, because
   of high altitude, temperatures drop below −40 °C in winter. Fog also
   affects many parts of the state during winter and the monsoons, making
   transportation extremely perilous.

Sub-divisions

   The four districts of Sikkim and their Headquarters
   Enlarge
   The four districts of Sikkim and their Headquarters

   Sikkim has four districts, each overseen by a Central Government
   appointee, the district collector, who is in-charge of the
   administration of the civilian areas of the districts. The Indian army
   has control of a large territory, as the state is a sensitive border
   area. Many areas are restricted and permits are needed to visit them.
   There are a total of eight towns and nine sub-divisions in Sikkim.

   The four districts are East Sikkim, West Sikkim, North Sikkim and South
   Sikkim. The district capitals are Gangtok, Geyzing, Mangan and Namchi
   respectively. These Four Districts are further divided into
   Sub-Divisions. "Pakyong" is the sub-division of East District. "Soreng"
   is the sub-division of West District. "Chungthang" is the sub-division
   of North District. "Ravongla" is the sub-division of South District.

Flora and fauna

   The Rhododendron is the state tree.
   Enlarge
   The Rhododendron is the state tree.

   Sikkim is situated in an ecological hotspot of the lower Himalayas, one
   of only three among the Ecoregions of India. The forested regions of
   the state exhibit a diverse range of fauna and flora. Owing to its
   altitudinal gradiation, the state has a wide variety of plants, from
   tropical to temperate to alpine and tundra, and is perhaps one of the
   few regions to exhibit such a diversity within such a small area.

   The flora of Sikkim includes the rhododendron, the state tree, with a
   huge range of species occurring from subtropical to alpine regions.
   Orchids, figs, laurel, bananas, sal trees and bamboo in the lower
   altitudes of Sikkim, which enjoy a sub-tropical type climate. In the
   temperate elevations above 1,500 metres, oaks, chestnuts, maples,
   birchs, alders, and magnolias grow in large numbers. The alpine type
   vegetation includes juniper, pine, firs, cypresses and rhododendrons,
   and is typically found between an altitude of 3,500 metres to 5,000 m.
   Sikkim boasts around 5,000 flowering plants, 515 rare orchids, 60
   primulas species, 36 rhododendrons species, 11 oaks varieties, 23
   bamboos varieties, 16 conifer species, 362 types of ferns and ferns
   allies, 8 tree ferns, and over 424 medicinal plants. The orchid
   Dendrobium nobile is the official flower of Sikkim.
   The Himalayan Black Bear
   Enlarge
   The Himalayan Black Bear

   The fauna includes the snow leopard, the musk deer, the Bhoral, the
   Himalayan Tahr, the red panda, the Himalayan marmot, the serow, the
   goral, the barking deer, the common langur, the Himalayan Black Bear,
   the clouded leopard, the Marbled Cat, the leopard cat, the wild dog,
   the Tibetan wolf, the hog badger, the binturong, the jungle cat and the
   civet cat. Among the animals more commonly found in the alpine zone are
   yaks, mainly reared for their milk, meat, and as a beast of burden.

   The avifauna of Sikkim is comprised of the Impeyan pheasant, the
   crimson horned pheasant, the snow partridge, the snow cock, the
   lammergeyer and griffon vultures, as well as golden eagles, quail,
   plovers, woodcock, sandpipers, pigeons, Old World flycatchers, babblers
   and robins. A total of 550 species of birds have been recorded in
   Sikkim, some of which have been declared endangered.

Economy

Macro-economic trend

   This is a chart of trend of gross state domestic product of Sikkim at
   market prices estimated by Ministry of Statistics and Programme
   Implementation with figures in millions of Indian Rupees.
   Year Gross State Domestic Product
   1980 520
   1985 1,220
   1990 2,340
   1995 5,200
   2000 9,710

   Sikkim's gross state domestic product for 2004 is estimated at $478
   million in current prices.

   Sikkim's economy is largely agrarian, based on traditional farming
   methods, on terraced slopes. The rural populace grows crops such as
   cardamom, ginger, oranges, apples, tea and orchids. Rice is grown on
   terraced hillsides in the southern reaches. Sikkim has the highest
   production and largest cultivated area of cardamom in India. Because of
   the hilly terrain, and lack of reliable transportation infrastructure,
   there are no large-scale industries. Breweries, distilleries, tanning
   and watch-making are the main industries. These are located in the
   southern reaches of the state, primarily in the towns of Melli and
   Jorethang. The state has an impressive growth rate of 8.3%, which is
   the second highest in the country after Delhi.
   Elaichi or Cardamom is the chief cash crop of Sikkim.
   Enlarge
   Elaichi or Cardamom is the chief cash crop of Sikkim.

   In recent years, the government of Sikkim has promoted tourism. Sikkim
   has a vast tourism potential and by tapping into this the state has
   grossed an earnings windfall. With the general improvement in
   infrastructure, tourism is slated to be the mainstay of the Sikkim's
   economy. A fledgling industry the state has recently invested in is
   online gambling. The "Playwin" lottery, which is played on custom-built
   terminals connected to the internet, has been a commercial success,
   with operations all over the country. Among the minerals mined in
   Sikkim are copper, dolomite, limestone, graphite, mica, iron, and coal.

   The opening of the Nathula Pass on July 6, 2006 connecting Lhasa, Tibet
   to India is expected to give a boost to the local economy, though the
   financial benefits will be slow to arrive. The Pass, closed since the
   1962 Sino-Indian War, was an offshoot of the ancient Silk Route, which
   was essential to the wool, fur and spice trade.

Transport

   The River Teesta said to be the lifeline of Sikkim.
   Enlarge
   The River Teesta said to be the lifeline of Sikkim.

   Sikkim does not have any airports or railheads because of its rough
   terrain. The closest airport, Bagdogra Airport, is near the town of
   Siliguri, West Bengal. The airport is about 124 km away from Gangtok. A
   regular helicopter service run by the Sikkim Helicopter Service
   connects Gangtok to Bagdogra; the flight is thirty minutes long,
   operates only once a day, and can carry 4 people. The Gangtok helipad
   is the only civilian helipad in the state. The closest railway station
   is New Jalpaiguri which is situated sixteen kilometres from Siliguri.

   National Highway 31A links Siliguri to Gangtok. The highway is an
   all-weather metalled road which mostly runs parallel of the river
   Teesta, entering Sikkim at Rangpo. Numerous public and privately run
   bus and jeep services connect the airport, railway station, and
   Siliguri to Gangtok. A branch of the highway from Melli connects
   western Sikkim. Towns in southern and western Sikkim are connected to
   the northern West Bengal hill stations of Kalimpong and Darjeeling.
   Within the state, four wheel drives are the most popular means of
   transport, as they can navigate rocky slopes. Mini-buses link the
   smaller towns to the state and district headquarters.

Demographics

   A traditional Buddhist dwelling in Gangtok
   Enlarge
   A traditional Buddhist dwelling in Gangtok

   Today the majority of Sikkim's residents are of Nepali ethnic-national
   origin who came to the province in the 19th century. The native
   Sikkimese, consist of the Bhutias, who migrated from the Kham district
   of Tibet in the 14th Century, and the Lepchas who are believed to have
   migrated from the far east. Tibetans reside mostly in the northern and
   eastern reaches of the state. Immigrant resident communities not native
   to the state include the Marwaris, who own most of the shops in South
   Sikkim and Gangtok; the Biharis, most of whom are employed in blue
   collar jobs; and the Bengalis.

   Hinduism and Buddhism are the religions professed by most Sikkimese.
   Sikkim also has a small Christian population, consisting mostly of
   people of Lepcha origin, converted to the faith after British
   missionaries started preaching in the region in the late 19th century.
   The state has never had inter-religious strife. Mosques in downtown
   Gangtok and Mangan also serve the minuscule Muslim population.

   Nepali is the lingua franca of Sikkim. English and Hindi are also
   spoken and understood in most of Sikkim. Other languages spoken in
   Sikkim include Bhutia, Dzongkha, Groma, Gurung, Lepcha, Limbu, Magar,
   Majhi, Majhwar, Nepal Bhasa, Rai, Sherpa, Sunuwar, Tamang, Thulung,
   Tibetan, and Yakha.

   As India's least populous state, Sikkim has only 540,493 inhabitants,
   with 288,217 males and 252,276 females. It is also one of the least
   densely populated states with only 76 persons per square kilometre. Its
   growth rate is 32.98% (1991-2001). The sex ratio is 875 females per
   1000 males. With 50,000 inhabitants, Gangtok is the state's only
   significant town. The urban population in Sikkim is 11.06%. The per
   capita income stands at Rs. 11,356, which is one of the highest in the
   country.

Culture

   The Gumpa being performed in Lachung during the Buddhist festival of
   Losar.
   Enlarge
   The Gumpa being performed in Lachung during the Buddhist festival of
   Losar.

   Sikkim residents celebrate all major Indian festivals such as Diwali
   and Dussera, the popular Hindu festivals. Losar, Loosong, Saga Dawa,
   Lhabab Duechen, Drupka Teshi and Bhumchu are Buddhist festivals that
   are also celebrated. During the Losar – the Tibetan New Year in
   mid-December – most government offices and tourist centres are closed
   for a week. Christmas has also recently been promoted in Gangtok to
   attract tourists during the off-season.

   It is common to hear Western rock music being played in homes and in
   restaurants even in the countryside. Hindi songs have gained wide
   acceptance among the masses. Indigenous Nepali rock, music suffused
   with a Western rock beat and Nepali lyrics, is also particularly
   popular. Football and cricket are the two most popular sports.

   Noodle-based dishes such as the thukpa, chowmein, thanthuk, fakthu,
   gyathuk and wonton are common in Sikkim. Momos, steamed dumplings
   filled with vegetable, buff (buffalo's meat) or pork and served with a
   soup is a popular snack. The mountainous peoples have a diet rich in
   beef, pork and other meats. Alcohol is cheap owing to the low excise
   duty in Sikkim and beer, whiskey, rum and brandy are consumed by many
   Sikkimese.

   Almost all dwellings in Sikkim are rustic, consisting of a bamboo
   frame, woven with pliable bamboo and coated with cow dung, providing a
   warm interior. In the higher elevations, houses are made of wood.

Government and politics

   The White Hall complex houses the residences of the Chief Minister and
   Governor of Sikkim.
   Enlarge
   The White Hall complex houses the residences of the Chief Minister and
   Governor of Sikkim.

   Like all states of India, the head of the state government is a
   governor appointed by the Central Indian Government. His appointment is
   largely ceremonial, and his main role is to oversee the swearing in of
   the Chief Minister. The Chief Minister, who holds the real executive
   powers, is the head of the party or coalition garnering the largest
   majority in the state elections. The governor also appoints the cabinet
   ministers on the advice of the Chief Minister. Sikkim has a unicameral
   legislature like most other Indian states. Sikkim is allocated one seat
   in each of both chambers of India's national bicameral legislature, the
   Lok Sabha, and the Rajya Sabha. There are a total of 32 state assembly
   seats including one reserved for the Sangha. The Sikkim High Court is
   the smallest high court in the country.

                                                    CAPTION: State symbols

                                               State animal      Red Panda
                                                 State bird Blood Pheasant
                                                 State tree   Rhododendron
                                               State flower   Noble orchid

   In 1975, after the abrogation of Sikkim's monarchy, the Congress Party
   got the largest majority in the 1977 elections. In 1979, after a period
   of instability, a popular ministry headed by Nar Bahadur Bhandari,
   leader of the Sikkim Sangram Parishad Party was sworn in. Bhandari held
   on to power in the 1984 and 1989 elections. In the 1994 elections Pawan
   Kumar Chamling from the Sikkim Democratic Front becoming the Chief
   Minister of the state. The party has since held on to power by winning
   the 1999 and 2004 elections.

Infrastructure

   Tibetology Museum and research centre
   Enlarge
   Tibetology Museum and research centre

   Roads in Sikkim are in a poor condition because most are exposed to
   landslides and flooding by nearby streams. The roads are maintained by
   the Border Roads Organisation (BRO), an offshoot of the Indian army.
   The roads in South Sikkim and NH-31A are in a good condition,
   landslides being less frequent in these areas. The state government
   maintains 1857.35 km of roadways that do not fall in the BRO
   jurisdiction.

   Sikkim has a number of hydroelectric power stations, providing a steady
   electricity source. However the voltage is unstable and voltage
   stabilisers are needed. Per capita consumption of electricity in Sikkim
   is 182  kWh. 73.2% of households have access to safe drinking water,
   and the large number of streams assures abundant water supply, thus the
   state never witnesses droughts.

Education

   Literacy is 69.68%, which breaks up into 76.73% for males and 61.46%
   for females.= There are a total of 1545 government-run educational
   institutions and eighteen private schools mostly located in the towns.
   There are about twelve colleges and other institutions in Sikkim that
   offer higher education. The largest institution is the Sikkim Manipal
   University of Health Medical and Technological Sciences which offers
   higher education in engineering, medicine and management. It also runs
   a host of distance education in diverse fields. There are two state-run
   polytechnics, Advanced Technical Training Centre (ATTC) and Centre for
   Computers and Communication Technology (CCCT) in Sikkim which offer
   diploma courses in various branches of engineering. ATTC is situated at
   Bardang, Singtam and CCCT at Chisopani, Namchi. Many students however,
   migrate to Siliguri and Calcutta for their higher education.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sikkim"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
