   #copyright

Snake charming

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Recreation

   Snake charming is the practice of apparently hypnotising a snake by
   simply playing an instrument. A typical performance may also include
   handling the snakes or performing other seemingly dangerous acts, as
   well as other street performance staples, like juggling and sleight of
   hand. The practice is most common in India, though other Asian nations
   such as Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Malaysia are also home to
   performers, as are the North African countries of Egypt, Morocco and
   Tunisia.

   Ancient Egypt was home to one form of snake charming, though the
   practice as it exists today likely arose in India. It eventually spread
   throughout Southeast Asia, the Middle East, and North Africa. Despite a
   sort of golden age in the 20th century, snake charming is today in
   danger of dying out. This is due to a variety of factors, chief among
   them the recent enforcement of a 1972 law in India banning ownership of
   serpents. In retaliation, snake charmers have organised in recent
   years, protesting the loss of their only means of livelihood, and the
   government has made some overtures to them.

   Many snake charmers live a wandering existence, visiting towns and
   villages on market days and during festivals. With a few rare
   exceptions, however, they typically make every effort to keep
   themselves from harm's way. For one, the charmer typically sits out of
   biting range, and his animal is sluggish and reluctant to attack
   anyway. More drastic means of protection include removing the
   creature's fangs or venom glands, or even sewing the snake's mouth
   shut. The most popular species are those native to the snake charmer's
   home region, typically various kinds of cobra, though vipers and other
   types are also used.

History

   Though serpents have featured prominently in man's religions for
   centuries, the earliest evidence for snake charming comes from Ancient
   Egyptian sources. Charmers there mainly acted as magicians and healers.
   As literate and high-status men, part of their studies involved
   learning the various types of snake, the gods to whom they were sacred,
   and how to treat those who were bitten by the reptiles. Entertainment
   was also part of their repertoire, and they knew how to handle the
   animals and charm them for their patrons.
   Snakes have long been popular subjects of Hindu art.
   Enlarge
   Snakes have long been popular subjects of Hindu art.

   Snake charming as it exists today probably originated in India.
   Hinduism has long held serpents to be sacred; the animals are related
   to the Nagas, and many gods are pictured under the protection of the
   cobra. Indians thus considered snake charmers to be holy men who were
   influenced by the gods.

   The earliest snake charmers were likely traditional healers by trade.
   As part of their training, they learned to treat snakebite. Many also
   learned proper snake handling techniques, and people called on them to
   remove serpents from their homes. Baba Gulabgir (or Gulabgarnath)
   became their Guru, since his legend states that he taught people to
   revere the reptiles, not fear them. The practice eventually spread to
   nearby regions, ultimately reaching North Africa and Southeast Asia.

   The early 20th century proved something of a golden age for snake
   charmers. Governments promoted the practice to draw tourism, and snake
   charmers were often sent overseas to perform at cultural festivals and
   for private patrons. In addition, the charmers provided a valuable
   source of snake venom for creating antivenins.

   Today, only about one million snake charmers remain in India; theirs is
   a dying profession. One reason for this is the rise of cable
   television; nature documentaries have extinguished much of the fear and
   revulsion once felt toward the animals and thus demystified the snake
   charmer. In addition, many people have less spare time than they once
   did, especially children, who in previous decades could watch a charmer
   all day with no commitments to school. Animal-rights groups have also
   made an impact by decrying what they deem to be the abuse of a number
   of endangered species. Another factor is urbanisation and
   deforestation, which have made the snakes upon which the charmers rely
   increasingly rare. This has in turn given rise to the single most
   important reason snake charming is declining, at least in India: It is
   no longer legal.

   India passed the Wildlife Protection Act in 1972. The law originally
   aimed at preventing the export of snakeskins, introducing a seven-year
   prison term for owning or selling of the creatures. Beginning in the
   late 1990s, however, animal-rights groups convinced the government to
   enforce the law with regard to snake charmers as well. As a result, the
   charmers were forced to move their performances to less-travelled areas
   such as small villages, or else to pay hefty bribes when caught by
   police officers. The trade is hardly a profitable one anymore, and many
   practitioners must supplement their income by begging, scavenging, or
   working as day labourers. Children of snake charmers increasingly
   decide to leave the profession to pursue higher-paying work, and many
   fathers do not try to make them reconsider. Modern Indians often view
   snake charmers as little more than beggars.

   In recent years, however, the snake charmers have struck back. In 2003,
   for example, hundreds of them gathered at the temple of Charkhi Dadri
   in Haryana to bring international attention to their plight. In
   December of the following year, a group of snake charmers actually
   stormed the legislature of the Indian state of Orissa with their
   demands, all the while brandishing their animals. The Indian government
   and various animal-rights groups have now acknowledged the problem. One
   suggestion is to train the performers to be snake caretakers and
   educators. In return, they could sell their traditional medicines as
   souvenirs. Another proposal would try to focus attention on the snake
   charmer's music; the charmer would be like other street musicians. The
   Indian government has also begun allowing a limited number of snake
   charmers to perform at specified tourist sites.

Performance technique

   Snake charmers typically walk the streets holding their serpents in
   baskets or pots hanging from a bamboo pole slung over the shoulder.
   Charmers cover these containers with cloths between performances. Dress
   in India and neighbouring countries is generally the same: long hair, a
   white turban, earrings, and necklaces of shells or beads. Once the
   performer finds a satisfactory location to set up, he sets his pots and
   baskets about him (often with the help of a team of assistants who may
   be his apprentices) and sits cross-legged on the ground in front of a
   closed pot or basket. He removes the lid, then begins playing a
   flute-like instrument made from a gourd, known as a been or pungi. As
   if drawn by the tune, a snake eventually emerges from the container; if
   a cobra, it may even extend its hood. The reptile then begins swaying
   to and fro in time with the musician's tune, apparently hypnotised. The
   snake never strikes, and the charmer may go as far as kissing the
   creature on the head. Amazed onlookers throw coins and bills to the
   successful performer. Eventually, as if on cue, the snake returns to
   its container, the charmer replaces the lid, and he gathers up his
   earnings. Alternatively, the charmer may handle his animals, daring his
   audience to touch them. Almost no one does. Once he has earned all he
   can from his current viewers, he moves on to perform somewhere else.

   In reality, standing erect and extending the hood is a normal defensive
   reaction for a cobra and simply indicates the snake's startled reaction
   to losing its darkened environment. Charmers may even wave their
   instrument over the opening (in such a way as to not arouse audience
   attention) in order to prompt the creature to emerge. As for the
   snake's swaying movement, it is actually a reaction to the movement of
   the performer's instrument and sometimes the tapping of his foot. The
   animal cannot actually hear the tune being played, though it can
   perhaps feel some of the sound vibrations as well as those from any
   tapping by the charmer. The serpent's evident reluctance to attack is
   explained by its timid nature; most snakes prefer to scare off possible
   predators rather than fight them. Most snake charmers reduce the
   chances of a bite even further by sitting just out of striking range
   (about one-third of a cobra's body length). Even kissing the creature
   is not too dangerous, as cobras are incapable of attacking things above
   them. Though some claim that snake charmers drug the animals, this is
   rare, if it occurs at all. In addition, many snake charmers learn to
   read their animals and can tell when they are ready to strike. In a
   worst-case scenario, most snake charmers know at least rudimentary
   methods of treating snakebite. The return to its container is caused by
   the snake charmer stopping his waving motion. Even the reptile's
   receptacle plays a part, as it keeps the snake's blood temperature down
   and the animal groggy.{{fact]]

   Charmers often supplement their performances with juggling, sleight of
   hand, and other tricks. One occasional feat is "turning a rod into a
   serpent", a trick that has been known since Biblical times (see Exodus
   7:12). This is reportedly accomplished by putting pressure on a
   particular nerve behind the snake's head, which causes it to stiffen
   up. Sometimes, charmers stage mock combats between their snakes and
   other animals, such as mongooses. North African snake charmers usually
   set up battery-powered loudspeakers with which they advertise a wide
   array of charms, medicines, and healthcare pamphlets. They may also
   demand exorbitant fees from hapless tourists who snap photographs of
   them.

The snakes

   The first task a would-be snake charmer must tackle is to get a snake.
   Traditionally, this is done by going out into the wilderness and
   capturing one, not too difficult, as most South Asian and North African
   snakes tend to be slow movers. The exercise also teaches the hunter how
   to handle the wild reptiles. Today, however, more and more charmers buy
   their animals from snake dealers. A typical charmer takes in about
   seven animals per year.

   The exact species of serpents used varies by region. In India, the
   Indian cobra is preferred, though some charmers may also use Russell's
   vipers. Indian and Burmese pythons are also encountered, though they
   are not as popular. In North Africa, the Egyptian cobra, puff adder,
   carpet viper and horned desert viper are commonly feature in
   performances. Except for the pythons, all of these species are highly
   venomous.

   At home, snake charmers keep their animals in containers such as
   baskets, boxes, pots, or sacks. They must then train the creatures
   before bringing them out into public. For those charmers who do not
   de-fang their pets, this may include introducing the snake to a hard
   object similar to the punji. The snake supposedly learns that striking
   the object only causes pain.

   The care given to performing serpents is often described as poor at
   best. In an effort to remove any danger from their performances, snake
   charmers routinely de-fang their animals or remove their venom glands.
   An even more severe technique is to actually sew the creature's mouth
   shut, leaving only a small opening through which its tongue may flick
   in and out (the stitches can be removed for periodic feedings). An even
   more extreme method is total removal of the animal's jawbone and the
   venom glands with it. These methods often cause infection and lead to
   the snake's death.

   Feeding methods are often no better. Some snake charmers give their
   animals only milk, which the snakes are incapable of digesting (though
   some sources claim this practice is a myth). Others feed them leaves
   and herbs that are thought to cause the snakes to become lethargic and
   confused. Still others do not feed them at all and simply find new
   animals once the old ones die. Animal-rights groups report an average
   lifespan of six months for a performing snake. Steve Irwin had also
   stated such ideas, that the snakes will slowly die after their fangs
   are ripped. Additionally, he had said that to the viewers to "Never
   stop and pay money to these people(snake charmers)".

   That said, a few snake charmers treat their animals quite well, feeding
   them properly and not maiming them in any way. In fact, some performers
   seem to have an uncanny rapport with their snakes, the reptiles seeming
   almost tame. These charmers may even learn rudimentary veterinary
   medicine.

Lifestyle

   snake charmer in Delhi (1973)
   Enlarge
   snake charmer in Delhi (1973)

   Snake charming is typically an inherited profession. Most would-be
   charmers thus begin learning the practice at a young age from their
   fathers. Part of this is due to India's caste system; as members of the
   Sapera or Sapuakela castes, snake charmers have little other choice of
   profession. In fact, entire settlements of snake charmers and their
   families exist in some parts of India and neighbouring countries. In
   Bangladesh, snake charmers are typically members of the Bedey ethnic
   group. They tend to live by rivers and use them to boat to different
   towns on market days and during festivals. North African charmers
   usually set up in open-air markets and souks for their performances.
   Their trade is primarily aimed at the tourist market, so they tend to
   work in resort towns and near large hotels.

   In previous eras, snake charming was often the charmer's only source of
   income. This is less true today, as many charmers also scavenge,
   scrounge, sell items such as amulets and jewelry, or perform at private
   parties to make ends meet. Snake charmers are often regarded as
   traditional healers and magicians, as well, especially in rural areas.
   These charmers concoct and sell all manner of potions and unguents that
   purportedly do anything from curing the common cold to raising the
   dead. They also act as a sort of pest control, as villagers and
   city-dwellers alike call on them to rid homes of snakes (though some
   accuse snake charmers of releasing their own animals in order to
   receive the fee for simply catching them again).
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snake_charming"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
