   #copyright

Solomon Islands

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; Geography of
Oceania (Australasia)

   Solomon Islands

   Flag of the Solomon Islands Coat of arms of the Solomon Islands
   Flag                        Coat of arms
   Motto: To Lead is to Serve
   Anthem: God Save Our Solomon Islands
   Royal anthem: God Save the Queen
   Location of the Solomon Islands
   Capital
   (and largest city) Honiara
   9°28′S 159°49′E
   Official languages English
   Government Constitutional monarchy
    - Queen Elizabeth II
    - Governor-General Nathaniel Waena
    - Prime Minister Manasseh Sogavare
   Independence from the UK
    - Date 7 July 1978
   Area
    - Total 28,896 km² ( 142nd)
   11,157 sq mi
    - Water (%) 3.2%
   Population
    - July 2005 estimate 478,000 ( 167th)
    - Density 17/km² ( 189th)
   43/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total $911 million ( 171st)
    - Per capita $1,894 ( 146th)
   HDI  (2003) 0.594 (medium) ( 128th)
   Currency Solomon Islands dollar ( SBD)
   Time zone ( UTC+11)
   Internet TLD .sb
   Calling code +677

   The Solomon Islands is a nation in Melanesia, east of Papua New Guinea,
   consisting of nearly one thousand islands. Together they cover a land
   mass of 28,400 square kilometres (10,965  sq mi). The capital is
   Honiara, located on the island of Guadalcanal.

   The Solomon Islands have been inhabited by Melanesian people for at
   least 30,000 years. The United Kingdom established a protectorate over
   the Solomon Islands in the 1890s. Some of the most bitter fighting of
   World War II occurred on these islands. Self-government was achieved in
   1976 and independence two years later. The country remains a
   Commonwealth Realm.

   Since 1997 ethnic violence, government misconduct and crime have
   undermined stability and civil society. In June 2003 an Australian-led
   multinational force, the Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon
   Islands (RAMSI), arrived to restore peace and disarm ethnic militias.

History

   Solomon Island Warriors with Spears in Ornamented War Canoe
   Enlarge
   Solomon Island Warriors with Spears in Ornamented War Canoe

   The Solomon Islands have been inhabited by Melanesians for over 30,000
   years. Polynesian settlers began to arrive in 4,000 BC. The first
   European to discover the islands was Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa in 1568.
   Missionaries began visiting the Solomons in the mid-1800s. They made
   little progress at first, because " blackbirding" (the often brutal
   recruitment of laborers for the sugar plantations in Queensland and
   Fiji) led to a series of reprisals and massacres. The evils of the
   labor trade prompted the United Kingdom to declare a protectorate over
   the southern Solomons in 1893. In 1898 and 1899, more outlying islands
   were added to the protectorate; in 1900 the remainder of the
   archipelago, an area previously under German jurisdiction, was
   transferred to British administration apart from the islands of Buka
   and Bougainville which remained under German administration as part of
   German New Guinea until occupied by Australia in 1914 at the
   commencement of World War I. Traditional trade and social intercourse
   between the western Solomon islands of Mono and Alu (the Shortlands)
   and the traditional societies in the south of Bougainville, however,
   continued without hindrance. Under the protectorate, missionaries
   settled in the Solomons, converting most of the population to
   Christianity.

   In the early 20th century, several British and Australian firms began
   large-scale coconut planting. Economic growth was slow, however, and
   the islanders benefited little. With the outbreak of World War II, most
   planters and traders were evacuated to Australia, and most cultivation
   ceased. Some of the most intense fighting of World War II occurred in
   the Solomons. The most significant of the Allied Forces' operations
   against the Japanese Imperial Forces was launched on August 7, 1942
   with simultaneous naval bombardments and amphibious landings on the
   Florida Islands at Tulagi and Red Beach on Guadalcanal. The Battle of
   Guadalcanal became an important and bloody battle fought in the Pacific
   War and the Allies begin to repulse the Japanese expansion. Of
   strategic importance in the during the war were the coastwatchers who
   provided intelligence of Japanese naval, army and aircraft movements
   during the campaign. Sergeant-Major Jacob Vouza was a notable
   coastwatcher who refused to divulge Allied information inspite of
   interrogation and torture by Japanese Imperial forces. He was awarded
   the highest award for bravery by the Americans. Islanders Biuku Gasa
   and Eroni Kumana would be noted by National Geographic for being the
   first to find the shipwrecked John F. Kennedy and his crew of the
   PT-109. They suggested using a coconut which was later kept on the desk
   of the president to write a rescue message for delivery by dugout
   canoe.
   The U.S. employment of tanks in Guadalcanal was hampered by the nature
   of the terrain
   Enlarge
   The U.S. employment of tanks in Guadalcanal was hampered by the nature
   of the terrain

   Following the end of World War II, the British colonial government
   returned. The capital was moved from Tulagi to Honiara to take
   advantage of the infrastructure left behind by the U.S. military. A
   native movement known as the Marching Rule defied government authority.
   There was much disorder until some of the leaders were jailed in late
   1948. Throughout the 1950s, other indigenous dissident groups appeared
   and disappeared without gaining strength. In 1960, an advisory council
   of Solomon Islanders was superseded by a legislative council, and an
   executive council was created as the protectorate's policymaking body.
   The council was given progressively more authority. In 1974, a new
   constitution was adopted establishing a parliamentary democracy and
   ministerial system of government. In mid-1975, the name Solomon Islands
   officially replaced that of British Solomon Islands Protectorate.

   On January 2, 1976, the Solomons became self-governing, and
   independence followed on July 7, 1978, the first post-independence
   government was elected in August 1980. The series of governments formed
   from there on have not performed to upgrade and build the country.
   Following the 1997 election of Bartholomew Ulufa'alu the political
   situation in the Solomon's began to deteriorate. Governance was
   slipping as the performance of the police and other government agencies
   deteriorated due to ethnic rivalries. The capital of Honiara on
   Guadalcanal was increasingly populated by migrants from the island of
   Malaita. In June 2002, an insurrection mounted by militants from the
   island of Malaita resulted in the brief detention of Ulufa’alu and his
   subsequent forced resignation. Manasseh Sogavare, leader of the
   People's Progressive Party, was chosen Prime Minister by a loose
   coalition of parties. Guadalcanal militants retaliated and sought to
   drive Malaitan settlers from Guadalcanal, resulting in the closure of a
   large oil-palm estate and gold mine which were vital to exports. New
   elections in December 2002 brought Sir Allan Kemakeza into the Prime
   Minister’s chair with the support of a coalition of parties.

   Kemakeza attempted to address the deteriorating law and order situation
   in the country, but the prevailing atmosphere of lawlessness,
   widespread extortion, and ineffective police, prompted a formal request
   by the Solomon Islands Government for outside help. With the country
   bankrupt and the capital in chaos, the request was unanimously
   supported in Parliament. In July 2003, Australian and Pacific Island
   police and troops arrived in the Solomon Islands under the auspices of
   the Australian-led Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands
   (RAMSI). A sizable international security contingent of 2,200 police
   and troops, led by Australia and New Zealand, and with representatives
   from about 20 other Pacific nations began arriving the next month under
   Operation Helpem Fren. Since this time some commentators have
   considered the country a failed state.

   In April 2006 allegations that the newly elected Prime Minister Snyder
   Rini had used bribes from Chinese businessmen to buy the votes of
   members of Parliament led to mass rioting in the capital Honiara. A
   deep underlying resentment against the minority Chinese business
   community led to much of Chinatown in the city being destroyed. China
   sent chartered aircraft to evacuate hundreds of Chinese who fled to
   avoid the riots. Further Australian and New Zealand troops were
   dispatched to try to quell the unrest. Rini eventually resigned before
   facing a motion of no confidence in Parliament, and Parliament elected
   Manasseh Sogavare as Prime Minister.

Politics

   The Solomon Islands are a constitutional monarchy and have a
   parliamentary system of government. The Queen is the head of state, she
   is represented by the Governor-General who is chosen by the Parliament
   for a 5-year term. There is a unicameral parliament of 50 members,
   elected for 4-year terms. However, Parliament may be dissolved by
   majority vote of its members before the completion of its term.
   Parliamentary representation is based on single-member constituencies.
   Suffrage is universal for citizens over age 18. The head of government
   is the Prime Minister; the Prime Minister is elected by Parliament and
   chooses the other members of the cabinet. Each ministry is headed by a
   cabinet member, who is assisted by a permanent secretary, a career
   public servant, who directs the staff of the ministry.

   Solomon Islands governments are characterized by weak political parties
   (see List of political parties in Solomon Islands) and highly unstable
   parliamentary coalitions. They are subject to frequent votes of no
   confidence, and government leadership changes frequently as a result.
   Cabinet changes are common.

   Land ownership is reserved for Solomon Islanders. The law provides that
   resident expatriates, such as the Chinese and Kiribati, may obtain
   citizenship through naturalization. Land generally is still held on a
   family or village basis and may be handed down from mother or father
   according to local custom. The islanders are reluctant to provide land
   for nontraditional economic undertakings, and this has resulted in
   continual disputes over land ownership.

   No military forces are maintained by the Solomon Islands, although a
   police force of nearly 500 includes a border protection unit. The
   police also are responsible for fire service, disaster relief, and
   maritime surveillance. The police force is headed by a commissioner,
   appointed by the governor-general and responsible to the prime
   minister. The current commissioner is an Australian.

Provinces

   Map of the Solomon Islands
   Enlarge
   Map of the Solomon Islands

   For local government, the country is divided into 10 administrative
   areas, of which nine are provinces administered by elected provincial
   assemblies, and the 10th is the town of Honiara, administered by the
   Honiara Town Council.
     * Central
     * Choiseul
     * Guadalcanal
     * Honiara, Town
     * Isabel
     * Makira-Ulawa
     * Malaita
     * Rennell and Bellona
     * Temotu
     * Western

Foreign relations and the military

   Solomon Islands is a member of the United Nations, Commonwealth, South
   Pacific Commission, South Pacific Forum, International Monetary Fund,
   and the European Economic Community/African, Caribbean, Pacific Group
   (EEC/ACP)/(Lome Convention).

   The political stage of the Solomon Islands is further influenced by its
   diplomatic importance to the Republic of China on Taiwan and the
   People's Republic of China. The Solomon Islands gives diplomatic
   recognition to the ROC, recognizing it as the sole-legitimate
   Government of all of China, giving Taiwan vital votes in the United
   Nations. Lucrative investments, political funding and preferential
   loans from both the ROC and PRC are increasingly manipulating the
   political landscape of the Solomon Islands.

   Relations with Papua New Guinea, which had become strained because of
   an influx of refugees from the Bougainville rebellion and attacks on
   the northern islands of the Solomon Islands by elements pursuing
   Bougainvillean rebels, have been repaired. A peace accord on
   Bougainville confirmed in 1998 has removed the armed threat, and the
   two nations regularized border operations in a 2004 agreement.

   There is currently no regular military of the Solomon Islands. The
   various paramilitary elements of the Royal Solomon Islands Police
   (RSIP) were disbanded in 2003 following the intervention of the
   Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands (RAMSI), and the
   RSIP was disarmed. RAMSI has a small military detachment headed by an
   Australian commander with responsibilities for assisting the police
   element of RAMSI in internal and external security. The RSIP still
   operates two patrol boats (RSIPV Auki and RSIPV Lata) which constitute
   the navy of the Solomon Islands.

   In the long-term it is anticipated that the RSIP will resume the
   defence role. The police force is headed by a commissioner, appointed
   by the governor general and responsible to the prime minister.

   The police budget of the Solomon Islands has been strained due to a
   four-year civil war. Following Cyclone Zoe's strike on the islands of
   Tikopia and Anuta in December 2002, Australia had to provide the
   Solomon Islands government with 200,000 Solomons ($50,000 Australian)
   for fuel and supplies for the patrol boat Lata to sail with relief
   supplies. (Part of the work of RAMSI includes assisting the Solomon
   Islands Government to stabilise its budget.)

Geography

   The Solomon Islands is a wide island nation that lies East of Papua New
   Guinea and consists of many islands: Choiseul, the Shortland Islands;
   the New Georgia Islands; Santa Isabel; the Russell Islands; Nggela (the
   Florida Islands); Malaita; Guadalcanal; Sikaiana; Maramasike; Ulawa;
   Uki; Makira ( San Cristobal); Santa Ana; Rennell and Bellona; the Santa
   Cruz Islands and three remote, tiny outliers, Tikopia, Anuta, and
   Fatutaka. The distance between the westernmost and easternmost islands
   is about 1,500 kilometres (930  mi). The Santa Cruz Islands (of which
   Tikopia is part), are situated north of Vanuatu and are especially
   isolated at more than 200 kilometres (120 mi) from the other islands.
   Bougainville is geographically part of the Solomon Islands, but
   politically Papua New Guinea.

   The islands' ocean-equatorial climate is extremely humid throughout the
   year, with a mean temperature of 27° C (80° F) and few extremes of
   temperature or weather. June through August is the cooler period.
   Though seasons are not pronounced, the northwesterly winds of November
   through April bring more frequent rainfall and occasional squalls or
   cyclones. The annual rainfall is about 3050mm (120 in).

   The Solomon Islands archipelago is part of two distinct terrestrial
   ecoregions. Most of the islands are part of the Solomon Islands rain
   forests ecoregion, which also includes the islands of Bougainville and
   Buka, which are part of Papua New Guinea, these forests have come under
   pressure from forestry activities. The Santa Cruz Islands are part of
   the Vanuatu rain forests ecoregion, together with the neighboring
   archipelago of Vanuatu. Soil quality ranges from extremely rich
   volcanic (there are volcanoes with varying degrees of activity on some
   of the larger islands) to relatively infertile limestone. More than 230
   varieties of orchids and other tropical flowers brighten the landscape.

Economy

   View of Honiara
   Enlarge
   View of Honiara

   Its per capita GDP of $340 ranks Solomon Islands as a lesser developed
   nation, and more than 75% of its labor force is engaged in subsistence
   farming and fishing. Most manufactured goods and petroleum products
   must be imported. Until 1998, when world prices for tropical timber
   fell steeply, timber was Solomon Islands main export product, and, in
   recent years, Solomon Islands forests were dangerously overexploited.
   Other important cash crops and exports include copra and palm oil. In
   1998 Ross Mining of Australia began producing gold at Gold Ridge on
   Guadalcanal. Minerals exploration in other areas continued. However in
   the wake of the ethnic violence in June 2000, exports of palm oil and
   gold ceased while exports of timber fell. The islands are rich in
   undeveloped mineral resources such as lead, zinc, nickel, and gold.

   Exploitation of Solomon Islands' fisheries also offers prospects for
   export and domestic economic expansion. However, a Japanese joint
   venture, Solomon Taiyo Ltd., which operated the only fish cannery in
   the country, closed in mid-2000 as a result of the ethnic disturbances.
   Though the plant has reopened under local management, the export of
   tuna has not resumed. Negotiations are underway which may lead to the
   eventual reopening of the Gold Ridge mine and the major oil-palm
   plantation.

   Tourism, particularly diving, is an important service industry for
   Solomon Islands. Growth in that industry is hampered, however, by lack
   of infrastructure and transportation limitations.

   The Solomon Islands Government was insolvent by 2002. Since the RAMSI
   intervention in 2003, the government has recast its budget, and has
   taken a hard look at priorities. It has consolidated and renegotiated
   its domestic debt and with Australian backing, is now seeking to
   renegotiate its foreign obligations. Principal aid donors are
   Australia, New Zealand, the European Union, Japan, and the Republic of
   China.

Demographics

   As of 2006 the majority 552,438 people on the Solomon Islands are
   ethnically Melanesian (94.5%). Polynesian (3%) and Micronesian (1.2%)
   are the two other significant groups.

   There were 74 languages spoken in the Solomon Islands, although four of
   these are extinct. On the central islands, Melanesian languages are
   spoken, on the outliers Rennell and Bellona to the south, Tikopia,
   Anuta and Fatutaka to the far east, Sikaiana to the north east, and
   Luaniua ( Ontong Java Atoll, Lord Howe Atoll) to the north, Polynesian
   languages. Immigrant populations of Gilbertese (i-Kiribati) and
   Tuvaluans speak Micronesian languages. While English is the official
   language, only 1-2% of the population speak English; the lingua franca
   is Solomons Pijin.

Religion

   The religion of Solomon Islands is about 96% Christian with following
   denominations: Church of Melanesia 33%, Roman Catholic 19%, Seventh-day
   Adventist 11%, United Church 10%, Other Christian 4%) and about 4%
   indigenous religious beliefs. .
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solomon_Islands"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
