   #copyright

Somalia

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Countries;
Countries

   SOS Children works in Somalia. For more information see SOS Children in
   Somalia, Africa
                      Soomaaliya
   الصومال
   Somalia

   Flag of Somalia Coat of arms of Somalia
   Flag            Coat of arms
   Motto: none
   Anthem: Soomaaliyeey Toosoow
   Location of Somalia
   Capital
   (and largest city)    Mogadishu
                         2°02′N 45°21′E
    Official languages   Somali, Arabic
   Government            Nominal government
    - President          Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed
    - Prime Minister     Ali Mohammed Ghedi
       Independence      from the UK and Italy
    - Date               July 1, 1960
                         Area
    - Total              637,657 km² ( 42nd)
                         246,201 sq mi
    - Water (%)          1.6
                      Population
    - July 2005 estimate 8,228,000 ( 91st)
    - 1987 census        7,114,431
    - Density            13/km² ( 198th)
                         34/sq mi
        GDP ( PPP)       2005 estimate
    - Total              $4.809 billion ( not ranked)
    - Per capita         600 ( not ranked)
        HDI  (2003)      n/a (n/a) ( unranked)
         Currency        Somali shilling ( SOS)
         Time zone       EAT ( UTC+3)
    - Summer ( DST)      not observed ( UTC+3)
       Internet TLD      .so
       Calling code      +252

   Somalia ( Somali: Soomaaliya; Arabic: الصومال, Aṣ-Ṣuumaal), formerly
   known as the Somali Democratic Republic, is a coastal nation at the
   Horn of Africa in East Africa. It is bordered by Ethiopia to the west,
   Djibouti to the north and mid-west, Kenya on its south-west, and the
   Gulf of Aden on its north, and the Indian Ocean at its east. The Somali
   state currently exists solely in a de jure capacity; Somalia has no
   recognized central government authority nor any other feature
   associated with an established independent state. De facto authority
   resides in the hands of the governments for the unrecognized entities
   of Somaliland, Puntland, the Supreme Islamic Courts Council and the
   weak, but United Nations-recognized, Interim transitional government in
   Baidoa about 250 kilometers north-west of the capital Mogadishu.
   Violence has plagued Somalia since warlords ousted former dictator
   Mohamed Siad Barre in 1991.

History

   The independence of the British Somaliland Protectorate from the United
   Kingdom was proclaimed on June 26, 1960. On July 1, 1960, unification
   of the British and ex- Italian Somaliland took place. The government
   was formed by Abdullahi Issa. Aden Abdullah Osman Daar was appointed as
   President and Abdirashid Ali Shermarke as Prime Minister. Later, in
   1967, Mohammed Ibrahim Egal became Prime Minister in the government
   appointed by Abdirishid Ali Shermarke. Egal was later chosen as
   President of the self-declared independent Somaliland. He died in a
   hospital in Pretoria on May 3, 2002.

   In late 1969, a military government assumed power following the
   assassination of Shermarke, who had been chosen, and served as,
   President from 1967–1969. Mohamed Siad Barre, a General in the armed
   forces, became the President in 1969 following a coup d'état. The
   revolutionary army leaders, headed by Siad Barre, established
   large-scale public works programmes. They also successfully implemented
   an urban and rural literacy campaign, in which they helped to
   dramatically increase the literacy rate from a mere 5% to 55% by the
   mid- 1980s.

   In the meantime, Barre assassinated a major figure in his cabinet,
   Major General Gabiere, and two other officials. Intermittent civil war
   has been a fact of life in Somalia since 1977. In 1991, first insurgent
   forces led by Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, leader of the (SSDF), and
   President Ali Mahdi Mohamed was unrecognised as the interim president
   by some factions. The same year, the northern portion of the country
   declared its independence as Somaliland; although de facto independent
   and relatively stable compared to the tumultuous south, it has not been
   recognized by any foreign government. In the period 1991-1992, a split
   in the southern United Somali Congress, which led efforts to unseat
   Barre, caused an escalation in the civil war, especially in the
   Mogadishu area.

   Following the failure of Operation Restore Hope and beginning in 1993,
   a two-year UN effort (primarily in the south) was able to alleviate
   famine conditions. The UN contingent included some US troops, 18 of
   whom were killed in fighting after a helicopter was shot down in
   Mogadishu (as shown in the film " Black Hawk Down").

   The UN withdrew in Operation United Shield by March 3, 1995, having
   suffered significant casualties, and the rule of government has not yet
   been restored.

   Yet another secession from Somalia took place in the northeastern
   region. The self-governing state took the name Puntland after declaring
   "temporary" independence in 1998, with the intention that it would
   participate in any Somali reconciliation to form a new central
   government. It is important to note that this province does not seek
   permanent secession from Somalia.

   A third secession occurred in July 2006 with the declaration of the
   state of Jubaland. The territory of Jubaland is now declared its
   Regional Autonomy by its people. Col. Barre Aden Shire Hiiraale,
   chairman of the Administration of Jubba Valley Alliance Dooxada Jubbais
   the most powerful leader there. Again, this regional government did not
   want full statehood.

   A fourth self-proclaimed entity led by the Rahanweyn Resistance Army
   (RRA) was set up in 1999. This "temporary" secession was reasserted in
   2002, leading to de facto autonomy of Southwestern Somalia. The RRA had
   originally set up an autonomous administration over the Bay and Bakool
   regions of south and central Somalia in 1999.

   Somalia was one of the many countries affected by the tsunami which
   struck the Indian Ocean coast following the 2004 Indian Ocean
   earthquake, destroying entire villages and killing an estimated 300
   people.

   A conflict to unseat warlords broke out in May 2006. The battle was
   fought between an alliance of C.I.A.-backed Mogadishu warlords known as
   the Alliance for the Restoration of Peace and Counter-Terrorism or
   "ARPCT" and a militia loyal to Union of Islamic Courts or "UIC". The
   conflict began in mid-February. Several hundred people, mostly
   civilians, died in the crossfire. Mogadishu residents described it as
   the worst fighting in more than a decade of lawlessness. The Islamists
   accused the U.S. of funding the warlords through the Central
   Intelligence Agency in an effort to prevent the Islamists gaining
   power. The U.S. State Department, while neither admitting nor denying
   this, said the U.S. had taken no action that violated the international
   arms embargo of Somalia. A few emails describing covert illegal
   operations by private military companies in breach of UN regulations
   have been reported by the UK Sunday newspaper The Observer. The U.N.
   maintains an arms embargo on Somalia, and some have alleged that the
   U.S. broke international law by supplying the Mogadishu warlords.

   The president of the Somali transitional government, Abdullahi Yusuf,
   told the BBC the alliance of warlords was not fighting on behalf of the
   transitional government, even though several of the warlords held
   cabinet posts. Four powerful warlords who had been serving as ministers
   were sacked.

   On June 5, 2006 the Islamic Militia said it had taken control of the
   whole of Mogadishu. On 14 June 2006 the last ARPCT stronghold in
   southern Somalia, the town of Jowhar, fell with little resistance to
   the ICU. The remaining ARPCT forces fled to the east or across the
   border into Ethiopia. The warlords' alliance effectively collapsed.

   The transitional government called for intervention by a regional East
   African peacekeeping force. UIC leaders opposed this, and lobbied
   African Union (AU) member states at an AU ceremony in Libya on
   September 9, 2006 to abandon plans to send peacekeepers to Somalia. The
   Islamists are fiercely opposed to foreign troops – particularly
   Ethiopians – in Somalia. Somalia and Ethiopia fought a bitter war in
   1977-78 over the Somali province of Ogaden, which has been ruled by the
   Ethiopians since the partition of Somali lands in the first half of the
   20th century. As well, many have claimed that Ethiopia, with its long
   history as an imperial power, seeks to rule Somalia by proxy.

   Steadily the Islamist militia backing the UIC took control of much of
   the southern half of Somalia, normally by negotiation with local clan
   chiefs rather than the use of force. The Islamists stayed clear of the
   government headquarters town of Baidoa, which Ethiopia said it would
   protect if threatened. But on September 25, 2006, the UIC moved into
   the southern port of Kismayo, the last remaining port held by the
   government.

   On Wednesday, November 1st, 2006, peace talks between the UN-recognized
   interim government in the North and the Islamists of the south broke
   down. Many authorities fear civil war, with Ethiopian and rival
   Eriterean forces backing opposing sides in the power-struggle and
   political deadlock between the appointed transitional government and
   the somewhat popular UIC. ]

Politics

   Political and Military Situation in and Around Somalia, November 26,
   2006.
   Enlarge
   Political and Military Situation in and Around Somalia, November 26,
   2006.

   Somalia has had no effective national government since 1991, though
   there is an internationally recognized government in Baidoa. This
   government, called the Transitional National Government, controls only
   Baidoa and is not recognized by most Somalis to be legitimate. The
   transitional government was appointed abroad, by forces historically
   opposed to Somali interests such as Ethiopia and various African
   countries seeking to limit the extent and scope of Somali development
   and eventual encroachment on occupied Somali lands. In the northwest,
   there is the breakaway republic of Somaliland, which declared its
   independence in 1991. This governing zone is not internationally
   recognized although it has remained more stable and certainly more
   democratic than the south and northeast. Puntland in the northeast
   declared itself autonomous in 1998 and has not joined the Transitional
   Government, though the former president of Puntland is now the
   president of the Baidoa government and Puntland has stated its desire
   to join a future theoretical federated state. In the southeastern
   interior, Jubaland and Southwestern Somalia have both joined the Baidoa
   government, and its leaders are part of the Baidoa parliament. The
   other half of the country, with the bulk of the population, is
   controlled by the United Islamic Courts , which controls the critically
   important cities of Mogadishu and, since September 24th, 2006, Kismayo.

   The Council is led by Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed. When asked if the UIC
   plans to extend its control to the rest of Somalia, Sheikh Ahmed
   responded in an interview:

     "Land is not our priority. Our priority is the people's peace,
     dignity and that they could live in liberty, that they could decide
     their own fate. That is our priority. Our priority is not land; the
     people are important to us."

   On October 14, 2004, Somali members of parliament elected warlord
   Abdullahi Yusuf, previously president of Puntland, to be the next
   president. Because of the situation in Mogadishu, the election was held
   in a sports centre in Nairobi, Kenya. Yusuf was elected transitional
   President by Somalia's transitional parliament. He won 189 of the 275
   votes from members of parliament. The session of Parliament was also
   held in neighbouring Kenya. His government is recognized by most
   Western nations as legitimate, although his actual authority is
   questionable considering his history as a warlord and as a participant
   in the civil war that has ruined Somalia.

   Many other small political organizations exist, some clan-based, others
   seeking a Somalia free from clan-based politics (such as the United
   Somali Front). Many of them have come into existence since the civil
   war.

   As of late 2006, however, the Transitional National Government remains
   in control of only a relatively small portion of the country; by some
   accounts its control barely extends beyond the limits of its capital
   city of Baidoa. In addition, the political situation remains unstable;
   for example, on September 18, 2006, Abdullah Yusuf barely survived a
   suicide attack on his convoy in Baidoa, although twelve other people
   were killed.

Capital

   Mogadishu, along with other parts of the former Somalia, is cited as an
   example of anarcho-capitalism. Despite (or perhaps because of) the
   lawlessness, Mogadishu leads East Africa in access to
   telecommunications and the Internet. A modern communications network
   has developed in the city, including local cellular telephone systems
   with international connections via satellite. The lack of taxes has led
   to modern communications prices that rank among the lowest in Africa.
   Numerous Internet cafes have sprung up and two television broadcasters,
   and an Internet service provider are active aswell. Telecoms thriving
   in lawless Somalia

Geography

   Map of Somaliland and neighbouring Somalia.
   Enlarge
   Map of Somaliland and neighbouring Somalia.

   Satellite image of Somalia, generated from raster graphics data
   supplied by The Map Library
   Enlarge
   Satellite image of Somalia, generated from raster graphics data
   supplied by The Map Library

   Somalia is located on the east coast of Africa on and north of the
   Equator between the Gulf of Aden on the north and Indian Ocean on the
   east. Together with Ethiopia and Djibouti it is often referred to as
   the Horn of Africa. It borders Djibouti on the northwest, Ethiopia on
   the west, and Kenya on southwest. Somalia comprises Italy's former
   Trust Territory of Somalia and the former British Protectorate of
   Somaliland (now seeking recognition as an independent state). The
   coastline extends 3,025 kilometres (1,880  mi); the longest coastline
   in Africa.

   At 246,184  mi² (637,657  km²), Somalia is the world's forty-second
   largest country (after Afghanistan). It is comparable in size to the
   Central African Republic, and is somewhat smaller than the US state of
   Texas.

   The northern part of the country is hilly, and in many places the
   altitude ranges between 900 and 2,100 metres (3,000-7,000  ft) above
   sea level. The central and southern areas are flat, with an average
   altitude of less than 180 metres (600 ft). The Juba and the Shebelle
   Rivers rise in Ethiopia and flow south across the country towards the
   Indian Ocean. The Shebelle, however, does not reach the sea except
   during seasons of high rain.

   Major climatic factors are a year-round hot climate, seasonal monsoon
   winds, and irregular rainfall with recurring droughts. Mean daily
   maximum temperatures range from 30°C to 40°C (85-105°F), except at
   higher elevations and along the east coast. Mean daily minimums usually
   vary from about 15°C to 30°C (60-85°F). The southwest monsoon, a sea
   breeze, makes the period from about May to October the mildest season
   at Mogadishu. The December-February period of the northeast monsoon is
   also relatively mild, although prevailing climatic conditions in
   Mogadishu are rarely pleasant. The "tangambili" periods that intervene
   between the two monsoons (October-November and March-May) are hot and
   humid.

Administrative divisions

   Somalia is divided into eighteen regions (gobollada, sing. gobol),
   which in turn are subdivided into districts. The regions are:

   1 Awdal
   2 Bakool
   3 Banaadir
   4 Bari
   5 Bay
   6 Galguduud

                7 Gedo
                8 Hiiraan
                9 Jubbada Dhexe
              10 Jubbada Hoose
              11 Mudug
              12 Nugaal

                               13 Sanaag
                               14 Shabeellaha Dhexe
                               15 Shabeellaha Hoose
                               16 Sool
                               17 Togdheer
                               18 Woqooyi Galbeed

Economy

   A Somali rancher herds cattle in Kismayo.
   Enlarge
   A Somali rancher herds cattle in Kismayo.

   Since the collapse of the state, Somalia has transformed from what
   Mohamed Siad Barre referred to as "scientific socialism" to a free
   market economy.

     Somalia flourished precisely because of the "world community’s"
     neglect. In Somalia, "the very absence of a government may have
     helped nurture an African oddity — a lean and efficient business
     sector that does not feed at a public trough controlled by corrupt
     officials," wrote Peter Maas in the May 2001 issue of The Atlantic
     Monthly. Tele-communications, transportation, and shipping companies
     were organized up to provide services to the liberated private
     sector. Internet cafes have sprung up in Mogadishu. Private security
     firms helped businessmen protect their investments and property. A
     recent World Bank study grudgingly admitted: "Somalia boasts lower
     rates of extreme poverty and, in some cases, better infrastructure
     than richer countries in Africa." This is almost certainly because
     it is not cursed with a World Bank-subsidized central government to
     siphon away the nation’s wealth.

     —

   Agriculture is the most important sector, with livestock accounting for
   about 40% of GDP and about 65% of export earnings. Nomads and
   semi-nomads, who are dependent upon livestock for their livelihood,
   make up a large portion of the population. After livestock, bananas are
   the principal export; sugar, sorghum, maize, and fish are products for
   the domestic market. The small industrial sector, based on the
   processing of agricultural products, accounts for 10% of GDP. Oil also
   is an untapped resource, mainly in Puntland. But due to protests,
   battles, and the like, it is hard for foreign experts to come into the
   country.

Health

   Somalia continues to have one of the highest child mortality rates in
   the world, with 10% of children dying at birth and 25% of those
   surviving birth dying before age five. But on the other hand Somalia
   also has one of the lowest HIV/Aids infection rates in Africa and in
   the World.
   Somalia has one of the lowest HIV infected populations in Sub-Saharan
   Africa
   Enlarge
   Somalia has one of the lowest HIV infected populations in Sub-Saharan
   Africa

     The breadth of the AIDS pandemic has led to the idea in the West
     that the entire continent is ravaged by the disease. But Somalia --
     isolated for 14 years since the civil war began and populated by
     devout Muslims -- has an infection rate of perhaps only 1.5 or 2 per
     cent of the adult population.

     —-Stephanie Nolan

   "The outside world's picture of Somalia has been distorted by the
   natural tendency of the foreign media to focus on bad news” and that
   "[p]eace reigns in most of the country " and "as a result regional and
   local governments have been able to resume working in many areas." The
   article quotes former Somalia ambassador to Washington, Omar Mohalim
   Mohamoud as "Somalis consider themselves born free. To them, the State
   equals registration, regulation and restriction" and attributes this
   prejudice against a new central government to the nomadic culture and
   the bad experiences of the Barre regime. The article concludes by
   stating that "Somalia can only deal with its massive material and
   social problems once the pieces of the jigsaw have been fitted back
   together."
   The building of new homes is a sign of hope in Mogadishu.
   Enlarge
   The building of new homes is a sign of hope in Mogadishu.

   There are signs of growth in Somalia:

     "Despite the seeming anarchy, Somalia's service sector has managed
     to survive and grow.... Mogadishu's main market offers a variety of
     goods from food to the newest electronic gadgets. Hotels continue to
     operate, and militias provide security."

     — CIA Factbook

   Infrastructure, such as roads are as numerous as those in neighbouring
   countries but of much lower quality. A World Bank report states that
   the private sector has found it too hard to build roads due to high
   transaction costs and the fact that those who pay road fees are not the
   only ones using the road (see free rider problem), presenting a problem
   with recuperation of investment. The thriving telecommunications
   industry is private, offering wireless service and Internet cafés.
   Competing phone companies have agreed on interconnection standards,
   which were brokered by the United Nations funded Somali Telecom
   Association. Electricity is furnished by entrepreneurs, who have
   purchased generators and divided cities into manageable sectors. In
   1989, before the collapse of the government, the national airline had
   only one airplane. Now there are approximately fifteen airlines, over
   sixty aircraft, six international destinations, and more domestic
   routes. According to a World Bank report, the "private airline business
   in Somalia is now thriving with more than five carriers and price wars
   between the companies." The owner of Daallo Airlines says, "Sometimes
   it's difficult without a government and sometimes it's a plus," but
   "Corruption is not a problem, because there is no government."

   The private sector also supplies water. However, a statistic from 2000
   indicated that only 21% of the population had access to safe drinking
   water at that time. With the collapse of the central government, the
   education system is now private. A World Bank study reports "modest
   gains in education." As last measured in 2001, primary school
   enrolment, which stood at 17%, was nearly at pre-war levels, and
   secondary school enrolment had been increasing since 1998. However,
   "adult literacy is estimated to have declined from the already low
   level of 24% in 1989 to 17.1% in 2001." A more recent 2003 study
   reported that the literacy rate had risen to 19%. In comparison,
   literacy is at 49% in wealthier West Africa and 35% among its
   neighbours. Higher education ended completely in the civil war of 1991,
   but Mogadishu University reopened in 1998 and its first class graduated
   in 2001. Other universities have opened in other cities. In addition to
   customer fees, much of the funding for the education system comes from
   international Islamic charities such as Al-Islah.
   Some signs of investment: in 2004, a Coca-Cola bottling plant opened in
   Mogadishu.
   Enlarge
   Some signs of investment: in 2004, a Coca-Cola bottling plant opened in
   Mogadishu.

   The main problem affecting economic growth is the lack of stability, or
   the perception of it. For businesses to operate, it is necessary to
   provide some level of security and internationally recognized
   governments are widely perceived as being more reliable in this than
   the traditional tribal leadership that currently holds sway in Somalia.
   However, investors are feeling more comfortable lately; for example, a
   Coca-Cola bottling plant opened in Mogadishu in 2004.
   A Somali shop, 2005.
   Enlarge
   A Somali shop, 2005.

   Remittance services has become a large industry in Somalia. Successful
   people from the world-wide diaspora who fled because of the war
   contribute to the economy around $2 billion annually. In the absence of
   a formal banking sector, money exchange services have sprouted
   throughout the country, handling between $500 million and $1 billion in
   remittances annually. Wireless communications has also become a giant
   economic force in Somalia. Because of the war, nobody really knows the
   size of the economy or how much it is growing.

Demographics

   This 2002 CIA map shows population density throughout Somalia.
   Enlarge
   This 2002 CIA map shows population density throughout Somalia.

   Somalia has a population of around 8,591,000. However, estimates are
   very difficult because of the political situation and the mostly
   nomadic nature of the Somalis. The last census was in 1975. Most
   outside analysts use this estimate but Somalia is one of the fastest
   growing countries in Africa and the world. Some estimates range between
   15 and 25 million.

   Today, about 60% of all Somalis are nomadic or semi-nomadic
   pastoralists who raise cattle, camels, sheep, and goats. About 25% of
   the population are settled farmers who live mainly in the fertile
   agricultural region between the Juba and Shebelle rivers in southern
   Somalia. The remainder of the population (15%-20%) is urban.

   Because of the civil war,the country has a large diaspora community,
   one of the largest of the whole continent. There are over a million
   Somalis outside of Africa, and this excludes those who have inhabited
   Ogaden province, Northeastern Kenya, and Djibouti.

Languages

   Nearly all inhabitants speak Somali, the official language. This
   standard was based on dialects from the Mudug province.

   The Somali language was not used extensively for writing until 1973,
   when a standard orthography using the Latin alphabet was decreed by the
   Supreme Revolutionary Council (SRC). Somali is now the language of
   instruction in schools. English, Italian, and Arabic are also used.

Telecommunications

   Somalia's public telecommunications system was almost completely
   destroyed or dismantled; however, private wireless companies exist in
   most major cities and actually provide better services than in
   neighbouring countries, despite (or perhaps due to) Somalia's lack of
   government. Somalia has the cheapest cellular calling rates in Africa,
   with some companies charging less than a cent a minute. ( Telecoms
   thriving in lawless Somalia) Companies providing telecommunication
   services are:
     * Golis Telecom
     * SOMTEL
     * Galkom
     * Global Internet Company
     * Hormuud

                                * Telcom
                                * Nationlink
                                * Netco
                                * STG
                                * Dahabshiil

Geographic locale

   Flag of Djibouti  Djibouti Flag of Yemen  Yemen
   Image:Template CanadianCityGeoLocation North.png
   Gulf of Aden Arabian Sea
   Flag of Ethiopia  Ethiopia North
   West    Flag of Somalia  Somalia     East
   South
   Flag of Kenya  Kenya Indian Ocean

   Countries of East Africa

   Djibouti • Eritrea • Ethiopia • Kenya • Somalia • Tanzania • Uganda
   Countries of Africa

   Sovereign states: Algeria • Angola • Benin • Botswana • Burkina Faso •
   Burundi • Cameroon • Cape Verde • Central African Republic • Chad •
   Democratic Republic of the Congo • Republic of the Congo • Comoros •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Djibouti • Egypt ^1 • Equatorial Guinea • Eritrea •
   Ethiopia • France ^2 • Gabon • The Gambia • Ghana • Guinea-Bissau •
   Guinea • Kenya • Lesotho • Liberia • Libya • Madagascar • Malawi • Mali
   • Mauritania • Mauritius • Morocco • Mozambique • Namibia • Niger •
   Nigeria • Portugal ^2 • Rwanda • Senegal • Seychelles • Sierra Leone •
   Somalia • South Africa • Spain ^2 • Sudan • Swaziland • São Tomé and
   Príncipe • Tanzania • Togo • Tunisia • Uganda • Yemen ^3 • Zambia •
   Zimbabwe

   Dependencies: British Indian Ocean Territory (UK) • French Southern
   Territories (France) • Mayotte (France) • Réunion (France) • Saint
   Helena ^4 (UK)

   Unrecognized countries: Somaliland • Western Sahara •

   ^1  Partly in Asia. ^2  Mostly in Europe. ^3  Mostly in Asia.
   ^4 Includes the dependencies of Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha.
   Countries on the Arabian Sea

   Flag of India  India • Flag of Iran  Iran • Flag of Maldives  Maldives
   • Flag of Oman  Oman • Flag of Pakistan  Pakistan • Flag of Somalia
   Somalia • Flag of Sri Lanka  Sri Lanka • Flag of Yemen  Yemen
   Countries on the Red Sea

   Flag of Djibouti  Djibouti • Flag of Egypt  Egypt • Flag of Eritrea
   Eritrea • Flag of Israel  Israel • Flag of Jordan  Jordan • Flag of
   Saudi Arabia  Saudi Arabia • Flag of Somalia  Somalia •
   Flag of Sudan  Sudan • Flag of Yemen  Yemen
   Countries and territories on the Indian Ocean

   Eurasia: Bahrain • Bangladesh • Christmas Island • Cocos (Keeling)
   Islands • India • Indonesia • Iran • Iraq • Israel • Kuwait • Malaysia
   • Maldives • Myanmar • Oman • Pakistan • Qatar • Saudi Arabia • Sri
   Lanka • Thailand • United Arab Emirates • Yemen

   Africa: Comoros • Djibouti • Eritrea • Kenya • Madagascar • Mauritius •
   Mayotte • Mozambique • Seychelles • Somalia • Somaliland • South Africa
   • Sudan • Tanzania

   Oceania: Australia • Christmas Island • Cocos (Keeling) Islands

   Islands: Bahrain • Christmas Island • Cocos (Keeling) Islands •
   Madagascar • Maldives • Mauritius • Mayotte • Seychelles • Sri Lanka
   Member states of the African Union

   Algeria • Angola • Benin • Botswana • Burkina Faso • Burundi •
   Cameroon • Cape Verde • Central African Republic • Chad • Comoros •
   Democratic Republic of the Congo • Republic of the Congo •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Djibouti • Egypt • Eritrea • Ethiopia •
   Equatorial Guinea • Gabon • The Gambia • Ghana • Guinea •
   Guinea-Bissau • Kenya • Lesotho • Liberia • Libya • Madagascar •
   Malawi • Mali • Mauritania • Mauritius • Mozambique • Namibia • Niger •
   Nigeria • Rwanda • São Tomé and Príncipe • Senegal • Seychelles •
   Sierra Leone • Somalia • South Africa • Sudan • Swaziland • Tanzania •
   Togo • Tunisia • Uganda • Western Sahara  (SADR) • Zambia • Zimbabwe
   Arab League
   Flag of the League of Arab States

   Algeria • Bahrain • Comoros • Djibouti • Egypt • Iraq • Jordan • Kuwait
   • Lebanon • Libya • Mauritania • Morocco • Oman • State of Palestine •
   Qatar • Saudi Arabia • Somalia • Sudan • Syria • Tunisia • United Arab
   Emirates • Yemen
   Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC)
   Flag of the OIC

   Afghanistan • Albania • Algeria • Azerbaijan • Bahrain • Bangladesh •
   Benin • Burkina Faso • Brunei • Cameroon • Chad • Comoros •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Djibouti • Egypt • Gabon • Gambia • Guinea •
   Guinea-Bissau • Guyana • Indonesia • Iran • Iraq • Jordan • Kuwait •
   Kazakhstan • Kyrgyzstan • Lebanon • Libya • Maldives • Malaysia •
   Mali • Mauritania • Morocco • Mozambique • Niger • Nigeria • Oman •
   Pakistan • State of Palestine • Qatar • Saudi Arabia • Senegal •
   Sierra Leone • Somalia • Sudan • Surinam • Syria • Tajikistan •
   Turkey • Tunisia • Togo • Turkmenistan • Uganda • Uzbekistan •
   United Arab Emirates • Yemen

   Observer countries: Bosnia and Herzegovina • Central African Republic •
   Russia • Thailand • Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus

   Observer Muslim organizations and communities:
   Moro National Liberation Front

   Observer international organizations:
   Economic Cooperation Organization • Organisation of African Unity •
   League of Arab States • Non-Aligned Movement • United Nations
   Cushitic-speaking nations

   Cushitic
   Flag of Djibouti  Djibouti • Flag of Eritrea  Eritrea • Flag of
   Ethiopia  Ethiopia • Flag of Kenya  Kenya • Flag of Somalia  Somalia
   Beja
   Flag of Egypt  Egypt • Flag of Eritrea  Eritrea • Flag of Sudan  Sudan
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Somalia"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
