   #copyright

Song Thrush

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

                   iSong Thrush

                             Conservation status

   Least Concern (LC)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom: Animalia
   Phylum:  Chordata
   Class:   Aves
   Order:   Passeriformes
   Family:  Turdidae
   Genus:   Turdus
   Species: T. philomelos

                                Binomial name

   Turdus philomelos
   Brehm, 1831

   The Song Thrush (Turdus philomelos) is a common European member of the
   thrush family Turdidae.

   It is commonly found in well-vegetated woods and gardens over all of
   Europe south of the Arctic circle, except Iberia. They have also been
   introduced to New Zealand and Australia. They are common and widespread
   in NZ however in Australia only a small population around Melbourne
   survives. Many birds move south during the winter, although some
   western populations are resident. This species has also been introduced
   in other parts of the world.

   Song Thrushes are omnivorous, eating a wide range of insects,
   earthworms, snails and berries. They often use a favourite stone as an
   "anvil" to smash snail shells against.

   They do not form flocks, although several birds may be loosely
   associated in suitable habitat.

   Song Thrushes, at about 22–23 cm long and 70–90 g in weight, are
   smaller than Blackbirds, Turdus merula. Sexes are similar, with plain
   brown backs and neatly spotted underparts. The breast is washed with
   buff.

   They nest in bushes or hedges, laying four or five eggs (bright glossy
   blue with black spots) in a neat cup-shaped nest lined with clay. The
   female incubates for about 14 days; the young fledge in about the same
   time. Song Thrushes may raise two or three broods in a year.

   The male sings its loud song from trees, rooftops or other elevated
   perches. The song characteristically repeats melodic phrases, as
   described by Robert Browning in the poem "Home Thoughts, from Abroad":

     Hark, where my blossom'd pear-tree in the hedge
     Leans to the field and scatters on the clover
     Blossoms and dewdrops – at the bent spray's edge –
     That's the wise thrush; he sings each song twice over,
     Lest you should think he never could recapture
     The first fine careless rapture!

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Song_Thrush"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
