   #copyright

Sorrel

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Plants

                    iSorrel
           Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Plantae
   Division: Magnoliophyta
   Class:    Magnoliopsida
   Order:    Caryophyllales
   Family:   Polygonaceae
   Genus:    Rumex
   Species:  R. acetosa

                                Binomial name

   Rumex acetosa
   L.

   The common sorrel, or spinach dock, is a perennial herb, which grows
   abundantly in meadows in most parts of Europe and is cultivated as a
   leaf vegetable.

   In the Caribbean, sorrel typically refers to Jamaican Red Sorrel (
   Hibiscus sabdariffa). A popular sorrel beverage is widely consumed
   which is dark red, and has a sweet, spiced flavor. The deep red
   coloured annual is also used in making tarts and jellies. The fibre is
   also used by craftspeople.

   Common sorrel is a slender plant about 60 cm high, with juicy stems and
   leaves. It has whorled spikes of reddish-green flowers, which bloom in
   June and July. The leaves are oblong, the lower ones being 7 to 15 cm
   in length, slightly arrow-shaped at the base, with very long petioles.
   The upper ones are sessile, and frequently become crimson.

   As the flowers increase in size, they become a purplish colour. The
   stamens and pistils are on different plants. The seeds, when ripe, are
   brown and shining. The perennial roots run deeply into the ground.

   The leaves of sorrel are eaten by the larvae of several species of
   Lepidoptera including blood-vein.

   Common sorrel has been cultivated for centuries, although its
   popularity has decreased considerably over time. The edible leaves have
   a flavor that is very similar to that of kiwifruit (Chinese
   Gooseberry), or sour wild strawberries. Because of the mildly acidic
   taste, some say that it quenches thirst, and consider it helpful in
   boosting the appetite. The leaves may be added to salads to sharpen the
   taste. They are often puréed in soups and sauces and is the
   characteristic ingredient in shav. The plant contains oxalic acid,
   which contributes to its characteristic flavor, and so may be
   contraindicated in people with rheumatic-type complaints, kidney or
   bladder stones, and the like. It is also a laxative.

                              Herbs and spices
     Herbs Basil · Bay leaf · Boldo · Borage · Chervil · Chives ·
        Coriander leaf (cilantro) · Curry leaf · Dill · Epazote ·
   Eryngium foetidum (long coriander) · Fennel · Holy basil · Houttuynia
                    cordata · Lavender · Lemon grass ·
   Limnophila aromatica (rice paddy herb) · Lovage · Marjoram · Mint ·
Oregano · Parsley · Perilla · Rosemary · Rue · Sage · Savory · Sorrel ·
        Stevia · Tarragon · Thyme · Vietnamese coriander (rau ram)
    Spices African pepper · Ajwain (bishop's weed) · Allspice · Amchur
  (mango powder) · Anise · Asafoetida · Caraway · Cardamom · Cardamom,
  black · Cassia · Celery seed · Chili · Cinnamon · Clove · Coriander
     seed · Cubeb · Cumin · Cumin, black · Dill seed · Fenugreek ·
 Galangal · Garlic · Ginger · Grains of paradise · Horseradish · Juniper
 berry · Liquorice · Mace · Mahlab · Mustard, black · Mustard, white ·
 Nigella (kalonji) · Nutmeg · Paprika · Pepper, black · Pepper, green ·
    Pepper, pink · Pepper, white · Pomegranate seed (anardana) · Poppy
 seed · Saffron · Sarsaparilla · Sassafras · Sesame · Sichuan pepper ·
      Star anise · Sumac · Tamarind · Turmeric · Wasabi · Zedoary

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sorrel"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
