   #copyright

Squash (sport)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Sports

   Squash racquet and ball
   Enlarge
   Squash racquet and ball
   Players in a glass-backed squash court
   Enlarge
   Players in a glass-backed squash court
   International Squash Singles Court, as specified by the World Squash
   Federation
   Enlarge
   International Squash Singles Court, as specified by the World Squash
   Federation

History

   Squash is an indoor racquet sport which was formerly called "Squash
   rackets", a reference to the 'squashable' soft ball used in the game
   (compared with the harder ball used in its parent game Rackets (or
   Racquets – see below). The game is played by two players (or four
   players for doubles) with 'standard' rackets in a four-walled court
   with a small, hollow rubber ball.

   Squash historians assert that the game originated in the 19th century
   at Harrow School, in London, England, as a derivative of the game of
   Rackets. The first recorded construction of purpose-built squash courts
   was at Harrow in the 1860s. It is possible that earlier squash courts
   were created at Harrow by sub-dividing a rackets court, which is almost
   exactly the size of three Squash courts (presumably to allow more
   players on the courts at the same time).

   The game generally remained the preserve of the schools and
   universities until the early part of the 20th century, by which time it
   was becoming popular in the private clubs (such as the Royal Automobile
   Club in London) and with officers in the British armed forces.

   The United States of America became the first nation to form a
   dedicated association and codify its game in 1907. In the same year,
   the (British) Tennis and Rackets Association formed a squash rackets
   sub-committee to administer the game, which became progressively
   codified during the 1920s. Subsequently, the (British) Squash Rackets
   Association was formed and took over administration of the game in
   1928. The game is now administered by the WSF ( World Squash
   Federation). The men's professional game is managed by the PSA (
   Professional Squash Association) and the women's by WISPA ( Women's
   International Squash Players Association).

   Squash continued almost exclusively as the game of the upper-middle and
   upper classes until around the 1950s, when commercial operators began
   building public courts. The game boomed in popularity, with
   participation peaking around the early 1980s. Despite a downturn in
   player numbers, the game remains popular in many places, especially
   Australia, northwestern Europe, North America and Asia (primarily the
   south and southeastern regions thereof).

   At the elite level, the game was strictly divided between amateur
   players (usually 'gentlemen' and 'ladies') and professional players,
   who were often coaches employed by the exclusive clubs. This division
   started to break down with the growth of the commercial side of the
   game in the 1960s, with the women's game becoming 'open' in 1973 and
   the men's game following suit in 1980.

The court

   The 'International' size court was codified in the 1920s at 32 feet
   (9750 mm) long and 21 feet (6400 mm) wide. The front wall has an 'out'
   line 15 feet (4570 mm) above the floor, connected by a raking 'out'
   line meeting the 'out' line on the back wall at 7 feet (2130 mm) above
   the floor. The front wall also has a 'service' line 6 feet (1830 mm)
   above the floor with the 'tin' (the equivalent of a net) 17 inches (430
   mm) high surmounted by a 'board' a further 2 inches (50 mm) high. The
   floor is marked to divide it into two quarter courts and two service
   boxes as shown (refer to the diagram above). The court for the USA game
   is a similar size, but narrower at 18 feet (5480 mm).

Playing equipment

   'Standard' rackets are governed by the rules of the game. Traditionally
   they were made of laminated timber (typically Ash), with a small strung
   area using natural 'gut' strings. After a rule change in the mid-1980s,
   they are now almost always made of composite materials or metals
   (graphite, kevlar, titanium, and/or boron) with synthetic strings.
   Modern rackets are 70 cm (27 inches) long, with a maximum strung area
   of 500 square centimetres (approximately 80 square inches) and a weight
   between 110 and 200 grams (4-7 ounces).

   Squash balls are made with two pieces of rubber compound, glued
   together to form a hollow sphere and buffed to a matte finish.
   Different balls are provided for varying temperature and atmospheric
   conditions and standards of play: more experienced players use 'slow'
   balls that are smaller and have less bounce than those used by less
   experienced players (these 'slower' balls tend to 'die' in the corners
   of the court, rather than 'standing up' to allow easier shots).

   Small coloured dots on the ball indicate the level of bounciness and
   hence, the standard of play it is suited for. The recognised colours
   and 'speeds' are:
     * Double Yellow - Extra Super slow
     * Yellow - Super slow
     * Green or White - slow
     * Red - Medium
     * Blue - Fast

   Balls are manufactured to these standards by Dunlop, Prince, Pointfore,
   Wilson and others. The 'double-yellow dot ball', introduced in 2000, is
   currently the competition standard, replacing the earlier 'yellow-dot'
   which was long considered the competition standard. There is also a
   high-altitude "orange dot" ball, used in places like Mexico City,
   Denver and Johannesburg. In North America the Dunlop "green dot" ball
   is often used at high altitude.

   Other balls available are:
     * Dunlop 'Max Blue' (aimed at beginners) which is 12 percent larger
       and has 40 percent longer 'hang time' than a 'double yellow' dot
       ball and has 'instant bounce'

     * Dunlop 'Max Progress' (red) (for players wishing to improve their
       technique) which is 6 percent larger with a 20 percent longer
       hang-time than a 'double yellow' dot ball and has instant bounce

   Because of the vigorous nature of the game, players need to wear
   comfortable sports clothing and robust indoor (non-marking) sports
   shoes. In competition, men usually wear shorts and t-shirt or polo
   shirt. Women normally wear a skirt and t-shirt or tank top, or a sports
   dress. Towelling wrist and head bands may also be required in humid
   climates. Eye protection with polycarbonate lenses is also recommended,
   as players may be struck by a fast-swinging racket or the ball, which
   can typically reach speeds of well in excess of 200 km/h (125 mph). In
   the 2004 Canary Wharf Squash Classic, John White was recorded driving
   balls at speeds over 270 km/h (170 mph). Many squash venues mandate the
   use of eye protection and some associaton rules require that all
   juniors and doubles players must wear eye protection.

The play and scoring

   The players usually spin a racket to decide who commences serving at
   the start of the match and this player starts the first rally by
   electing to serve from either the left or right service box. For a
   legal serve, at least part of one of the server's feet must be in that
   box and, after being struck by the racket, the ball must strike the
   front wall above the service line and below the out line and land in
   the opposite quarter court, unless volleyed by the receiver.

   The players then take turns hitting the ball against the front wall
   (referred to as 'rallying'). The ball may be volleyed (hit whilst still
   in the air) or after its first bounce and before the second. To be
   considered 'good', the ball must reach the front wall below the 'out'
   line and above the 'board' or 'tin', before touching the floor. The
   ball may also be struck against any of the other three walls before
   reaching the front wall. Shots that are first played off the side or
   back walls are referred to as 'boasts' or 'angles'.

   The rally continues until a player is unable to return his or her
   opponent's shot or makes a mistake (e.g. hits the ball 'out', or hits
   it after its second bounce, or onto the floor, 'board' or 'tin'), or a
   'let' or 'stroke' is awarded by the referee for interference (see
   below).

   In the 'traditional' British scoring system (as adopted in 1926), a
   point is scored only by the server (when the receiver is unable to
   return the ball to the front wall before it has bounced twice). When
   the receiver wins the rally, they are awarded only the right to serve.

   Games are usually played to 9 points (alternatively, the receiver may
   opt to call 'set two' and play to 10 when the score first reaches 8-8).
   Competition matches are usually played to 'best-of-five' (ie. first
   player to win 3 games wins the match).

   Alternatively, in the point-a-rally scoring system (often referred to
   as PARS or 'American' scoring), points are scored by the winner of each
   rally, whether or not they have served. Traditionally, PARS scoring was
   up to 15 points (or the receiver calls 15 or 17 when the game reaches
   14 all). However, in 2004, the PARS scoring was reduced to 11 for the
   professional game (If the game reaches 10 all, a player must win with
   two consecutive points with the serve).

   In the 'international' game, club, doubles and recreational matches are
   usually played using the traditional 'British' scoring system. Scoring
   systems and rules can be adapted subtly to accommodate shorter game
   time (e.g. games played to 7 points, best-of-three games) or multiple
   players (e.g. a form of squash called three-quarter court, where one
   service box is blocked out and excess players wait in that area while
   two players play a single point in the remaining area of the court).

Strategy and tactics

   The fundamental strategy of the game is to hit the ball straight up the
   side walls to the back corners referred to as a straight drive or
   "length", then move to the centre of the court near the "T" to be well
   placed to retrieve the opponent's return. Attacking with soft or
   "short" shots to the front corners (referred to as 'drop shots') causes
   the opponent to cover more of the court and may result in an outright
   winner. 'Angle' shots (see above) are used for deception and again to
   cause the opponent to cover more of the court.

   Highly skilled players often attempt to finish rallies by hitting the
   ball at an angle onto the front wall and into an area known as the
   'nick' (the junction between the side wall and floor) which if done
   properly will cause the ball to roll out along the floor and be
   unreturnable. If the shot misses the nick, however, the ball may bounce
   out from the side wall and allow the opponent an easy attacking shot.
   Hitting opposing players with the ball if they obstruct results in
   extra points through a stroke.

   A key strategy in squash is known as "dominating the T" (the
   intersection of the red lines near the centre of the court where the
   player is in the best position to retrieve the opponent's next shot).
   Skilled players will return a shot, and then move back toward the 'T'
   before playing the next shot. From this position, the player can
   quickly access any part of the court to retrieve the opponent's next
   shot with a minimum of movement.

   Rallies between experienced players may involve 30 or more shots and
   therefore there is a very high premium on fitness, both aerobic and
   anaerobic. As players become more skilled and, in particular, better
   able to retrieve shots, points often become a war of attrition. At
   higher levels of the game, the fitter player has a major advantage.

   Almost all players (inexperienced or experienced) will fall into the
   following categories of style of play:
     * "Retriever"- Usually a very fit player, plays patiently, can
       retrieve most shots hit by an opponent, but doesn't have a
       particularly strong attacking game.
     * "Shooter", or "attacking player"- May be a patient player as well,
       but is more comfortable trying to hit winning shots or going for
       "nicks". Generally has very good shot accuracy and deception
       skills.
     * "Power Player"- Tries to overpower their opponent by hitting the
       ball with extreme pace. Not known for their fitness, or patience.
     * "All-Around Player"- Is comfortable playing all different styles
       and places, comfortable in all areas of the court.

   Ability to change the direction of ball at the last instant is also
   important to off-balance the opponent. Expert players can anticipate
   the opponent's shot a few tenths of a second before compared to the
   average player, giving them a chance to react sooner. Such skill is
   usually acquired by a lot of practice and game experience.

Interference and obstruction

   Interference and obstruction are an inevitable aspect of this highly
   athletic sport, where two players are confined within a shared space.
   Generally, the rules entitle players to reasonable access to the ball,
   a reasonable swing and an unobstructed shot to any part of the front
   wall. When interference occurs, a player may appeal for a 'let' and the
   referee (or the players themselves if there is no official) then
   interprets the extent of the interference. The referee may elect to
   allow a 'let' and the players then replay the point, or award a
   'stroke' (either a point or the right to serve) to the appealing
   player, depending on the degree of interference and whether the player
   interfered with was likely to have hit a winning shot had the
   interference not occurred.

   When it is deemed that there has been little or no interference, the
   rules provide that no let is to be allowed, in the interests of
   continuity of play and the discouraging of spurious appeals for lets.
   Because of the subjectivity in interpreting the nature and magnitude of
   interference, the awarding (or withholding) of lets and strokes is
   often controversial.

   If the ball was travelling towards the side wall and hits the opponent,
   it is usually a let. However, it is a stroke if the ball is travelling
   straight to the front wall and the ball hits the opponent.

Cultural and social aspects

   There are several variations of squash played across the world. In the
   U.S. 'hardball' singles and doubles are played with a much harder ball
   and different size courts (as noted above). Whilst 'hardball' singles
   has lost much of its popularity in North America (in favour of the
   'International' version), the hardball doubles game is still active.
   There is also a doubles version of squash played with the standard
   ball, sometimes on a wider court, and a more tennis-like variation
   known as squash tennis.

   The relatively small court and low-bouncing ball makes scoring points
   harder than in its American cousin racquetball, as the ball may be
   played to all four corners of the court. Since every ball must strike
   the front wall above the tin (unlike racquetball), the ball cannot be
   easily 'killed'. As a result, rallies tend to be longer than in
   racquetball.

   Squash games are most competitive and enjoyable when played between
   players of similar skill levels. Most squash players prefer partners
   who are compatible physically, mentally, and technically, as a small
   difference in ability may result in one player overwhelmingly
   dominating the match. Currently there is no international standard
   method (other than for professional players) for evaluating skill
   levels for players

   Squash provides an excellent cardiovascular workout. In one hour of
   squash, a player may expend approximately 700 to 1000 calories (3,000
   to 4,000 kJ) which is significantly more than most other sports and
   over 70% more than either general tennis or racquetball. The sport also
   provides a good upper and lower body workout by utilising both the legs
   to run around the court and the arms/torso to swing the racquet.

   Squash now has a universal appeal, as there are courts in 148 countries
   in the world from Argentina to Zambia.

Players and records

   The (British) Squash Rackets Association conducted its first British
   Open championship for men in 1930, using a 'challenge' system: Charles
   Read was designated champion, but was beaten in home and away matches
   by Don Butcher. This championship continues to this day, but now using
   a knockout format since 1947.

   Since its inception, the men's British Open has been dominated by
   relatively few players: F.D. Amr Bey (Egypt) in the 1930s; Mahmoud
   Karim (Egypt) 1940s; brothers Hashim Khan and Azam Khan (Pakistan)
   1950s and 1960s; Jonah Barrington (Great Britain and Ireland) and Geoff
   Hunt (Australia) 1960s and 1970s; Jahangir Khan (Pakistan) 1980s;
   Jansher Khan (Pakistan) 1990s.

   The women's championship started in 1921, and has similarly been
   dominated by relatively few players: Joyce Cave and Nancy Cave
   (England) in the 1920s; Margot Lumb (England) 1930s; Janet Morgan
   (England) 1950s; Heather McKay (Australia) 1960s and 1970s; Vicki
   Cardwell (Australia) and Susan Devoy (New Zealand) 1980s; Michelle
   Martin (Australia) 1990s; Sarah Fitz-Gerald (Australia) 1990s and
   2000s.

   Heather McKay, with her lengthy and absolute dominance of the game (she
   remained undefeated in her 18 year career during the 1960s and 1970s),
   is undoubtedly the greatest woman player of all time. Amongst the men,
   most modern commentators consider Jahangir Khan (1980s) or (the
   distantly related) Jansher Khan (1990s) to be the greatest male
   players. Other worthy contenders are Jonah Barrington, Geoff Hunt and
   Hashim Khan.

   Because of its traditions, the British Open has been considered by many
   to be more prestigious than the World Open, which began in the
   mid-1970s. However, some have shown concern about the ability of the
   former to sustain its prominence, citing its failure in 2005 to attract
   top players, probably due in part to the disparity in prize money. In
   2005 the combined men's and women's prize money for the British Open
   came to $71,000, compared with the 2006 World Open's prize money,
   estimated to be about $2 million.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Squash_%28sport%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
