   #copyright

St Buryan

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

                                 St. Buryan Parish
                                     Penzanze
                                                                 Penwith
                                              Shown within UK and Penwith
              OS Grid Reference:                                  SW409257
                        Lat/Lon:                      50°4′30″N, 5°37′15″W
                     Population:                        1215 (2001 census)
                      Dwellings:                         533 (2001 census)
                                    Settlements
               Major Settlement:                                St. Buryan
                Settlement Type:                                   Village
                     Population:                                      1030
                      Dwellings:
          Secondary Settlements: Lamorna, Crows-an-Wra, Sparnan, Tregarnoe
                                                           Administration
                           Ward: St Buryan
                       District: Penwith
                         County: Cornwall
                         Region:                        South West England
                                                Post Office and Telephone
                      Post town:                                     Truro
                       Postcode:                                  TR19 6xx
                  Dialling Code:                                     01736

   The parish of St Buryan as seen looking south from Chapel Carn Brea,
   the highest point in the parish
   Enlarge
   The parish of St Buryan as seen looking south from Chapel Carn Brea,
   the highest point in the parish
   St Loy's Cove in the south of the parish
   Enlarge
   St Loy's Cove in the south of the parish
   Countryside south of St Buryan
   Enlarge
   Countryside south of St Buryan

   St Buryan(Cornish: Eglosborrie) is a village and civil parish in the
   Penwith district of Cornwall, United Kingdom. The parish encompasses
   the villages of St. Buryan, Lamorna, and Crows-an-wra and shares
   boundaries with the parishes of Sancreed and St Just to the north,
   Sennen and St Levan (with which it has close ties) to the west, with
   Paul to the east and by the sea in the south. The village of St Buryan
   is situated approximately five miles (8 km) west of Penzance along the
   B3283 towards Lands End. Three further minor roads also meet at St
   Buryan, two link the village with the B3315 towards Lamorna, and the
   third rejoins the A30 at Crows-an-Wra.

   Named after the Irish Saint Buriana, the parish is situated in an area
   of outstanding natural beauty and is a popular tourist destination. It
   has been a designated conservation area since 1990 and is proximal to
   many sites of special scientific interest in the surrounding area. St
   Buryan is also an important historical region and the parish is dotted
   with evidence of Neolithic activity, from stone cirles and celtic
   crosses to burial chambers and ancient holy wells. The village of St
   Buryan itself is also a site of special historic interest, and contains
   many listed buildings including the famous grade I listed Church. The
   bells of St Buryan Church, which have recently undergone extensive
   renovation, are reputedly the heaviest peel of six anywhere in the
   world. The parish also has a strong cultural heritage. Many painters of
   the Newlyn School including Samuel John "Lamorna" Birch were based at
   Lamorna in the south of the parish, which is also the former location
   of the folk club of celebrated Cornish singer Brenda Wootton. Today St
   Buryan is an important local centre housing many important amenities.

Geography

   The parish, which is generally fertile and well cultivated, comprises
   6972 acres (28.2 sq km) of land, 3 acres of water and 18 acres of
   foreshore and lies predominantly on granite. It is more elevated at its
   northern part and slopes gently north to south-east towards the sea.
   Chapel Carn Brea, (50°09'N, 5°65W), often described as the first hill
   in Cornwall (from a westerly perspective), sits at its northernmost
   edge and rises 657 feet above sea level. The hill is also an important
   historical site showing evidence of neolithic activity, as well as the
   remains of the chapel from which it is named. Toward the south is the
   village of St Buryan, which sits on a plateau and is centrally sited
   within the parish. Further to the south the terrain slopes down toward
   the sea, ending in several deep cut river valleys at Lamorna, Penberth
   and St Loy that are both sheltered and heavily forested. West of St
   Buryan, toward St Levan, the terrain again gently descends, causing the
   ground to become more marshy and waterlogged and less suitable for
   growing arable crops. East of the village the land also slopes away
   toward Drift, and its reservoir, past the wooded area at Pridden and
   the deep cut valley at Trelew (in which a steep embankment has been
   built to carry the B3283 road). Since 1990 St Buryan and the
   surrounding region has been designated a conservation area by Penwith
   District Council; recognising the village's status as an area of
   special architectural and historic interest and preventing development
   that might alter the village's character.

Etymology

   The village is named after the 6th century Irish Christian missionary
   Saint Buriana (also sometimes called Beriana, Buriena, or Beriena). The
   local legend describes how, whilst ministering to the local inhabitants
   from the oratory that stood on the site of the current church, Saint
   Buriana was abducted by the local king, Geraint (or Gereint) of
   Dumnonia. Saint Piran, patron saint of Cornwall and also a fellow
   missionary, negotiated for her release, but the reticent Geraint,
   agreed only on the caveat that the he be awoken by a cuckoo calling
   across the snow: a fate unlikely in mid-winter. The legend states that
   Saint Piran prayed through the night whilst the snow fell, and in the
   morning Geraint was awoken by a cuckoo's song. He was so taken aback by
   the miracle that he honoured his pledge, however, shortly afterwards he
   changed his mind and tried to recapture Buriana. Buriana is said to
   have died as Geraint tried to re-imprison her, and was purportedly
   buried on the site of her chapel.

History

   Celtic cross near Chapel Carn Brea in the north of St. Buryan parish
   Enlarge
   Celtic cross near Chapel Carn Brea in the north of St. Buryan parish

   St Buryan and the surrounding area is rich in history and has been a
   centre of human activity for several thousand years.

Early Neolithic Period

   The area surrounding St Buryan was is use by humans in Neolithic times,
   as is evident from the their surviving monuments. A mile (1.5km) to the
   north of St Buryan lies Boscawen-Un, a neolithic stone circle
   containing 19 stones around a leaning central pillar. The circle is
   also associated with two nearby standing stones or menhirs. Although
   somewhat overgrown, the site can be reached by traveling along the A30
   west of Drift and is only a few hundred metres south of the road. A
   more accessible stone circle, The Merry Maidens, lies 2 miles (3 km) to
   the south of the village in a field along the B3315 toward Lands End.
   This much larger circle comprises nineteen granite megaliths some as
   much as 1.4 metres ( 4'7") tall, is approximately 24 metres (79ft) in
   diameter and is thought to be complete. Stones are regularly spaced
   around the circle with a gap or entrance at its eastern edge. The Merry
   Maidens are also called Dawn's Men, which is likely to be a corruption
   of the Cornish Dans Maen, or Stone Dance. The local myth about the
   creation of the stones suggests that nineteen maidens were turned into
   stone as punishment for dancing on a Sunday. The pipers' two megaliths
   some distance north-east of the circle are said to be the petrified
   remains of the musicians who played for the dancers. This legend was
   likely initiated by the early Christian Church to prevent old pagan
   habits continuing at the site.

   Like Stonehenge and other stone monuments built during this period the
   original purpose of such stone circles is unknown, although there is
   strong evidence that they may have been ceremonial or religious sites.
   Many other lone standing stones from the neolithic period can be seen
   around the parish, at sites including Pridden, Trelew, Chyangwens and
   Trevorgans. In addition to menhirs there are numerous stone crosses
   within the parish, including two fine examples in St Buryan itself, one
   in the churchyard, and the other in the centre of the village. These
   take the form of a standing stone, sometimes carved into a Celtic cross
   but more often left roughly circular with a carved figure on the face.
   It is thought that many of these are pagan in origin, dating from the
   Neolithic and later periods, but were adapted by the early Christian
   church to remove evidence of the previous religion. These crosses are
   often remote and mark/protect ancient crossing points. Other examples
   in the parish can be found at Crows-an-Wra, Trevorgans and Vellansaga.

Bronze and Iron Ages

   Only several hundred yards from the site of the Merry Maidens lies a
   Bronze age burial chamber, Cruk Tregyffian, that was discovered (and
   unfortunately damaged) during widening of the adjacent B3315 road. The
   circular barrow is composed of stone uprights decorated with cupmarks,
   dry stone walling and 4 capstones. Although the original decorated
   stone has been removed to Truro museum to protect it against
   weathering, a replica now sits in its place. Further east along the
   B3315 road, and only a mile from Lamorna, lies the Boleigh Fogou,
   considered to be one of the best remaining monuments of its kind in
   Cornwall. Built in the Iron age, the purpose of Fogous (derived from
   the Cornish word for cave) is not known, however, it has been
   speculated that they could have been used for food storage or for
   religious ceremonies. The Fogou at Boleigh is extensive and has a large
   entranceway that leads to a long passage with classic dry stone wall
   and lintel construction. A low doorway just inside the entrance leads
   to a much narrower and lower passage that turns ninety degrees left
   after a few metres. After the turn the passage continues for a metre or
   two before ending; there is a modern metal support grille set into the
   roof above this section.

Middle Ages

   Human activity in the parish continued and intensified in the Middle
   Ages. A revolt against the Anglo-Saxon English in 931 AD by the Cornish
   Celts (supported by the Danes) led to a battle southeast of the village
   at Boleigh where a farm and hamlet now stands. The Saxon king Athelstan
   crushed the resistance, before continuing on to conquer the Isles of
   Scilly. A local story tells of ancient armour being ploughed up in the
   nearby fields at Gul Reeve (a corruption of the Cornish Gwel Ruth,
   meaning red field). The establishment of a church and monastery in the
   village by Athelstan (see Religion) contributed to the rising
   importance of the parish. This was not without problems, and in 1328 St
   Buryan was excommunicated from the church over a row about control of
   the religious matters in the parish. It was not reinstated for another
   eight years.

   After the Norman conquest the area fell under the control of the
   Robert, Count of Mortain, a half brother of William the Conqueror, and
   the parish of St Buryan is mentioned in the Domesday book with the old
   Cornish name of Eglosberrie (and elsewhere Eglosburrie) meaning 'church
   of St. Buryan': "

     "EGLOSBERRIE; it was free in the time of King Edward (the Confessor,
     i.e. before 1066); 1 hide (about 120 acres). Land for 8 ploughs
     (requiring, perhaps, 8 oxen each); ½ plough there. 6 villagers and 6
     smallholders. Pasture, 20 acres. Value 10s; when the Count (of
     Mortain) received the land, value 40s. Also 12 cattle and 12 sheep.”

   St Buryan was visited by King John in the early 1200s who, after
   landing at Sennen from Ireland, travelled to the parish to stay the
   night. The purpose of the visit was an inspection of local mining works
   in the area and resulted in the import of German engineers to improve
   their efficiency. By the 14th century St Buryan's importance as a
   regional centre had grown sufficiently that in 1302 King Edward granted
   it a weekly market, to be held on Saturdays, and two yearly fayres of
   three days each to be held on the feasts of St Buryan and St Martin.

Tudor and Stuart period

   Stone cross in St Buryan village churchtown
   Enlarge
   Stone cross in St Buryan village churchtown

   Perhaps one of the most notable residents of St Buryan during the
   seventeenth century was one William Noy, an MP (Grampound 1603-1614,
   Fowey 1623-1625 and Helston 1627-1631) and member of the court of King
   Charles I, who was born and lived on the Pendrea estate within the
   parish . He was created Attorney-general to the king in October 1631
   and specialised in reviving long forgotten taxes to raise money to fund
   the King's lifestyle during his period of Personal Rule His advice
   controversially led to the imposition of ship money which is though by
   many to have helped trigger the English Civil War. Noy suffered from
   stones, and died in great pain before being buried at the church in New
   Brentford in 1634.

Industrial revolution

   Population change from 1800 to the present day in St Buryan parish
   (lefthand scale) compared to Penwith district(righthand scale)[1].
   Enlarge
   Population change from 1800 to the present day in St Buryan parish
   (lefthand scale) compared to Penwith district(righthand scale) .

   Whereas St Buryan was an important regional religious centre during the
   Middle Ages due to its monastery and Royal Peculiar status, the
   importance of the parish to the district faded with the onset the
   industrial revolution. This was in part due to the destruction of the
   collegiate buildings during The Protectorate period after the civil war
   and also the gradual weakening of the political position of the Church
   of England that occurred during the eighteenth and nineteenth
   centuries. This loss of importance is reflected in the fact that the
   proportion of the district's population living in the parish fell from
   four and a half to less than two percent over this period. Unlike other
   parishes in Penwith, such as St Just, St Buryan was not a major focus
   of mining activity during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
   having a mainly agrarian economy. After a spike in population in the
   early 1800s that is mirrored across the district and coincides both
   with the arrival of the railways and increased tin mining activity in
   Penwith, the population of the parish gradually declined over the next
   two hundred years (see figure right), in part due to the increased
   mechanisation of farming that the industrial revolution brought,
   requiring fewer people to work the land.

Twentieth century

   After a period of decline during the twentieth century, which saw a
   reduction in the village's population (see figure), culminating in the
   loss of a blacksmiths, the local dairy, the village butchers and a cafe
   in the early nineties, St Buryan has been enjoying a renaissance,
   fueled in part by an influx of new families. The local school has been
   expanded to include a hall and a fourth classroom and a new community
   centre has recently been built nearby.

Religion

   St Buryan has a long history of religious activity both through its
   historical connection with the church of the state, and later playing
   an important part in the Methodist revival of the 18th century, led by
   John Wesley who visited the parish and ministered on several occasions.

The Church of St Buryan

   The church of St Buryan as seen from the front entrance
   Enlarge
   The church of St Buryan as seen from the front entrance

   A church has stood on the current site since c. 930 AD, built by King
   Athelstan in thanks for his successful conquest of Cornwall on the site
   of the oratory of Saint Buriana (probably founded in the 5th century).
   The Charter from Athelstan endowed the building of collegiate buildings
   and the establishment of one of the earliest monasteries in Cornwall,
   and was subsequently enlarged and rededicated to the saint in 1238 by
   Bishop William Briwereby. Owing to the nature of the original Charter
   from King Athelstan, the parish of St Buryan was long regarded as a
   Royal Peculiar thus falling directly under the jurisdiction of the
   British monarch as a separate dioceses, rather than the Church. This
   led to several hundred years of arguments between The Crown and the
   Bishops of England over control of the parish, which came to a head in
   1327 when blood was shed in the churchyard, and in 1328 St Buryan was
   excommunicated by the Bishop. St Buryan was not reinstated until 1336.
   Only two of the King's appointed Deans appear to have actually lived in
   the diocese of St Buryan for more than a few months, and the
   combination of these factors led to the subsequent ruinous state of the
   church in 1473. The church was subsequently rebuilt and enlarged, the
   tower was added in 1501 and further expansion took place in the late
   15th and 16th centuries when the bulk of the present church building
   were added. Further restoration of the interior took place in 1814, and
   the present Lady Chapel was erected in 1956. The church is currently
   classified as a Grade I listed building. The Deanery was annexed in
   1663 to the Bishopric of Exeter after the English Civil War, however,
   it was again severed during the episcopacy of Bishop Harris, who thus
   became the first truly independent dean . The current diocese holds
   jurisdiction over the parishes of St Buryan, St Levan, and Sennen. St
   Buryan church is famous for having the heaviest peal of six bells in
   the world, and a recent campaign to restore the church's bells, which
   had fallen into disuse, has enabled all six to be rung properly for the
   first time in decades.

Methodism

   St Buryan methodist chapel, rebuilt in 1981 after storm damage
   Enlarge
   St Buryan methodist chapel, rebuilt in 1981 after storm damage

   John Wesley, the founding father of Methodism, visited the parish on
   several occasions, but was not well received at first. He first visited
   St Buryan in 1747 where he preached at Tredinney, and later attended
   services at the church in St Buryan during which the local reverend is
   reputed to have made several caustic remarks about him. A second visit
   in 1766, during which he preached from outside the church, led to him
   being threatened with a whip by the local squire, however this only
   strengthened his resolve to return. The first Methodist chapel was
   built in 1783 on a site opposite the current day chapel, on land
   purchased the previous year and inspected by Wesley himself during his
   last visit to the parish. In 1833, as Methodism became more popular in
   Cornwall, a second larger chapel was built on the site of the current
   one. This was subsequently rebuilt in 1981 after suffering storm damage
   to the old structure. Further Chapels were built in the parish, at
   Crows-an-Wra in 1831 with seating for 220 as a replacement for an
   earlier chapel at nearby Treve and at Borah in 1817 with seating for
   100, which was rebuilt in 1878. Both of these closed in 1981 to
   coincide with the enlargement of the St Buryan Chapel. A Bible
   Christian group also operated in the village, founded circa 1815. With
   growing support a proper chapel was built in 1860 on the site of the
   current Hosken's meadow. This was closed in 1932 but left derelict for
   another 65 years before being demolished.

Education

   St Buryan primary school in Rectory Road St Buryan
   Enlarge
   St Buryan primary school in Rectory Road St Buryan

   The first record of a school in the parish was in 1801, on a site
   adjacent to the old poorhouse beside the church buildings in the main
   village. This was administered through the poorhouse, whose trustees
   were also the trustees of the school. A new school was built in 1830
   which now forms the village hall. The school was subscription based and
   pupils paid a penny a day toward their education. When compulsory
   education was introduced in 1875 these buildings were extended to deal
   with the influx of pupils. The school moved again to its present site,
   a new purpose built building along Rectory Road, in 1910. Today St.
   Buryan primary school teaches pupils between the ages of four and
   eleven and is a feeder school for nearby Cape Cornwall Comprehensive.
   There was until recently an attached nursery for taking care of
   children of pre-school age, but this has subsequently moved to new
   premises in the village. For many years the school taught in its
   original three classrooms, however under the headship of Paul Gazzard
   the site has been expanded to include a fourth classroom, a hall and
   gymnasium, a library and a new reception area. This expansion was made
   financially possible in part due to a spell as a grant maintained
   school during the previous Tory administration in which the school had
   direct control over its own budget. Under the School Standards and
   Framework Act 1998 the school became a foundation school. The school
   currently teaches 87 pupils from the villages and the surrounding
   parish. There has been a steady rise in pupil numbers in recent years
   made possible by the improved facilities and mirroring the population
   rise in the parish as a whole. All pupils come from a white British
   background and use English as their first language. Nearly six percent
   of pupils have Statements of Special Educational Need, which is above
   the national average. In the recent Ofsted inspection pupils’ standards
   of achievement were classed as good overall with above average results
   in science and English and very high attainment in mathematics.

Culture

   Boscawen-Un stone circle Near St Buryan
   Enlarge
   Boscawen-Un stone circle Near St Buryan

   Like much of the rest of Cornwall, St Buryan has many strong cultural
   traditions. The first Cornish Gorsedd ( Gorseth Kernow) in over one
   thousand years was held in the parish in the stone circle at
   Boscawen-Un on the 21st September 1928. The procession, guided by the
   bards of the Welsh Gorsedd and spoken mostly in Cornish was aimed at
   promoting Cornish culture and literature. The modern Gorsedd has
   subsequently been performed nine times in the parish including the
   fiftieth anniversary, both at Boscawen-Un and the stone circle at The
   Merry Maidens. There is also a regular Eisteddfod held in the village.
   The feast of St Buriana is celebrated on the Sunday nearest to May 13th
   (although the St Buriana's official day is the 1st May)consisting of
   fancy dress and competitions for the children of the village and
   usually other entertainments later in the evening. In the summer there
   are also several other festivals, including the agricultural
   preservation rally in which vintage tractor, farm equipment, rare breed
   animals and threshing demonstrations are shown as well as some vintage
   cars and traction engines. This is currently being hosted at Trevorgans
   farm and is traditionally held on the last Saturday of July. St Buryan
   is also twinned with Calan in Morbihan, Brittany.

Art

   In the late ninteenth and early twentieth centuries the parish
   attracted many painters from the Newlyn school, particularly at Lamorna
   where a small colony led by Samuel John "Lamorna" Birch was established
   and included painters such as Alfred Munnings, Laura Knight and Harold
   Knight who lived and painted there. These artists were attracted by
   cheap living, the changeable quality of the light and a desire to paint
   En plein air. This style of painting had become increasingly popular
   after the introduction of paints in tubes in the 1870s, an innovation
   which meant that painters no longer had to make their own paints by
   grinding and mixing dry pigment powders with linseed oil.

Economy

   farmland cut for hay in St Buryan parish
   Enlarge
   farmland cut for hay in St Buryan parish

   The major economic activity in the parish is agriculture and the parish
   encompasses several large farms. Most agriculture centres around
   dairying, plus arable crops such as potato and cauliflower being farmed
   as well as some raising of pigs and sheep. As with much of Cornwall,
   fishing is an important source of income and employment. Many smaller
   crabbers and landline fishermen operate from out of the various coves
   and harbours amongst the rocky shoreline. Prior to its closure at the
   turn of the millennium the transatlantic telephone cable station, and
   telecommunications educational facility, run by Cable and Wireless at
   Porthcurno provided further employment opportunities in the
   neighbouring parish of St Levan. With its central location in west
   Penwith and proximity to popular tourist attractions such as the Minack
   Theatre, Lands End and the Blue Flag beach at Sennen Cove, St Buryan
   enjoys a healthy income from visitors, both day trippers and those
   renting accommodation, during the summer months.

Government and politics

   For the purposes of local government St Buryan is a civil parish and
   elects 11 councillors every four years. The principal local authorities
   in this area are Penwith District Council and the Cornwall County
   Council. The County of Cornwall (Electoral Changes) Order 2005 stated
   that for the purposes of election to Cornwall County Council, St Buryan
   parish falls within the St Just electoral division and returns a single
   member. For elections to Penwith District Council the District of
   Penwith (Electoral Changes) Order 2002 states that St Buryan falls
   within the St Buryan district ward, which also includes the parishes of
   Paul, St Levan, Sancreed and Sennen and returns two members.

Transport

   Being one of the most westerly parishes in England, St Buryan is
   somewhat isolated from the rest of the UK. The village of St Buryan is
   situated approximately five miles (8 km) west of Penzance along the
   B3283 which forks about five miles from the end of the A30, the major
   trunk road that runs the length of Cornwall. Three further minor roads
   also meet at St Buryan, two link the village with the B3315 towards
   Lamorna, and the third rejoins the A30 at Crows-an-Wra. St. Buryan is
   served by three bus routes run by First Devon & Cornwall, part of First
   Group. Two services, 1 and 1A, run between Penzance and Lands End via
   Gwavas, Sheffield, St Buryan and Sennen. The third, the 300 service,
   runs a circular route via St Ives, St Just, Sennen, St Buryan and
   Newlyn. Services run frequently from Penzance to the village until
   around 10 pm during the summer months, but markedly less often in the
   winter.

Amenities

   Churchtown in St Buryan with a view of the village shop
   Enlarge
   Churchtown in St Buryan with a view of the village shop

   Commercial activity in St Buryan centres around Churchtown where a well
   stocked village store, run under a Londis franchise and housing an ATM
   cashpoint, plus a post office, an antiques shop and the St Buryan Inn
   are located. There is also a garage at the eastern end of the village
   that runs a limited coach service. The village was also previously
   served by its own Butchers Shop, this was closed in 1990 due to
   combination of the economic recession and pressure from the recently
   opened Safeway supermarket in nearby Penzance. A Doctor's branch
   surgery is currently held in the village cricket pavilion every
   Thursday between twelve and one pm. At other times patients must travel
   to the surgery in nearby St Just, the West Cornwall hospital in
   Penzance or the Royal Cornwall hospital at Treliske, Truro.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/St_Buryan"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
