   #copyright

Stanisław Koniecpolski

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Historical figures

                            Stanisław Koniecpolski


       Noble Family                                           Koniecpolski
       Coat of Arms

                                                              Pobóg
            Parents                                Aleksander Koniecpolski
                                                            Anna Sroczycka
           Consorts                Katarzyna Żółkiewska (1615)
                                   Krystyna Lubomirska (1619)
                                                    Zofia Opalińska (1656)
           Children                                Aleksander Koniecpolski
      Date of Birth                                              1590/1594
     Place of Birth                                              Koniecpol
      Date of Death                                         March 11, 1646
     Place of Death                                                  Brody

   Stanisław Koniecpolski, (1590/1594^ – 11 March 1646) was a Polish
   nobleman ( szlachta), magnate, official ( starost and castellan),
   voivode of Sandomierz from 1625, and Field and later Grand Crown hetman
   ( second highest military commander, after the king) of the
   Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. Stanisław Koniecpolski lived a life
   that involved almost constant warfare, and during his military career
   he won many victories. Before he reached the age of 20, he had fought
   in the Dymitriads and the Moldavian Magnate Wars, where he was taken
   captive by the forces of the Ottoman Empire at the Battle of Cecora in
   1620. After his release in 1623 he defeated Ottoman vassals the Tatars
   in 1624. With inferior forces he fought Swedish forces of Gustavus
   Adolphus to a stalemate in Prussia during the second phase of the
   Polish-Swedish War (1626-1629). He defeated a major Turkish invasion at
   Kamieniec Podolski (Kamianets-Podilskyi) in Ukraine in 1634, and during
   his life led many other successful campaigns against the rebellious
   Cossacks and invading Tatars. He is considered to be one of the most
   skilled and famous military commanders in the history of Poland and
   Lithuania.

Biography

Childhood

   Stanisław Koniecpolski was born between 1590 and 1594^1 into the
   szlachta and magnate family of Koniecpolscy in their seat of Koniecpol.
   His father was Aleksander Koniecpolski, voivode ( palatine) of Sieradz,
   a staunch supporter of king Sigismund III of the House of Vasa. His
   mother was Anna Sroczycka, daughter of Stanisław Sroczycki, voivode of
   Kamieniec Podolski, who brought into the Koniecpolscy family large
   estates in Podolia. Stanisław's brothers were Krzysztof Koniecpolski
   (chorąży koronny, voivode of Bełsk from 1641), Remigiusz Koniecpolski (
   bishop of Chełm, died in 1640), Jan Koniecpolski (castellan and voivode
   of Sieradz) and Przedbor Koniecpolski (died in 1611).
   The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth at its greatest extent, 1648
   Enlarge
   The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth at its greatest extent, 1648

   Stanisław Koniecpolski had a speech impediment since childhood, and
   throughout his life he stuttered on longer words. At the age of 15, his
   father's influence at the royal court got him the Commonwealth district
   office of starosta (mayor) of Wieluń. At that time he also studied at
   the Jagiellonian University in Kraków. After several years of studies
   he was sent by his father to the royal court, to continue his education
   in a more practical fashion. He also undertook, over a period of
   several months, a tour of Western Europe (mostly France) to learn
   foreign languages.

Early career

   Koniecpolski chose to follow a military career, and in 1610 he took
   part in the Dymitriads against Muscovy, including the Battle of
   Kłuszyn. During the siege of the Smolensk fortress on 8 July 1611, the
   collapsing walls killed his brother Przedbor and Stanislaw returned to
   Koniecpol with his body. In the autumn of the same year he rejoined the
   army and under the command of Grand Lithuanian Hetman Jan Karol
   Chodkiewicz, he took part in the effort to relieve and bring supplies
   to the besieged Polish forces in the Moscow Kremlin. During that time
   he was entrusted by the hetman with the important command of the right
   flank of the Polish forces.
   Polish elite heavy cavalry, the hussars, at Kłuszyn
   Enlarge
   Polish elite heavy cavalry, the hussars, at Kłuszyn

   In 1612 Koniecpolski joined the units of wojsko kwarciane (regular
   Commonwealth army) in Ukraine under the command of hetman Stanisław
   Żółkiewski, who greatly influenced his career. In 1614 he was given the
   responsibility of destroying rebellious units of wojsko kwarciane, who
   were led by Jan Karwacki . On May 17 he won a victory at Rohatyn and
   captured Krawacki. In 1615 he married the daughter of Żółkiewski,
   Katarzyna. Soon after the marriage, he received an official rank of
   podstoli koronny.
   Hetman Stanisław Żółkiewski, mentor of Koniecpolski
   Enlarge
   Hetman Stanisław Żółkiewski, mentor of Koniecpolski

   In 1615 and 1616 Koniecpolski gained experience in Ukraine fighting
   against Tatar hordes, but he failed to break or capture any sizable
   enemy units. In 1617 alongside Żołkiewski he took part in the Moldavian
   Magnate Wars and fought against the powerful Turkish army of Iskander
   Pasha (high official in the Ottoman Empire), which ended in a
   negotiated ceasefire. He also negotiated with Cossacks near Olszanica,
   Russia, where the Cossack register (list of privileged Cossacks in the
   Commonwealth military) was limited to 1,000 and Cossack's raids on the
   Black Sea were forbidden. Those raids, often reaching and pillaging
   wealthy Ottoman cities vastly contributed to the Cossack income, but
   provoked retaliation raids back into the Commonwealth territory.

   In 1618, during the session of the Commonwealth parliament ( Sejm) and
   ignoring the opposition of magnate Krzysztof Zbaraski and his allies,
   king Sigismund III Vasa granted the buława (ceremonial mace or baton)
   of Grand Crown Hetman to Stanisław Żółkiewski and the baton of Field
   Crown Hetman to Koniecpolski.

   Soon afterwards Koniecpolski was defeated by the Tatars near Oryn,
   where he made a mistake of charging in front of his army against
   overwhelming odds and consequently barely made it out of the battle
   alive. In 1619 his first wife, Katarzyna, died in labor with his first
   son, Andrzej Koniecpolski. Koniecpolski thereafter married Krystyna
   Lubomirska, who in 1620 gave birth to Aleksander Koniecpolski.

   In 1620 Koniecpolski and Żólkiewski led the army to Cecora to fight
   against the horde of Kantymir ( Khan Temir). The army numbered over
   10,000, which consisted of such important regiments as the private
   forces of magnates Koreccy, Zasławscy, Kazanowscy, Kalinowscy and
   Potoccy. Koniecpolski commanded the right flank of the Commonwealth
   forces during the Battle of Cecora. On September 19 the Polish forces
   were defeated, but were able to retreat in an organised fashion. The
   morale of the army was low, and while Koniecpolski stopped the army
   from disintegrating on 20 and 21 September, during the later retreat
   the army collapsed and ran towards the river. In the ensuing battle
   Żólkiewski was killed and Koniecpolski and many magnates ( Samuel
   Korecki, Mikolaj Struś, Mikołaj Potocki, Jan Żółkiewski, son of
   Stanisław and Łukasz Żołkiewski) were taken captive. This defeat marked
   the end of the Moldavian Magnate Wars. The prisoners were transported
   to Białograd, to Iskander pasha, then near Constantinople to the Castle
   of Seven Towers and held in the Black Tower. They returned to Poland on
   spring of 1623, when the diplomatic mission of Krzysztof Zbaraski
   bought their freedom for 30,000 talars.
   Castle of the Seven Towers in Instanbul, where Koniecpolski was
   imprisoned
   Enlarge
   Castle of the Seven Towers in Instanbul, where Koniecpolski was
   imprisoned

   Koniecpolski soon had his revenge. In July 1623 he took part in the
   skirmishes against Tatars near Tremblowla. Around February of 1624, the
   Kantymir's forces (horda budziacka) attacked southern Poland once
   again. One of its armies was intercepted and destroyed on February 6 by
   Koniecpolski near Szmańkowice and Martynów ( battle of Martynów around
   20 June), forcing the forces of Ali pasha to retreat towards Bukowina.
   Kantymir's forces crossed the border on June 5 and hetman Koniecpolski
   crushed them on June 20. Kantymir barely made it out alive.
   Koniecpolski used a new strategy - light Cossack cavalry that was as
   fast as the Tatars' had driven the enemy towards fortified postitions
   called the tabors. For his victory the Sejm awarded him 30,000 zlotys
   and made him voivode of Sandomierz in 1625.

   In 1625 Zaporozhian Cossacks rebelled, allied with Szanhin Girej, and
   tried to form an alliance with Muscovy. Koniecpolski reasoned that the
   Tatars had their share of trouble with Porta and that the budziacka
   horda of Kantymir would not be able to send major assistance. He
   gathered a 12,000-strong army of wojsko kwarciane and private units. He
   promised all Cossacks loyal to the Commonwealth fair treatment, and
   death to the rebels remaining under Mark Żmajła. On October 25 1625
   near Kryków he attacked the Cossacks, who managed to stop the first
   attacks of cavalry and retreated towards Lake Kurukowski. They managed
   again to stop the second assault and Koniecpolski was "in grave danger
   at one moment". The conflict ended with a ceasfire; the Cossack
   register was set at 6,000; and again they promised to stop raiding the
   Black Sea and provoking the Tatars.

   In 1626 the Tatars invaded again, razing and pillaging territories as
   far as the voivodships of Bełsk, Halice and Lwów, while some advance
   units reached the cities of Tarnopol and Tremblowla. A small army of
   wojsko kwarciane under Koniecpolski managed to defeat the rear guard of
   the main Tatar army, which crossed the borders with many treasures and
   slaves in jasyr. Later that year, fearing a repeat of the invasion,
   Koniecpolski violated a Sejm declaration and recruited and fielded an
   army of 8,000 against the expected Tatar second wave.

New year, new war

   Though the Tatar second wave was keenly anticipated, in 1626 the Tatars
   did not invade again but Swedes under Gustavus Adolphus crossed the
   Commonwealth borders instead, rekindling the Polish-Swedish War.
   Koniecpolski's forces (4,200 light cavalry, 1,000 dragoons, 1,000
   infantry) moved to the Prusy Królewskie with amazing speed.
   Strengthened by other units, he had 10,000 men against over
   20,000-strong Swedish force. Using the tactic of maneuver warfare, with
   small mobile units striking at the enemy's communication lines and
   smaller units, he managed to stop the Swedish attack and force the
   units under Axel Oxenstierna into a defense.
   Gustavus Adolphus, one of the most famous opponents of Koniecpolski
   Enlarge
   Gustavus Adolphus, one of the most famous opponents of Koniecpolski

   The Sejm agreed to raise money for the war, but the situation of the
   Polish forces was difficult. Lithuanian forces were dealt a serious
   defeat in December of 1626 near Koknese in Inflanty and retreated
   behind the Dvina river. The Swedes planned to strike Koniecpolski from
   two directions - Oxenstierna from direction of the Vistula and Johann
   Streiff von Lawentstein and Maxymilian Teuffl from Swedish held
   Pomorze. The flooding of the Vistula disrupted their plans and allowed
   Koniecpolski to intercept the enemy units coming from Pomorze. In
   March/April (dates vary, 12 March being most common) of 1627 near
   Czarne (Hamersztyn) they forced the Swedish forces to retreat inside
   the city, and three days later to surrender, leaving behind their
   banners and insignia. Some Swedish soldiers and mercenaries changed
   sides at that time. This victory also convinced the Elector of
   Brandenburg to declare his support for the Commonwealth, and the
   Lithuanian forces resumed the offensive in Inflanty.
   Portrait of hetman Stanislaw Koniecpolski
   Enlarge
   Portrait of hetman Stanislaw Koniecpolski

   In May 1626 the Swedes were reinforced by Gustavus Adolphus, who landed
   in Piława with over 8,000 soldiers. During the crossing of the Vistula
   near Kieżmark, in the vicinity of Gdańsk, he met the Polish forces and
   in the ensuing battle was wounded in the hip and forced to retreat. In
   July he led forces to lift the siege of Braniew, and lay siege to
   Orneta. Koniecpolski responded with the sudden attack and capture of
   Gniew. Gustavus was reported to be impressed by the speed of
   Koniecpolski's reaction. With about 7,800 men (including 2,500 cavalry
   and hussars, Commonwealth elite heavy cavalry), Koniecpolski tried to
   stop the Swedish army from reaching Gdansk, near Tczew. On 7-8 August,
   battle with the Swedish forces (10,000 men including 5,000 infantry)
   took place near the swamps of Mołtawa. The Swedes wanted to provoke the
   Poles into an attack and then destroy them with infantry fire and
   artillery, but Koniecpolski decided not to attack. The Swedes then took
   the initiative and attacked with cavalry, but did not manage to draw
   the Poles within the range of their fire. The consequent Swedish
   attacks dealt severe damage to Polish cavalry units, but did not manage
   to cripple the army (whose morale was kept high, thanks to
   Koniecpolski). The battle ended when Gustavus Adolphus was once again
   wounded and the Swedes retreated.

   After the battle, Koniepolski saw the need to reform the army and
   strengthen the firepower of infantry and artillery to match the Swedish
   units. The Swedes, on the other hand, learned arts of cavalry attacks,
   charges and melee combat from the Poles. Koniecpolski's tactics led to
   the defeat of a Swedish flotilla by the small Polish Navy on 28
   November, 1627, at the battle of Oliwa.

   In 1628 the Polish forces, lacking funding, were forced to stop their
   offensive and switch to defense. Gustavus Adolphus captured Nowy and
   Brodnica. Koniecpolski counterattacked by using his small forces most
   efficiently - fast cavalry melee attacks combined with the supporting
   fire of infantry and artillery, and using fortifications and terrain
   advantage. The Sejm decided to increase the funds for the war after the
   battle of Górzno, where Stanisław Potocki was defeated. Austria sent
   help to the Commonwealth in the form of units under field marshall Jan
   Jerzy Arnheim. Nonetheless, Koniecpolski was forced to withdraw
   Commonwealth forces from many strategic Polish strongholds in Prussia.

   In time, hetman Koniecpolski managed to recapture Puck. The final
   battle took place on 27 June 1629 near Trzciana (or Trzcianka). The
   Swedes attacked in the direction of Grudziądz, were stopped, and
   retreated to Szturm and Malbork. Koniecpolski attacked the rear guard
   led by Jan, count of Ren, and destroyed it. He also repelled a
   counterattack by Swedish raitars, who were pushed in the direction of
   Pułkowice, where another counterattack was led by Gustavus Adolfus with
   2,000 raitars. This counterattack was also stopped, and the Swedish
   forces were saved by the last reserve units led by field marshall
   Herman Wrangel, who finally managed to stop the Polish attack. Gustavus
   Adolfus said after the battle "I have never been in such a bath". 1,200
   Swedes were killed, including the count of Ren, Jan Wilhelm Reingraff,
   and a few hundred were captured. Polish losses were under 200 killed
   and injured.

   However this victory was not followed up politically and militarily. A
   ceasefire in Stary Targ ( Truce of Altmark) on 26 October, 1629 was in
   favour of the Swedes, who got the right to tax Polish trade moved
   through the Baltic (3,5% on the value of goods), kept control of many
   cities in Prusy Królewskie and for the time were generally recognized
   as the dominant power on the southern Baltic Sea coast. Koniecpolski
   had no major influence over the negotiations, as he was quickly called
   back to Ukraine to crush yet another uprising of Cossacks, this time
   led by Taras Fedorowicz.

Grand Crown Hetman

   In 1630 Taras executed Hryćka Czarny, who opposed the uprising, and
   captured the fortress of Korsuń. Koniecpolski laid siege to Perejasław,
   but lacking the support of artillery and infantry, he could not break
   its walls. The Cossacks, lacking supplies, agreed to negotiations, and
   on 8 June the Kurukow agreement was reinstated. Koniecpolski's opinion
   was that harsh punishment should be dealt to all rebels but the Cossack
   situation in the long run was better remedied not by military
   suppression, but by fairer and more equal treatment, such as an
   increase in the number of Cossack soldiers (rejestr) and the regular
   payment of wages.
   Hetman Koniecpolski Freeing People Taken into Captivity by the Tatars,
   painted by Henryk Rodakowski (black-and-white reproduction, picture
   lost during the Second World War).
   Enlarge
   Hetman Koniecpolski Freeing People Taken into Captivity by the Tatars,
   painted by Henryk Rodakowski (black-and-white reproduction, picture
   lost during the Second World War).

   In 1632, few months before his death, Zygmunt III Waza awarded to
   Koniecpolski the position of Grand Crown Hetman. After the king's
   death, the hetman played a major role directing political affairs in
   the Commonwealth and supported the free election of the son of Zygmunt,
   Władysław IV Waza in 1632. In return, a year after the election, in
   1633, Władysław rewarded Koniecpolski with the office of the castellan
   of Kraków, the most prestigious office among the Commonwealth district
   offices. Since then, Koniecpolski became an influential advisor to the
   new king, often encouraging Wladyslaw to direct Polish foreign policy
   against the Tatars. Over the coming years, Koniecpolski, together with
   kanclerz Jerzy Ossoliński, would become an important supporter of
   Władysław as long as king's actions were carried out according to the
   law; Koniecpolski never supported any Władysław's actions that were not
   supported by the Sejm, as required by Commonwealth law.

   In 1633 Koniecpolski thwarted the Turks' attacks on the Commonwealth,
   defeating their forces on July 4 under Sasowy Róg and later that year,
   on October 22, with an army of 11,000 stopped a larger Ottoman invasion
   force of over 20,000 at Kamieniec Podolski. Those defeats and the tough
   stance of Koniecpolski convinced the Turks to sign a new treaty on
   September 19, 1634, which repeated the statements of Treaty of Chocim
   from 1621. This ended the Ottoman-Commonwealth War (1633-1634). In 1635
   after Cossacks under Ivan Sulima had destroyed Polish fort "Kudak" (
   Kodak fortress, near modern Dnepropetrovsk), Koniecpolski led an
   expedition that retook the fort and punished the insurgents; Sulima was
   taken prisoner and later exectuted. That year he was also present at
   the Treaty of Sztumska Wieś.
   Fortress of Kamienic Podolski, modern day.
   Enlarge
   Fortress of Kamienic Podolski, modern day.

   Koniecpolski understood the need to modernise the army and actively
   cooperated with Wladislaw IV on various projects leading to this goal,
   like drafting mercenary units experienced in the western art of war,
   and further development of artillery (he supervised the construction of
   arsenals in Kudak, Bar and Kamieniec Podolski, and built forges on his
   Ukrainian estates). He was the patron of many talented artillery and
   engineering officers. It is possible that he also sponsored
   cartographers like Wilhelm Beauplan, who created a map of Ukraine, and
   Sebastian Aders, who created a map of the Crimea. He also supported the
   plan to create the Commonwealth Baltic Fleet.
   Treaty of Sztumska Wieś in 1635 (depicting bishop Jakub Zadzik, king
   Władysław IV and hetman Stanisław Koniecpolski)
   Enlarge
   Treaty of Sztumska Wieś in 1635 (depicting bishop Jakub Zadzik, king
   Władysław IV and hetman Stanisław Koniecpolski)

   Koniepolski became the de facto unofficial ruler of Ukraine, as king
   Władysław entrusted him with most political decisions about this
   south-eastern region of the Commonwealth. Some foreigners indeed
   referred to him as the 'viceking of Ukraine', although such a position
   never existed in the Commonwealth. With the knowledge and support of
   the king, Koniecpolski sent and received diplomatic missions from
   Stambul, carried out negotiations and signed out treaties, and as a
   hetman, had a direct control over a significant part of Commonwealth
   military. He had his own espionage network stretching from Muscovy to
   Ottoman Empire itself.

The magnate

   The Presidential Palace in Warsaw, was constructed in 1643-1645 and
   sponsored by hetman Koniecpolski. In front the statue of Józef
   Poniatowski is visible.  It should be possible to replace this fair use
   image with a freely licensed one. If you can, please do so as soon as
   is practical.
   Enlarge
   The Presidential Palace in Warsaw, was constructed in 1643-1645 and
   sponsored by hetman Koniecpolski. In front the statue of Józef
   Poniatowski is visible.  It should be possible to replace this fair use
   image with a freely licensed one. If you can, please do so as soon as
   is practical.

   Over the course of his life, Koniecpolski gathered much wealth. He was
   a possessor of 16 districts (starostwa), and his yearly revenue was
   over 500,000 zlotys (Polish coins). He sponsored the construction of
   the Presidential Palace in Warsaw. He founded the town of Brody, which
   became an important local commercial centre, fortified it with a
   citadel and bastions in 1633 and set up workshops (a manufacture)
   producing Persian-type samite fabrics, carpets and rugs there. He also
   constructed a fortified palace in Podhorce with beautiful Italian
   gardens. More than 100,000 people lived on his estates in Western
   Ukraine.

   Koniecpolski was regarded as a honorable and fair person, and liked by
   most of the szlachta. What was especially rare for a Commonwealth
   magnate, he was said to have almost no enemies. His main opponents in
   politics were those who opposed king Władysław, and on Ukraine, magnate
   Jeremi Wiśniowiecki, who vied with Koniecpolski about the control over
   Ukraine region.

Last years

   After 1635 Koniecpolski's declining health made him more and more
   reliant on the younger hetman Mikołaj Potocki, who successfully crushed
   Cossack uprisings in 1637 and 1638, and a Tatar uprising in 1639.
   Koniecpolski's influence also protected the outlaw Samuel Łaszcz,
   another able commander.

   One of the Koniecpolski's greatest victories was during the winter
   campaign against the Turks in 1644. This was the largest army he had
   commanded so far: 19,000 soldiers (60% of them were private forces of
   the magnates, Koniecpolski's own forces numbered 2,200). He dealt a
   crushing defeat to Toğay bey's (Tuhaj Bej) forces near Ochmatów and
   pursued them. Many Turks drowned near Sina Woda when the ice cover on
   the water collapsed. This campaign brought more fame to Koniecpolski,
   who had not only predicted the place and time of the Turks' attack, but
   also destroyed their forces before they used their usual strategy of
   splitting the main forces into highly mobile and difficult to intercept
   units (czambuls).

   This victory led Wladyslaw IV to consider waging an offensive war
   against the Turks. Koniecpolski supported the limited war against the
   Crimean Chanate, but opposed Wladyslaw's plan to wage the war on the
   entire Ottoman Empire, considering it an unrealistic folly. He set
   forth his strategic concept in a plan he titled "Dyskurs o Zniesieniu
   Tatarow Krymskich" (A Discourse on the Destruction of the Crimean
   Tartars). Koniecpolski also strongly advised that a coalition with
   Moscow would be useful for this campaign.

   Unfortunately, king Wladyslaw continued to push for a crusade against
   Turkey, but with little internal support failed to achieve anything
   except to spread false hopes among the Cossacks, to whom he promised
   privileges and money for participation in that crusade. An astute
   statesman, Koniecpolski foresaw danger in the discontent of the
   Cossacks and advocated a policy designed to accommodate their demands,
   unfortunately with little support and success.

   After Koniecpolski's wife Krystyna died, Koniecpolski soon married the
   young Zofia Opalińska, daughter of future Crown Marshall Łukasz
   Opaliński on 16 January 1646. Koniecpolski died on 11 March, 1646 in
   Brody. Many sources point to his new marriage as the source of his
   death. Joachim Jerlicz wrote in his diary that he overdosed on an
   aphrodisiac.
   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stanis%C5%82aw_Koniecpolski"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
