   #copyright

Stargate SG-1

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Television

   Stargate SG-1
   The original Stargate SG-1 characters. From left to right: Daniel
   Jackson, Samantha Carter, Teal'c, George Hammond and Jack O'Neill.
   Genre Science fiction
   Running time 42 minutes, occasionally extended to 63 minutes
   Creator(s) Jonathan Glassner
   Brad Wright
   Starring Richard Dean Anderson
   Michael Shanks
   Amanda Tapping
   Christopher Judge
   Ben Browder
   Corin Nemec
   Don S. Davis
   Beau Bridges
   Claudia Black
   Country of origin United States
   Original channel Showtime
   (Seasons 1-5)
   Sci Fi
   (Seasons 6-10)
   Original run July 27, 1997–present (final Sci Fi season currently being
   aired)
   No. of episodes 204 (+10 yet to be aired)
   Official website
   IMDb profile
   TV.com summary

   Stargate SG-1 (often abbreviated as SG-1) is a science fiction
   television series based upon the 1994 science fiction film Stargate.
   Both posit the existence of devices called " Stargates" that use
   artificial wormholes to allow people and objects to cross vast
   distances of space in an instant. Although the show has referred to at
   least 20 SG teams, it focuses on a team called SG-1, who operate from a
   top-secret U.S. military base called the SGC (Stargate Command), use a
   Stargate found on Earth to explore other worlds, and defend Earth
   against alien threats instigated in the original film. Thus unlike many
   other science-fiction franchises with an interplanetary-exploration
   theme, SG-1 is set in the present day, is based on Earth, and primarily
   involves humans.

Show summary

   The original members of SG-1 were Col. Jack O'Neill ( Anderson), Dr.
   Daniel Jackson ( Shanks), Capt. Samantha Carter ( Tapping) and Teal'c (
   Judge). For eight seasons, their primary antagonists were the Goa'uld,
   a galaxy-dominating race of highly intelligent and ruthless snake-like
   alien creatures who invade and take control of the bodies of other
   species, including humans on various planets. The original arch-enemy
   from this race was the System Lord Apophis ( Peter Williams).

   In the pilot episode of SG-1, the primary goal of the SG teams is
   established: to travel to other worlds through the Stargate and procure
   alien technology to help defend Earth against the Goa'uld. This forms
   the basis of nearly every episode after that point. It is common for
   episodes to begin already on another planet, where the viewer is meant
   to infer that the team is there, as usual, reconnoitering for
   potentially useful allies or technology. Aside from this, the
   archaeologist and historian character Daniel Jackson often takes
   further interest in anthropology, alien society and culture, and even
   moral issues encountered whilst offworld, allowing for more
   philosophical or thoughtful episodes. Nearly all alien planets are
   depicted as populated by humans that were displaced from ancient Earth,
   allowing the show to explore real-life ancient cultures such as those
   of the Aztecs, Mayans, Britons, the Norse, Mongols, Greeks, Romans and
   most prominently, Ancient Egyptians. Many famous mythical locations,
   such as Avalon, Camelot and Atlantis, have been found throughout the
   show. In addition, the show often gives fictional origins for real
   religions and mythologies.

   The series often follows a direct formula in which major events,
   including the introduction of a villain, are the fault of human
   curiosity. Including:
     * After ignoring it for almost five thousand years, the Goa'uld come
       to realize that Earth is a threat to them after humanity activates
       the Stargate and defeats the System Lord, Ra.
     * The Replicators are a product of a humanoid android who was created
       by a human (most probably Alteran) scientist.
     * The Ori became aware of the Milky Way galaxy after Daniel Jackson
       and Vala Mal Doran activate an Ancient communication device that
       sends their consciousnesses to the Ori galaxy.
     * See also Stargate Atlantis.

   The decade-old show remains popular; in 2004, TV Guide suggested that
   its popularity may be exceeding that of the Star Trek franchise.
   Testifying to its vigor, Stargate SG-1 broke Nielsen Ratings records
   for the U.S. Sci-Fi Channel throughout its eighth season, whose
   two-part episode " Reckoning" was widely regarded by fans as one of the
   show's five best episodes,. Although Anderson departed as a regular
   after Season 8, he made guest appearances in several episodes of
   Seasons 9 and 10 of SG-1 and Season 3 of Stargate Atlantis.

Plot summary

   Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details for Stargate SG-1 Season 1
   follow.

   When Apophis attacks Earth at the beginning of the series, which is set
   one year after the events of the original film, the SGC military base
   is brought back into action, and SG teams are created, the prime of
   which is SG-1, to help defend Earth from the new threat. It is quickly
   revealed that Apophis is but one of many Goa'uld System Lords who
   battle for power of the galaxy. It is also discovered that the Stargate
   is part of a large system of gates that leads to numerous planets.

   The Goa'uld are portrayed as parasitic beings that take control of
   other bodies (usually humans, whom they transported across the galaxy
   in the distant past). System Lords are shown having vast armies of
   footsoldiers, the bulk of these forces consisting of modified humans
   known as Jaffa. Throughout the course of the show, some Jaffa – and
   then an increasing number – form a Jaffa Rebellion led by Bra'tac and
   main character Teal'c, a high-ranking Jaffa who defected to SG-1's
   cause in the first episode.
   Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details for Stargate SG-1 Season 2
   follow.

   SG-1 and the SGC make several alliances with other races in the galaxy,
   such as the Tok'ra. The Tok'ra are the same species as the Goa'uld, but
   they are opposed to the System Lords, and their hosts willingly share
   their bodies. Other races depicted include the Tollan and other
   advanced human civilizations. They also meet races that have been
   surviving in the galaxy for millennia, such as the Nox, the Asgard, and
   the remnants of an extinct race that come to be known as the Ancients.
   It is later discovered that the Ancients were the most advanced race
   ever, and were the builders of the Stargates.

   In the background of the show, there is a constant attempt by forces on
   Earth to take control of the Stargate. In particular, rogue NID agents,
   which eventually become the elite syndicate known as The Trust, are
   constantly trying to steal the Stargate or use alien technology for
   their own ends. The political powers on Earth are often at loggerheads
   over the Stargate, particularly after the program is revealed to
   ambassadors from the other main powers of Earth.
   Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details for Stargate SG-1 Season 3
   follow.

   Besides the Goa'uld, another threat arises in Season 3, namely a race
   of non-sentient machines called Replicators. These Replicators rarely
   posed a direct threat to the Milky Way galaxy, but were on the verge of
   wiping out the Asgard.
   Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details for Stargate SG-1 Season 4
   follow.

   Engaging with Replicators in the premiere, the show begins to spread
   away from its Goa'uld-orientated roots in Season 4, focusing on
   stand-alone episodes and alternative bases for episodes. Throughout the
   season, they encounter everything from genocidal civilizations, to
   advanced strength-enhancing gauntlets, to a newly recurring species,
   the Unas. The season ends with a large battle against the Goa'uld
   System Lord Apophis.
   Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details for Stargate SG-1 Season 5
   follow.

   After Apophis is conquered in Season 5, another Goa'uld System Lord
   takes his place as the show's main villain, Anubis. Anubis is
   considerably more evil than Apophis, and has much of the knowledge of
   the Ancients. The theme of Ascension is introduced fully, explaining
   that the Ancients survived extinction by Ascending to a higher plane of
   existence. Anubis tried to do this as well, to harvest the vast
   knowledge and power in that plane, but was cast down again, leaving him
   in a dangerous half-Ascended state. Anubis gains great power by using
   Ancient technology and stealing Asgard technology.
   Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details for Stargate SG-1 Season 6
   follow.

   Near the end of Season 5, Daniel Jackson dies, but Ascends with help
   from Oma Desala. In Season 6, his position is filled by Jonas Quinn;
   Jackson is now engaged in cosmic affairs on a higher plane.
   Occasionally, he appears to his friends to help them out, but is only
   visible to them alone, often causing them to think that they are
   hallucinating. However, in the Season 6 finale, Anubis threatens to
   destroy Abydos, the planet most dear to Daniel apart from Earth, and
   Daniel promises to stop Anubis.
   Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details for Stargate SG-1 Season 7
   follow.

   However, Daniel is ultimately unable to keep Anubis from destroying
   Abydos as the other Ascended beings have a rule against interfering in
   the affairs of mortal beings. His transgression causes him to be cast
   down by the Ancients to the human plane of existence allowing him to
   re-join SG-1 again. Soon after Daniel's return, Jonas Quinn is finally
   accepted back on his home world and leaves the SGC. Throughout Season
   7, Anubis consolidates his power by wiping out other System Lords,
   whilst Daniel and the SGC search for the Lost City of the Ancients,
   where powerful technology will be found that can defeat Anubis. In the
   Season 7 finale, an Ancient Outpost is located in Antarctica, and Jack
   O'Neill is able to use the weapon there to annihilate Anubis's entire
   fleet.
   Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details for Stargate SG-1 Season 8
   follow.

   In Season 8, the System Lord Ba'al subsumes much of Anubis's power, but
   Anubis is discovered not to be dead due to his half-Ascended state. He
   eventually comes to rule secretly over Ba'al as well. Alongside this,
   the Replicators escape and begin to conquer even the System Lords. A
   human-form Replicator (" RepliCarter") is created in the image of
   Samantha Carter, and this Replicator becomes the most powerful force in
   the galaxy.

   Towards the end of Season 8, Anubis seeks to destroy all life in the
   galaxy so he can remake it as he sees fit, and he seeks to do this
   using the Dakara Superweapon. However SG-1 reaches the weapon first and
   realigns it to destroy only the Replicators across the galaxy. They
   achieve this end, but not before Daniel is killed by RepliCarter.
   However he finds himself in the Ascended plane once more (again Oma has
   helped him), where Anubis is finally stopped in his plans by Oma.
   Daniel Jackson then is de-Ascended once more and arrives at the SGC.
   Ba'al has to flee under the total success of the Jaffa Rebellion, as
   the System Lords were severely weakened in their battle against the
   Replicators and now that the Replicators are gone the Jaffa gain much
   of their lost strength.
   Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details for Stargate SG-1 Season 9
   follow.

   In Season 9, Jack O'Neill leaves the SGC and SG-1 to be replaced by
   Cameron Mitchell ( Ben Browder), with Hank Landry ( Beau Bridges)
   taking control of the SGC itself. It is discovered that Ba'al fled to
   Earth and is rebuilding his power from there, whilst many Goa'uld have
   infected The Trust.

   Due to an accidental visit to a distant galaxy, Daniel Jackson and Vala
   Mal Doran draw the attention of a cosmic group of evil Ascended beings,
   the Ori, to the Milky Way. The Ori influence the mortal world through
   commanding mortals that they evolve and enhance. These mortals are
   called Priors, and uphold a religion that worships the Ori, called
   Origin. Followers of this religion are falsely promised Ascension, and
   unknowingly enforce the power of the Ori, who begin to make incursions
   into the Milky Way, with the ultimate goal of converting all humans and
   destroying the Ancients.

   When SG-1 learns that Merlin, a formerly Ascended Ancient and founder
   of the Arthurian legends, had been working on a weapon to incapacitate
   Ascended beings as a means of defense against the Ori, they head to the
   planet where he was said to have left it. There they find a village
   with a sword in a stone – the true Camelot – where they discover that
   the "weapon" is no less than the origin of the Holy Grail myth, and is
   long lost. Meanwhile the Ori manage to open a Supergate into the Milky
   Way and send a fleet of Ori battlecruisers on an evangelical crusade;
   they effortlessly wipe out the ships that had been waiting on the other
   side to defend the Milky Way.
   Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details for Stargate SG-1 Season 10
   follow.

   In Season 10, Vala joins SG-1 after it is revealed that her daughter,
   Adria, has been rapidly aged by the Ori and made the leader of their
   forces in the Milky Way. As the Ori continue to invade, SG-1 continues
   its search for Merlin's anti-ascended being weapon, the Sangraal (Holy
   Grail). However, they must now contend with Ba'al and his clones, who
   are attempting to steal the weapon for their own purposes.

   Following a visit to Atlantis, Daniel has been told of two planets that
   may contain the weapon. The information came to him via an ascended
   ancient known throughout history as Morgan Le Fay. But before she could
   help Daniel further, she was taken back by the Ancients, presumably to
   be punished for interfering in mortal affairs (It should also be
   pointed out that episode 3 of this season marks the first visit of SG-1
   to the Pegasus galaxy and Atlantis... although Teal'c didn't make this
   trip. It also features the first joint adventures between both shows).
   The 200th episode was aired during this season.

Impending cancellation

   On August 21, 2006, the Sci Fi Channel confirmed that Stargate SG-1 has
   been canceled after ten seasons. However, Executive producer Robert C.
   Cooper told GateWorld that they are hard at work looking for a new
   outlet for the story to continue.

     "As far as the future, I can't comment yet because nothing has been
     confirmed", Cooper said. "What we want to emphasize is that the
     franchise is not dying. SG-1 will go on in some way. We're just not
     ready to announce how." Cooper also emphasizes that, though emotions
     are running high among Stargate fans who have just learned the news,
     it is important to keep the show's ratings strong throughout the
     remainder of its run on SciFi. "What's most important is that fans
     don't take out their frustration with SciFi by not watching", he
     said. "In fact, what they need to do is watch both SG-1 and Atlantis
     LIVE and make sure the ratings stay strong. That helps prove to
     other outlets that might be interested in SG-1 that the show is
     still as strong as we think it is."

   Mark Stern, executive VP of original programming for the Sci Fi Channel
   stated that the cancellation "was not a ratings-based decision", adding
   that the production staff have been given enough time to tie up all the
   loose ends and to create a good ending for the show. Stern has also
   said that SciFi plans to use some SG-1 members on the still-continuing
   spin-off Stargate Atlantis. However, the term "cancellation", as
   applied by Sci Fi Channel, are orders for SG-1 episodes from MGM/Sony.
   They have merely cancelled their order for new episodes. MGM, the
   rights holder, has expressed a desire to continue SG-1 through another
   outlet, suggesting that another network may pick up the series. This
   means that the series is not actually cancelled, but simply on hold.
   MGM announced that they wish to continue the SG-1 series, either as a
   movie, mini-series or an eleventh season on some other network,
   suggesting that G4 and Showtime have presented interest in such an
   option. However, the Sci Fi Channel is attempting to block the action,
   citing their contract with MGM.. On Tuesday September 26 gateworld.net
   released news that IGN had reported that there will not be an eleventh
   season but rather that there will be a series of SG-1 TV Movies, the
   report cites unnamed cast member .

   On Wednesday, October 11, 2006, Brad Wright confirmed that MGM had
   given the greenlight to produce two direct-to-dvd films for Stargate
   SG-1. The first film would serve as an end to the Ori storyline, while
   the second would deal with time travel. None of the cast have signed on
   for the films as of yet, but they are said to be "very eager".

Fictional universe

   SG-1 has a rich backdrop of aliens, planets and technology. For more
   information, see the relevant articles:
     * Aliens in Stargate
     * Technology in Stargate
     * Planets in Stargate
     * Human civilizations in Stargate SG-1

Show history

   Developed for television by Jonathan Glassner and Brad Wright, the
   series is produced by MGM and filmed at Bridge Studios in Vancouver,
   British Columbia, Canada. The first episode was broadcast on July 27,
   1997 on Showtime in the US and December 3, 1997 on the Seven Network in
   Australia. Showtime produced and aired the series' first five seasons.
   Since season six, it has been produced and aired by the Sci Fi Channel.
   SG-1 recently became the longest-running North American science fiction
   series on television, surpassing The X-Files' 9 seasons and 202
   episodes. It is also listed in the 2007 Guinness World Records as the
   "longest running science fiction show (consecutive)"; Doctor Who fans
   dispute this claim, as over 600 episodes of the British show were
   produced and shown consecutively between 1963 and 1989. A spin-off
   series, Stargate Atlantis, began airing in 2004. The two shows now run
   in tandem, with plots that are occasionally interconnected, and story
   timelines that are simultaneous.

   On August 21, 2006 the Sci-Fi channel announced that it would not be
   renewing the show for an eleventh season; however, executive producer
   Robert C. Cooper has said that SG-1's story will continue in a
   yet-to-be-announced form. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer has announced that they
   are very keen to carry on the Stargate SG-1 story, and that they
   "intend to vigorously find a way to extend the franchise." The last day
   of shooting for season 10 was on October 5, 2006.

Cast

Regular characters

   Character Actor Length of time
   Col./ Brig. Gen./ Maj. Gen. Jack O'Neill Richard Dean Anderson 1997 –
   2005 (recurring afterwards)
   Dr. Daniel Jackson Michael Shanks 1997 – 2002, 2003 – present,
   (recurring otherwise)
   Capt./ Major/ Lt. Col. Samantha Carter Amanda Tapping 1997 – present
   Teal'c Christopher Judge 1997 – present
   Maj. Gen./ Lt. Gen. George Hammond Don S. Davis 1997 – 2004 (recurring
   afterwards)
   Jonas Quinn Corin Nemec 2002 – 2003
   Lt. Col. Cameron Mitchell Ben Browder 2005 – present
   Maj. Gen. Hank Landry Beau Bridges 2005 – present
   Vala Mal Doran Claudia Black 2006 – present (recurring previously)

   In Children of the Gods, the pilot episode for the series, when
   Samantha Carter sees a DHD for the first time, she comments on how it
   took "fifteen years and three supercomputers to MacGyver a system for
   the gate on Earth." This is a reference to Anderson's well-known
   portrayal of the TV character MacGyver.

   Throughout the show, there are many references to The Wizard of Oz,
   mainly stated by Col. O'Neill. As well as many references to The
   Simpsons as Jack O'Neill's favorite television series -- it is, in
   fact, Richard Dean Anderson's as well. In Citizen Joe, Dan
   Castellaneta, the voice of Homer Simpson, made a guest appearance as
   Joe Spencer. In turn, Richard Dean Anderson later made a guest
   appearance on The Simpsons in the seventeenth season episode Kiss Kiss,
   Bang Bangalore as himself.

   The USAF cooperates closely with the makers of the program. Two
   successive Chiefs of Staff of the USAF, Generals Michael E. Ryan and
   John P. Jumper, have appeared in the show, playing themselves. Ryan
   appeared in the episode " Prodigy" because of his fascination with
   science fiction, especially space exploration. Jumper made a cameo
   appearance in " Lost City", the episode that was originally slated to
   be the show's last. The Air Force Association recognized Richard Dean
   Anderson at its 57th annual dinner on September 14, 2004, for his work
   as actor and executive producer of the show and "for the show's
   continuous positive depiction of the Air Force." Many of the extras
   portraying US Air Force personnel are in fact real US Air Force
   personnel.

Other characters

Episodes

   Stargate SG-1's first episode was titled " Children of the Gods". As of
   2006, SG-1 is in its 10th Season, with 204 aired episodes. The
   producers feel that the 200th episode was a big milestone; airing
   mid-10th-season and titled " 200", it was written in collaboration by
   most of the staff-members in production, filled with in-jokes and
   references in the style of the show's 100th episode, " Wormhole
   X-Treme!".

Broadcasters

     * Argentina: Fox Broadcasting Company
     * Australia: Seven Network, TV1 (as of December 2006, Sci Fi
       Australia)
     * Austria: ATV+
     * Belgium: Kanaal Twee (Dutch-speaking Belgium), RTBF
       (French-speaking Belgium)
     * Brazil: Fox Broadcasting Company
     * Bulgaria: Nova Television (season 1)
     * Canada: Space, CityTV (and starting with Season 9 in HDTV on ASN,
       Movie Central (English); Z Télé, TQS ( French Canada)
     * Chile: Fox Broadcasting Company (Sg1 6-8,Atl 1-2) Axn (Sg1 1-2) La
       Red
     * Costa Rica: Repretel
     * Czech Republic: TV Nova (until season 6) Prima TV (until season 6)
     * Denmark: Kanal 5 (until season 5)
     * Finland: MTV3 (until season 6 - has ended) SubTV (until season 6 -
       has ended)
     * France: M6
     * Germany: RTL II, Tele5
     * Hungary: Tv2
     * Iceland: Skjár Einn
     * Israel: Channel 1
     * Italy: Fox ( Sky Italia)
     * Ireland: Sky One/ Sky Two/ Sky Three, RTÉ Two
     * Japan: AXN
     * Lithuania: TV3
     * Malaysia: TV3
     * Mexico: Fox Broadcasting Company (Sg1 1-8,Atl 1-2)
     * Morocco: 2M
     * Netherlands: Veronica
     * New Zealand: TV 2, SKY 1
     * Poland: HBO, HBO 2 and TVN (seasons 1-2),
     * Portugal: SIC (seasons 1-3), SIC Radical (seasons 4-6), AXN
       (seasons 7-8)
     * Romania: Antena 1, TVR 2
     * Slovenia: Kanal A
     * Slovakia: (TV JOJ,TV Markíza) (until season 6)
     * South Africa: M-Net Series ( DStv)
     * Spain: AXN (cable/satellite), TV3 ( Catalonia), Canal 9 ( Valencian
       Community), ETB2 ( Basque Country)
     * Sweden, TV3 (First season only)
     * United Kingdom: Sky One/ Sky Two/ Sky Three, Channel 4
     * United States: Showtime (until season 5), Sci Fi Channel (until
       season 10)
     * Uruguay: Fox Broadcasting Company

Spin-offs

   The Stargate SG-1 story and surrounding mythos has spawned many
   subsidiary productions which are often considered canon, with the
   occasional obvious exceptions.

Television shows

     * Stargate Atlantis
     * Stargate Infinity - animated; not considered canon.

Games

     * Stargate SG-1 Roleplaying Game
     * Stargate Adventure (video game)
     * Stargate SG-1: The Alliance (video game; production cancelled as of
       February 2006)
     * Stargate Worlds ( MMORPG)

Literature

   Several novels has been published based in Stargate SG-1. From 1999 to
   2001, ROC published four novels written by Ashley McConnell. In 2004,
   UK-based Fandemonium Press started a new series of licensed tie-in
   novels based on Stargate SG-1. Due to the conflict with ROC's license,
   these books were available in Australia, Canada, New Zealand, South
   Africa and the UK, but not in the US. Fandemonium books became
   available in the US in 2006.

   The official Stargate Magazine, produced by Titan Publishing, began
   publishing short stories written by Fandemonium authors in their 8th
   issue. The stories alternate between both SG-1 and Atlantis.

Comics

   A series of comics has also been published by Avatar Press.

Differences between the film and series

   The original film did not develop as much of the setting's depth as
   would be needed in a television series. MGM, which owned the rights,
   took Roland Emmerich and Dean Devlin's product and handed the reins to
   a new team of creators (Brad Wright and Jonathan Glassner). This new
   team introduced many new concepts to make the Stargate universe into a
   workable weekly science fiction show. Also, certain details were
   changed.

   For example, in the film:
     * Ra's species was not named, and Ra was presented as using a sort of
       incorporeal "possession" of a human host instead of direct
       biological parasitism.
     * A few names were spelled differently or changed, which has been a
       source of in-jokes and pedanticism ever since:
          + Colonel Jack O'Neill's name was spelled O'Neil.
          + Colonel Jack O'Neill's wife/ex-wife was named Sarah rather
            than Sara.
          + Colonel Jack O'Neil's son was named Tyler rather than Charlie.
            It is possible, though, that one is in fact his middle name.
          + Dr. Jackson's wife's name was Sha'uri, rather than Sha're.
     * A Goa'uld shown briefly in the movie as humanoid instead of
       snakelike. It is possible, however, that this is a Goa'uld still in
       its original host, an Unas. (The Unas were the Goa'uld's hosts
       before humans).
     * Ra was the last of a dying race rather than just one of many
       Goa'uld. However, this may not be an actual contradiction since it
       would be rather easy for the Goa'uld to have repopulated in the
       10,000 years since Ra discovered humanity.
     * According to the film, Abydos was located in the Kaliem galaxy, "on
       the far side of the known universe", but in the series it is one of
       the closest Stargates to Earth, in the Milky Way Galaxy.
     * The Air Force base was under Creek Mountain in the film, but in the
       series it is Cheyenne Mountain.
     * The first time Daniel Jackson sees the Stargate is after he figures
       out the seven-coordinate address system, but in the TV episode "
       Lost City", he tells Elizabeth Weir that "I remember when we were
       first trying to get the Stargate to work, I would just come here,
       and stare at it for hours." It is possible that he's referring to
       the cover-stones that the seven-symbols were printed upon, which he
       did stare at for hours on end. Another possibility is that he was
       simplifying his experience, so that he could impress upon her how
       long he had been at the SGC. Something which Weir catches and
       responds with, "Is that a gentle reminder that you've been an
       important part of this since the very beginning?".
     * In the episode " The Torment of Tantalus", it was clearly stated
       Catherine Langford was twenty-one in 1945, which would make her
       about four years old in 1928. However, she is much older in the
       opening sequence of the film, which is set in that year.
     * In the episode " Children of the Gods", O'Neill told General
       Hammond that their "first clue" Ra was an alien was the fact that
       his eyes glowed. In the film, O'Neill didn't encouter Ra until
       after Daniel Jackson had discovered he was an alien. It is likely
       that O'Neill was merely using a figure of speech.
     * In the film and in early episodes of Stargate SG-1 frost would form
       on the faces of the characters as a result of travelling through
       the Stargate. The reason given for this was inaccuracies in gate
       addresses due to stellar drift. The effect was phased out in series
       1 under the explanation of re-calculating the newer gate positions
       and adjusting the dialing accordingly. It can sometimes be seen in
       later episodes when the wormhole is affected during transit.

   Several of these differences were simply ignored by the TV series, but
   others have been addressed in various episodes of Stargate SG-1. For
   example, it was sarcastically mentioned at one point that there is
   another Colonel named Jack O'Neil whose name is often mixed up with
   Jack O'Neill's (and who "has no sense of humor"). Other changes have
   been explained as advances in technology, such as more precise "aiming"
   by Earth's dialing computer (to compensate for the drift of the planets
   in 10,000 years) that prevents the frost effect. Others are most likely
   just oversights.

   Because of these differences, some fans of the film consider the
   television series as its own separate entity, rather than a proper
   sequel to the film. Using some of Emmerich's notes, Bill McCay wrote a
   series of five novels continuing the story the original creators had
   envisioned. However, recently Dean Devlin stated that there was an
   interest in creating the original sequels and that the McCay books were
   not correct.

DVD releases

          DVD Name            Region 1          Region 2          Region 4
   Stargate SG-1 Season 1 May 22, 2001      October 21, 2002  March 1, 2004
   Stargate SG-1 Season 2 September 3, 2002 January 27, 2003  February 18,
                                                              2004
   Stargate SG-1 Season 3 June 17, 2003     February 24, 2003 May 12, 2004
   Stargate SG-1 Season 4 September 2, 2003 March 31, 2003    August 18, 2004
   Stargate SG-1 Season 5 January 20, 2004  April 28, 2003    November 17,
                                                              2004
   Stargate SG-1 Season 6 March 2, 2004     February 2, 2004  January 19, 2005
   Stargate SG-1 Season 7 October 19, 2004  February 28, 2005 March 16,
                                                              2005
   Stargate SG-1 Season 8 October 4, 2005   February 27, 2006 August 17,
                                                              2005
   Stargate SG-1 Season 9 October 3, 2006   August 10, 2006   August 16, 2006

DVD box art

   As shown on the Region 1 boxsets.

   The Complete First Season

   The Complete Second Season

   The Complete Third Season

   The Complete Fourth Season

   The Complete Fifth Season

   The Complete Sixth Season

   The Complete Seventh Season

   The Complete Eighth Season

   The Complete Ninth Season
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stargate_SG-1"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
