   #copyright

Star Trek: The Original Series

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Television

                           Star Trek
   Star Trek title card
           Genre         Science fiction
        Creator(s)       Gene Roddenberry
         Starring        William Shatner
                         Leonard Nimoy
                         DeForest Kelley
                         Nichelle Nichols
                         James Doohan
                         George Takei
                         Walter Koenig
   Theme music composer  Alexander Courage
       Opening theme     Star Trek Theme
     Country of origin   Flag of United States  United States
      No. of episodes    79
                           Production
   Executive producer(s) Gene Roddenberry
       Running time      50 min.
                           Broadcast
     Original channel    NBC
      Picture format     NTSC ( 480i)
       Audio format      Monaural
       Original run      September 8, 1966 – September 2, 1969
                           Chronology
        Followed by      Star Trek: The Animated Series
                             Links
                        Official website
                         TV.com summary

   Star Trek is a science fiction television series created by Gene
   Roddenberry which aired from September 8, 1966 through June 3, 1969. 80
   episodes were produced, 79 of which were aired. Although cancelled
   after a relatively short run, the program was placed in syndication,
   where it spawned a strong fan following and, later, achieved iconic
   status as an American - and eventually worldwide - television
   phenomenon.

   Set in the 23rd century, Star Trek follows the adventures of the
   starship Enterprise and her crew, led by Captain James T. Kirk (
   William Shatner) and his First Officer Mr. Spock ( Leonard Nimoy). Bill
   Shatner's legendary introduction to the show stated the starship's
   purpose and encapsulates the enduring draw for the fans then and now:

          Space...the Final Frontier. These are the voyages of the
          starship Enterprise. Its five-year mission: to explore strange
          new worlds, to seek out new life and new civilizations, to
          boldly go where no man has gone before.

   The success of the program was followed by five additional television
   series and eleven theatrical movies. The Guinness Book of Records lists
   it as having the largest number of spinoffs. Though the show was
   released as and is officially titled simply Star Trek, it has acquired
   the retronym Star Trek: The Original Series (sometimes shortened to
   ST:TOS or TOS), in order to distinguish this first series from the
   sequels which followed (all of which comprise the Star Trek universe or
   franchise). It was also sometimes known as Classic Trek.

   When Star Trek debuted on NBC in 1966, it was not successful; ratings
   were low and advertising revenue was lackluster. During the show's
   second season, the threat of cancellation loomed. The show's devoted
   fanbase conducted an unprecedented letter-writing campaign, petitioning
   NBC to keep the show on the air. The fans succeeded in gaining a third
   season, however NBC moved the show to a Friday Night Death Slot, and
   ratings remained poor. The series was cancelled at the end of its third
   season. The show became successful in reruns, and thus the Star Trek
   saga was born.

Awards

   Although it never won, Star Trek was nominated for the following Emmy
   awards:
     * Outstanding Dramatic Series (Gene Roddenberry and Gene L. Coon),
       1967
     * Outstanding Dramatic Series (Gene Roddenberry), 1968
     * Outstanding Supporting Actor ( Leonard Nimoy as Mr. Spock), 1967,
       1968, 1969
     * Outstanding Guest Appearance ( Frank Gorshin as Commissioner Bele),
       1969
     * Individual Achievement in Art Direction and Allied Crafts (Jim
       Rugg), 1967
     * Individual Achievement in Cinematography (Darrell Anderson, Linwood
       G. Dunn, and Joseph Westheimer), 1967
     * Individual Achievement in Film and Sound Editing (Douglas
       Grindstaff), 1967
     * Outstanding Achievement in Film Editing (Donald R. Rode), 1968
     * Special Classification of Individual Achievement for Photographic
       Effects (The Westheimer Company), 1968
     * Outstanding Achievement in Art Direction and Scenic Design (John
       Dwyer and Walter M. Jeffries), 1969
     * Outstanding Achievement in Film Editing (Donald R. Rode), 1969
     * Special Classification Achievements for Photographic Effects (The
       Howard A. Anderson Company, The Westheimer Company, Van der Veer
       Photo Effects, Cinema Research), 1969.

   Eight of its episodes were nominated for one of science-fiction’s top
   awards, the Hugo Award, in the category "Best Dramatic Presentation".
   In 1967 the nominated episodes were " The Naked Time", " The Corbomite
   Maneuver", and " The Menagerie". In 1968 all nominees were Star Trek
   episodes: " Amok Time", " Mirror, Mirror", " The Doomsday Machine", "
   The Trouble with Tribbles", and " The City on the Edge of Forever".
   Unlike the Emmys, Star Trek won both years for the episodes "The
   Menagerie" and "The City on the Edge of Forever".

   In 1968, Star Trek's most critically acclaimed episode, "City on the
   Edge of Forever" written by Harlan Ellison, won the prestigious Writers
   Guild of America Award for Best Original Teleplay, although this was
   for Ellison's original draft script, and not for the screenplay of the
   episode as it aired.

Broadcast history

   Star Trek originally aired on the NBC television network. All times are
   Eastern Daylight Time.
     * September 8, 1966 – August 31, 1967: Thursday, 8:30–9:30 P.M.
     * September 15, 1967 – August 30, 1968: Friday, 8:30–9:30 P.M.
     * September 20, 1968 – April 4, 1969: Friday, 10:00–11:00 P.M.
     * June 3, 1969 – September 2, 1969: Tuesday, 7:30–8:30 P.M.

Creation

   A longtime fan of science fiction, in 1960 Roddenberry put together a
   proposal for Star Trek, a science fiction television series set on
   board a large interstellar space ship dedicated to exploring the
   galaxy. Some influences Roddenberry noted were A. E. van Vogt's tales
   of the Space Beagle, Eric Frank Russell's Marathon stories, and the
   1956 science fiction film Forbidden Planet. Parallels have also been
   drawn with the 1954 TV scifi series Rocky Jones, Space Ranger, a much
   less sophisticated space opera that nevertheless included many of the
   elements (organization, crew relationships, missions, elements of
   bridge layout, and even some technology) that made up Star Trek.
   Roddenbery also drew heavily from the Horatio Hornblower novels
   depicting a daring sea captain exercising broad discretionary authority
   on distant missions of noble purpose; his Kirk character was more or
   less Hornblower in space. Roddenberry had extensive experience in
   writing westerns that were particularly popular television fare at the
   time, and pitched the show to the network as a " Wagon Train to the
   stars."

   In 1964, Roddenberry secured a three-year development deal with leading
   independent TV production company Desilu (founded by comedy stars
   Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz). In Roddenberry's original concept, the
   protagonist was named Captain Robert April of the "S.S. Yorktown".
   Eventually, this character became Captain Christopher Pike. The first
   pilot episode, " The Cage", was made in 1964, with actor Jeffrey Hunter
   in the role of Pike.

   At a time when racial segregation was still firmly entrenched in many
   areas of the United States, Roddenberry envisaged a multi-racial and
   mixed-gender crew, based on his assumption that racial prejudice and
   sexism would not exist in the 23rd century. He also included recurring
   characters from alien races, including Spock, who was half human and
   half Vulcan, united under the banner of the United Federation of
   Planets.

   Other innovative Star Trek features involved solutions to basic
   production problems. The idea of the faster-than-light warp drive was
   not new to science fiction, but it allowed a narrative device that
   permitted the Enterprise to quickly traverse space. The matter
   transporter, where crew members "beamed" from place to place, solved
   the problem of moving characters quickly from the ship to a planet, a
   spacecraft landing sequence for each episode being prohibitively
   expensive. The famous flip-open communicator was introduced as a plot
   device to strand the characters in challenging situations by
   malfunctioning, being lost or stolen, or out of range; absent such a
   device, the characters could simply beam up at the first sign of
   trouble. The flip-open communicator has been copied in many popular
   cell phone designs from the mid-1990's on.

   The Star Trek concept was first offered to the CBS network, but the
   channel turned it down for the more mainstream Irwin Allen production,
   Lost In Space. Star Trek was then offered to NBC, who commissioned and
   then turned down the first pilot (NBC executives would later be quoted
   as saying that the initial pilot episode was 'too cerebral'). However,
   the NBC executives were favorably impressed with the concept and made
   the unusual decision to commission a second pilot: " Where No Man Has
   Gone Before". Only the character of Spock (played by Leonard Nimoy)
   remained from the original pilot, and only two cast members ( Majel
   Barrett and Leonard Nimoy) carried on to the series. Much of the first
   pilot's footage was used in a later two-part episode, " The Menagerie".

   The second pilot introduced the main characters: Captain Kirk ( William
   Shatner), chief engineer Lieutenant Commander Scott ( James Doohan) and
   Lieutenant Sulu ( George Takei); Sulu's title in this episode was
   Ship's Physicist (changed to Helmsman in subsequent episodes). Chief
   medical officer and the captain's confidante Dr. Leonard McCoy (
   DeForest Kelley) (a Dr. Piper was present on the pilot), Yeoman Janice
   Rand ( Grace Lee Whitney) and communications officer Lieutenant Uhura (
   Nichelle Nichols) were introduced later. Roddenberry's inclusion of the
   Asian Sulu and black Uhura, both of them intelligent, well-spoken
   professionals, was a bold move when most television characters of the
   time were white and those who weren't were often presented in a highly
   stereotypical manner.

   Roddenberry's production staff included art director Matt Jefferies.
   Jefferies designed the Enterprise; his contribution was commemorated in
   the so-called Jefferies tube, which became a standard part of the
   (fictional) design of Federation starships. Jefferies' starship
   concepts arrived at a final saucer-and-cylinders design that became a
   template for all subsequent Federation space vehicles. Jefferies also
   developed the main set for the Enterprise bridge (based on an original
   design by Pato Guzman) and used his practical experience as a WWII
   airman and his knowledge of aircraft design to come up with a sleek,
   functional, ergonomic bridge layout. Costume designer William Ware
   Theiss created the striking look of the Enterprise uniforms and the
   risqué costumes for female guest stars. Artist and sculptor Wah Chang,
   who had worked for Walt Disney, was hired to design and manufacture
   props: he created the flip-open communicator, the portable
   sensing-recording-computing tricorder and the phaser weapons. Later, he
   would create various memorable aliens, such as the Gorn.

   The series introduced television viewers to many ideas which later
   became common in science fiction films: warp drive, teleportation,
   wireless hand-held communicators and scanners, directed energy weapons,
   desktop computer terminals, laser surgery, starship cloaking devices,
   and computer speech synthesis. Although these concepts had numerous
   antecedents in sci-fi literature and film, they had never before been
   integrated in one presentation and most of them were certainly new to
   TV. Even the ship's automatic doors were a novel feature in 1966.

   After a few episodes were in the can, but before they had been
   officially aired, Roddenberry screened one or two of them at a major
   science fiction convention, and, according to legend, received a
   standing ovation.

Characterizations

   Star Trek made celebrities of its cast of largely unknown actors.
   Kelley had appeared in many films and TV shows, but mostly in smaller
   roles. Shatner and Nimoy also had previous TV and film experience but
   neither was very well-known (although Shatner had starred as the
   terrified air traveler in the classic Twilight Zone episode " Nightmare
   at 20,000 Feet"). After the episodes aired, many performers found
   themselves type-cast due to their roles.

   The three main characters were Kirk, Spock, and McCoy, with writers
   often playing the different personalities off each other: Kirk was
   passionate and often aggressive, Spock was coolly logical, and McCoy
   was sardonic but always compassionate. In many stories the three
   clashed, with Kirk forced to make a tough decision while Spock
   advocated the logical but sometimes callous path and McCoy (or "Bones,"
   as Kirk nicknamed him (short for "sawbones," a traditional, slightly
   pejorative nickname for doctors)) insisted on doing whatever would
   cause the least harm. McCoy and Spock had a sparring relationship that
   masked their true affection and respect for each other, and their
   constant arguments became very popular with viewers. The Spock
   character was at first rejected by network officials who feared that
   his vaguely "satanic" appearance (with pointed ears and eyebrows) might
   prove upsetting to some viewers. The network had even airbrushed out
   Spock's pointed ears and eyebrows from publicity materials sent to the
   network affiliates. But Spock went on to become one of the most popular
   characters on the show as was McCoy's impassioned country-doctor
   personality. Spock, in fact, became a sex symbol of sorts, something
   nobody connected with the show had expected.

   Some advocates of logic in real life have criticised the depiction of
   Spock as logical arguing that his actions in the series did not support
   this. Originally intended in the series as a foil to Kirk's intuition,
   and as a demonstration of the perils of being overly logical, Spock's
   actions are often based on inadequate or willfully ignored information.
   In order to disguise both their own inability to create a truly logical
   character, and to demonise the exercise of logic generally, the writers
   are sometime accused of characterising Spock as "rigid, inclined to
   ignore or disregard relevant information, and both emotionless and
   disregarding the emotions of others" as a substitute for logic. To pick
   just one example, a truly logical leader, knowing he led emotional men,
   would not disregard their emotions in difficult situations or expect
   them to be successful in suppressing them entirely but would rather
   include their likely emotions, and the unavoidable consequences of
   those emotions, into his assessment. Most fans defend Spock's lack of
   total logic due to the character being half human.

   The series was created during a time of cold war politics, and the
   plots of its episodes occasionally reflected this. The original series
   shows encounters with other advanced spacefaring civilizations,
   including the Klingons and the Romulans, both of which were involved in
   separate "cold wars" with the Federation.

Episodes

   In terms of its writing, Star Trek is notable as one of the earliest
   science-fiction TV series to utilize the services of leading
   contemporary science fiction writers, such as Harlan Ellison and
   Theodore Sturgeon, as well as established TV writers. Series script
   editor Dorothy C. Fontana (originally Roddenberry's secretary) was also
   a vital part of the success of Star Trek — she edited most of the
   series' scripts and wrote several episodes. Her credits read D.C.
   Fontana at the suggestion of Gene Roddenberry since he felt that a
   woman might not be taken seriously because almost all science fiction
   writers were men.

   Several notable themes were tackled throughout the entire series. The
   most important was the exploration of major issues of 1960s USA, like
   sexism, racism, nationalism, and global war. Roddenberry utilized the
   allegory of a space vessel set many years in the future to explore
   these issues. For example, Star Trek was one of the first (though not,
   as is frequently repeated, the very first) television shows to feature
   an interracial kiss (in the episode " Plato's Stepchildren"), although
   because of the censorship of such displays prevalent at the time, it
   was depicted as being compelled by an alien of great mental ability,
   not as a voluntary act.

   One of the most celebrated episodes was " The City on the Edge of
   Forever" written by Harlan Ellison, which garnered both the Hugo Award
   and Writers Guild Award. Guest starring Joan Collins, the story dealt
   with the concept of time travel and changing the future, later utilized
   in films such as The Terminator (the end credits of which acknowledge
   Ellison's works) and Back to the Future. The first-season episode " The
   Menagerie" also won a Hugo Award.

   Episodes such as " The Apple", " Who Mourns for Adonais?", and " The
   Return of the Archons" display subtle anti-religious themes. " Bread
   and Circuses" and " The Omega Glory" have themes that are more overtly
   pro-religion and patriotic. Network interference, up to and including
   wholesale censorship of scripts and film footage, was a regular
   occurrence in the 1960s and Star Trek suffered from its fair share of
   tampering. Many scripts had to be revised after vetting by the NBC
   censors and, according to one book about the series, the gaping mouth
   of the "salt vampire" monster in the episode " The Man Trap" was
   actually an in-joke which referred to the network censors' persistent
   habit of cutting love scenes which featured open-mouthed kisses.

   The Original Series was also noted for its sense of humor, such as
   Spock and McCoy's pointed, yet friendly, bickering. Episodes like " The
   Trouble with Tribbles", " I, Mudd" and " A Piece of the Action" are
   written and staged as comedies. The third season episode " Spock's
   Brain" is an all-out parody of the show, written by the reportedly
   disgruntled writer/producer Gene L. Coon under the pen name "Lee
   Cronin". Star Trek's humor is generally much more subdued in the
   spin-offs and movies, with notable exceptions such as Star Trek IV: The
   Voyage Home.

   Several episodes used the conceit of duplicate Earths, allowing re-use
   of stock props and sets. "Bread and Circuses", " Miri" and "The Omega
   Glory" depict such worlds, and two episodes, " A Piece of the Action",
   and " Patterns of Force" are based on alien planets that have adopted
   period Earth costumes (Prohibition and Nazi, respectively).

   All 79 episodes of the series have been digitally remastered by CBS
   Paramount Domestic Television. They have since come out on DVDs in the
   "official order", not the same as when originally aired.

Best episodes

   According to Entertainment Weekly (Special Edition Jan. 18, 1995), the
   following are the ten best episodes of Star Trek:
     * 1. The City on the Edge of Forever
     * 2. Space Seed
     * 3. Mirror Mirror
     * 4. The Doomsday Machine
     * 5. Amok Time
     * 6. The Devil in the Dark
     * 7. The Trouble with Tribbles
     * 8. This Side of Paradise
     * 9. The Enterprise Incident
     * 10. Journey to Babel

"Star Trek Memories"

   In 1983, Leonard Nimoy hosted a one-hour special as a promotional
   tie-in with the film Star Trek III: The Search for Spock, in which he
   recounted his memories of working on The Original Series and explained
   the origins of things such as the Vulcan nerve pinch and the Vulcan
   hand salute. This special continues to be widely seen in some areas; it
   was included in the syndication package for The Original Series, in
   order to bump up the episode count to 80.

Music

Theme song

   The show's theme tune was written by Alexander Courage, immediately
   recognizable by many, and has been featured in a number of Star Trek
   spin-off episodes and motion pictures. The "lyrics" for the
   introduction were written by Gene Roddenberry without Courage's
   knowledge and without intending for them ever to be sung. Roddenberry
   would nevertheless get a 50% share of the music's performance
   royalties.

   See related article Star Trek: The Original Series (theme song).

Dramatic underscore

   For budgetary reasons, this series made significant use of "tracked"
   music, or music written for other episodes that was re-used in later
   episodes. Of the 79 episodes that were broadcast, only 31 had complete
   or partial original dramatic underscores created specifically for them;
   the remainder of music in any episode was tracked from a different
   episode. (It was primarily the decision of Robert H. Justman, credited
   as Associate Producer during the first two seasons, which episodes
   would have new music).

   Screen credits for the composers were given based on the amount of
   music composed for, or composed and re-used in, the episode. Some of
   these final credits were, though, occasionally incorrect.

   Beyond the short works of "source" music (music whose source is seen or
   acknowledged onscreen) created for specific episodes, eight composers
   were contracted to create original dramatic underscore during the
   series run: Alexander Courage, George Duning, Jerry Fielding, Gerald
   Fried, Sol Kaplan, Samuel Matlovsky, Joseph Mullendore and Fred
   Steiner. All conducted their own music. Of these composers, Steiner
   composed original music for the largest number of episodes (11), and it
   is his instrumental arrangement of Alexander Courage's main theme that
   is heard over many of the end title credits of the series.

   The tracked musical underscores were chosen and edited to the episode
   by music editors, principal of whom were Robert Raff (most of Season
   One), Jim Henrikson (Season One and Two), and Richard Lapham (Season
   Three).

   The original recordings of the music of some episodes were released in
   the United States commercially on the GNP Crescendo label. Music for a
   number of the episodes were re-recorded by the Varese Sarabande label,
   with Fred Steiner conducting the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra; and on
   the Label X label, with Tony Bremner conducting the Royal Philharmonic.

Characters

Regular characters

                    Picture Role Rank Performer Position
     James Tiberius Kirk Captain William Shatner Captain and commanding
                     officer of the Starship Enterprise.
    Spock Commander Leonard Nimoy Science officer and second-in-command;
    sole regular crew member of non-human parentage; Kirk's best friend.
    Leonard H. McCoy Lt. Commander DeForest Kelley Chief Medical Officer;
    after Spock, Kirk's closest confidante; usually called "Bones" by the
                                  captain.
       Montgomery Scott Lt. Commander James Doohan Chief Engineer and
         third-in-command; usually called " Scotty" by the captain.
    Nyota Uhura Lieutenant Nichelle Nichols Communications officer; sole
              female commissioned officer in the regular cast.
   Hikaru Sulu Lieutenant George Takei Helmsman (character was a scientist
                        in the second pilot episode).
      Pavel Andreievich Chekov Ensign Walter Koenig Navigator; mans the
     sensor station in Spock's absence (added to the regular cast in the
                               second season.)
      Janice Rand Yeoman Grace Lee Whitney Captain's yeoman (season 1).
      Christine Chapel Nurse Majel Barrett Head nurse, assistant to Dr.
                                   McCoy.

   Sulu and Uhura were not given first names in this series. Sulu's first
   name, Hikaru, was revealed non-canonically in Vonda McIntyre's Pocket
   Book novel Enterprise: The First Adventure. The name was "officially"
   put into the canon by George Takei in Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered
   Country. Uhura's first name was never mentioned on screen, but the name
   Nyota was used in fandom, and in Pocket Book novels. The Original
   Series holds the record for the most original novels, with over 100
   published (including the James Blish and Star Trek Logs book series).

   Majel Barrett also provided the voice of the computer in TOS and many
   other Star Trek series and movies. She also played (as a brunette) the
   part of Captain Pike's First Officer in the pilot episode " The Cage".
   Barrett married Roddenberry in 1969.

   The relatively young, mop-topped Russian navigator Chekov was added in
   the second season. There may be some truth to the unofficial story that
   the Soviet newspaper Pravda complained that there were no Russians
   among the culturally diverse characters. However, studio documentation
   suggests that the intention was to introduce a character with more
   appeal to a teenage market, especially the female sector. It's also
   been claimed that former Monkees member Davy Jones may have served as a
   model for the character.

Semi-regular

     * Transporter Chief Kyle ( John Winston), who also appeared aboard
       USS Reliant in Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan.
     * Lieutenant Galloway (David L. Ross), the only recurring character
       to be killed off during the original series.
     * Mr. Leslie ( Eddie Paskey).
     * Lieutenant Kelowitz (Grant Woods), who appeared in " The Galileo
       Seven", " Arena" and " This Side of Paradise".
     * Kevin Riley (Bruce Hyde), who appeared in " The Naked Time" and "
       The Conscience of the King".
     * Dr. M'Benga (Booker Bradshaw), who appeared in " A Private Little
       War", and " That Which Survives".
     * Mr. Hansen (Hagan Beggs), who appeared in " Court Martial" and both
       parts of " The Menagerie".
     * Lieutenant DeSalle (Michael Barrier), engineer who had a prominent
       role in " The Squire of Gothos", " This Side of Paradise", and "
       Catspaw".

   In addition, the series frequently included characters (usually
   security personnel wearing red uniforms) who are killed or injured soon
   after their introduction. So prevalent was this plot device that it
   inspired the term " redshirt" to denote a stock character whose sole
   purpose is to die violently in order to demonstrate the dangerous
   circumstances facing the main characters.

Original Series cameos in later series

   The sequel to the original series, Star Trek: The Next Generation,
   which premiered in 1987, was set approximately 80 years after the
   events of TOS. As that show and its spin-offs progressed, several TOS
   characters made appearances:
     * Spock, now a Vulcan ambassador, is said to have gone underground in
       the Romulan Empire in hopes of fostering peaceful coexistence with
       the Federation and reunification with Vulcan society ("
       Unification, Parts I and II").

     * Leonard "Bones" McCoy, now a 137-year-old admiral, inspects the
       Enterprise-D during her maiden flight in " Encounter at Farpoint".

     * Scotty, who is promoted to captain, is revealed to have spent about
       70 years trapped in a transporter buffer before being rescued by
       the Enterprise-D crew and resuming his life in " Relics". Captain
       Picard indefinitely loans him a shuttlecraft, and Scott decides
       that he might have some more travelling left to do after all.

     * Sulu, promoted to captain of the USS Excelsior in Star Trek VI: The
       Undiscovered Country, reprises his role from that performance in
       the Star Trek: Voyager episode " Flashback".

     * Sarek, portrayed by ( Mark Lenard), was Spock's father, continued
       to be an ambassador for the next century, finally retiring to
       Vulcan where he passes away during the events of "Unification".
       Mark Lenard also appears as Sarek in several of the movies; he also
       played the Romulan commander in the episode Balance of Terror.

     * Kang, Koloth and Kor, the three Klingons featured in " Day of the
       Dove", " The Trouble With Tribbles" and " Errand of Mercy",
       continued to serve the Empire well into the 24th century. They
       appeared in the Star Trek: Deep Space Nine episode " Blood Oath" in
       which Kang and Koloth were killed. Kor later appeared in two more
       episodes: " The Sword of Kahless" and finally in " Once More Unto
       the Breach" where he died fighting in the Dominion War. A younger
       version of Kang, from the era of Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered
       Country, later appeared in the Star Trek: Voyager episode "
       Flashback".

     * James Kirk disappears in 2293 during the maiden voyage of the
       Enterprise-B but 75 years later Kirk is recovered from The Nexus,
       an alternate plane of existence, by Enterprise-D Captain Jean-Luc
       Picard. Kirk's time in the 24th century is short, however, when he
       is killed by Dr. Soran in Star Trek: Generations.

   Besides the above examples, there have been numerous non-canon novels
   and comic books published over the years in which TOS-era crew are
   depicted in the TNG era, either through time-travel or other means. In
   addition, many actors who appeared on TOS later made guest appearances
   as different characters in later series, most notably Majel Barrett,
   who not only provided the voice for most Starfleet computers in
   episodes of every spin-off series (including Enterprise), but also had
   the recurring role of Lwaxana Troi in TNG and DS9.

Star Trek 2.0 on G4

   On April 10, 2006, an interactive version of TOS, known as "Star Trek
   2.0," began broadcast on the television channel G4. Members of G4's
   official site are able to use the online chat and "Spock Market."
   Messages from the online chat may be shown during the broadcast along
   with "Trek Stats" and "Trek Facts." The feature debuted on the cable
   network G4 began playing episodes of Star Trek along with showing
   interactive menus. Star Trek 2.0 aired at an 11 PM time slot, but on
   September 5th, 2006, Star Trek 2.0 moved to a 6 PM time slot. As of
   October 14 2006, Star Trek 2.0 was moved to a 4 PM−7 PM time slot. Star
   Trek 2.0, at present time, is not shown on G4 at all.
     * As a promotion of Star Trek 2.0, advertising agency 72andSunny
       created four, 30-second long stop-motion commercials using detailed
       Mego action figures of the crew, which became enormously popular on
       video site YouTube as well as G4TV.com's "Streaming Pile" video
       site. They also released a minute-long "Director's Cut" of the
       "Cribs" clip.

   On January 15, 2007, G4 launched Star Trek: The Next Generation 2.0 at
   9:00pm Monday through Friday. A press release for the show indicated it
   features TNG Facts and Stats along with 32 (up from 24) new stocks for
   the Spock Market game. Star Trek: The Next Generation 2.0 was later
   removed from Monday nights. It is now shown in 2.0 format only on
   Saturdays from 7 PM to 9 PM.

   An urgent subspace message on the Star Trek 2.0 Hailing Frequencies
   e-newsletter stated that Star Trek: The Next Generation 2.0 is
   scheduled for a refit. It will no longer feature live chat, stats, or
   facts on screen. But the Spock Market game will still be active and
   continue running as usual.

Remastered series

   In September 2006, CBS Paramount Television began syndication of an
   enhanced version of Star Trek: The Original Series with new
   state-of-the-art CGI visual effects. . These are being done under the
   supervision of Mike Okuda, technical consultant to the show. Changes
   involve new space shots, with a CGI Enterprise, and other new models (a
   Gorn ship is shown in Arena for example), redone matte background
   shots, and other minor touches such as tidying up viewscreens, etc. A
   number of scenes have also been recomposed, and in some cases new
   actors have been placed into the background of some shots. Among other
   changes made to the episodes is that the opening and closing music has
   been re-recorded in digital stereo.

   Daren Dotcherman, who worked on redoing the special effects for the
   Star Trek: The Motion Picture director's cut, is the host of
   trekenhanced.com, which details how he came up with the idea of
   remastering Star Trek. The site hosts a proof-of-concept reel from when
   he presented the idea to CBS. The reel includes enhanced effects for
   "The Doomsday Machine", and Dotcherman completed his version of that
   episode at the same time CBS Digital completed their version.

   The first episode to be released to syndication was " Balance of
   Terror" on the weekend of September 16, 2006. Episodes are being
   released at the rate of about one a week and broadcasted in 4:3. And
   the special effects artists heading the remastering report a great deal
   of positive feedback. The Enterprise model has evolved as the
   remastering has proceeded and the SFX artists have said they would like
   to go back and touch up some earlier work if possible.

   While the CGI shots have already been mastered for future applications
   in the 16:9 HD Format, but are currently broadcast along with the live
   action footage in the original 4:3 TV format, questions are arising how
   the live action footage will be later formatted into 16:9, which
   technically will make the elimination of picture elements on top and/or
   bottom of the original 4:3 footage inevitable to fill a 16:9 screen.

Fan material and downloads

   Star Trek has inspired fan-made and -produced series for free internet
   distribution, including Star Trek: New Voyages. Walter Koenig, D. C.
   Fontana and other Star Trek actors and production personnel have
   participated in producing various episodes.

iTunes

   In January 2007, the first season of Star Trek became available for
   download from Apple's iTunes Store. Although consumer reviews indicate
   that some of the episodes on iTunes are the newly "remastered"
   editions, iTunes editors have not indicated such, and if so, which are
   which.

   All first season episodes that had been remastered and aired were
   available from iTunes, except Where No Man Has Gone Before, which
   remain in its original form.

   On 20 March 2007, the first season was again added to the iTunes Store,
   with separate downloads for the original and remastered versions of the
   show, though according to the customer reviews, the original version
   contains minor revisions such as special effect enhancements.

XBOX 360

   Microsoft's Xbox 360 videogame console provides downloads of the
   Original series on the Xbox Live Marketplace.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Star_Trek:_The_Original_Series"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
