   #copyright

Stuttgart

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

   Coordinates: 48°47′N 9°11′E
                                Stuttgart
   Coat of arms of Stuttgart Location of Stuttgart in Germany
     __________________________________________________________________

   Country                   Germany
   State                     Baden-Württemberg
   Administrative region     Stuttgart
   District                  urban district
   Population                591,528 source (2006)
   Area                      207.36 km²
   Population density        2,853 / km²
   Elevation                 207-549 m
   Coordinates               48°47′ N 9°11′ E
   Postal code               70001-70629
   Area code                 0711
   Licence plate code        S
   Mayor                     Wolfgang Schuster ( CDU)
   Website                   stuttgart.de

   Stuttgart [ˈʃtʊtgaʁt], located in southern Germany, is the capital of
   the state of Baden-Württemberg with a population of 591,528 (as of
   April 2006) in the city and 2.7 million in the metropolitan area.

Overview

   Stuttgart, Germany, the capital of Baden-Württemberg state (pop. 11
   million, 36,000 square kilometers) and the Administrative Region of
   Stuttgart (pop. 4 million, 11,000 km²), is located in the centre of the
   very densely populated southwestern Stuttgart Region (population 2.7
   million, 3,700 km²) of Germany, close to both the Black Forest and the
   Swabian Jura. The city centre (situated in a lush valley, ringed with
   vineyards and forests, close to the River Neckar) itself has a
   population of 591,528 (as of 30 April 2006) and covers an area of 207
   km². Stuttgart with its metropolitan area (the political entity "
   Stuttgart Region" enlarged by the nearby cities of Ludwigsburg,
   Böblingen, Esslingen, Waiblingen, Göppingen and their respective
   districts [kreise]) is one of the most prominent and well-known German
   towns, especially due to its cultural, administrative and huge economic
   importance.

   Stuttgart is the sixth largest city in Germany and Stuttgart Region is
   the nation's fourth largest conurbation (behind Ruhr Area, Rhein/Main
   Area and Berlin). Neighbouring large cities are Frankfurt (210 km north
   of Stuttgart), Nuremberg (200 km northeast of Stuttgart) and Munich
   (220 km southeast of Stuttgart).

   The City of Stuttgart is subdivided into 23 city districts, among the
   most well-known are:
     * Bad Cannstatt (Western Europe's largest mineral spas / Zoo Wilhelma
       / " Cannstatter Wasen" and " Stuttgarter Frühlingsfest" on the
       Cannstatter Wasen)
     * Moehringen (Musical Theaters)
     * Stammheim (High-security court & jail, see RAF terrorists)
     * Untertürkheim ( DaimlerChrysler HQ and Original Mercedes-Benz
       plant)
     * Vaihingen (One of two campuses of Stuttgart's university, not to be
       confused with nearby Vaihingen(Enz))
     * Zuffenhausen (Home of the Porsche Sports Cars Company)
     * Feuerbach (Home of original Bosch plant)

   Stuttgart is also the seat of a protestant bishop (Protestant State
   Church of Württemberg) and one of the two co-seats of the bishop of the
   Roman Catholic diocese Rottenburg-Stuttgart. The pentecostal Biblische
   Glaubens-Gemeinde ist the largest megachurch in Germany.
   City Center seen from Weinsteige Road
   Enlarge
   City Centre seen from Weinsteige Road
   Stuttgart Palace Square - New Palace
   Enlarge
   Stuttgart Palace Square - New Palace
   Solitude Palace
   Enlarge
   Solitude Palace
   The 1956 TV Tower
   Enlarge
   The 1956 TV Tower
   U.S. Army Kelley Barracks
   Enlarge
   U.S. Army Kelley Barracks
   University of Applied Sciences Stuttgart
   Enlarge
   University of Applied Sciences Stuttgart

History

   The coat of arms shows a black, rampant horse on a yellow or golden
   field. It is a canting seal due to the fact that the name "Stuttgart"
   is an over the centuries modified version of "Stutengarten", in English
   roughly "mare garden" or "stud farm". About 950, Stuttgart was
   originally founded by Duke Liudolf of Swabia, one of the sons of the
   Holy Roman Emperor Otto I the Great, and used for horse breeding
   (especially for his father's cavalry, see Battle of Lechfeld). Later on
   (about 1300), Stuttgart became the residence of the counts of
   Württemberg. In 1496, the counts of Württemberg were promoted to dukes
   by the emperor of the Holy Roman Empire. After Napoleon's breakup of
   the Holy Roman Empire, the dukes of Württemberg earned the title of
   kings and Stuttgart became a royal residence.

   The name of the royal family of Württemberg and of the state originates
   from a steep Stuttgart hill, formerly known as Wirtemberg, nowadays
   called Württemberg. On top of that hill, the mausoleum from 1824 of
   Queen Katharina (daughter of Czar Paul I of Russia) and King Wilhelm I
   of Württemberg is located.

   During the revolution of 1848/1849, a democratic pan-German national
   parliament ( Frankfurt Parliament) was formed in Frankfurt to overcome
   the division of Germany. After long discussions, the parliament decided
   to offer the title of German Emperor to the Prussian king. Since the
   democratic movement became weaker, the German princes regained control
   of their independent states. Finally the Prussian king declined the
   revolutionaries' offer. The members of parliament were driven out of
   Frankfurt, and the most radical members (those who wanted to establish
   a republic) fled to Stuttgart. A short while later, this rump
   parliament was dissolved by the Württemberg military.

   In 1871, as an autonomous kingdom, Württemberg joined the German Empire
   or Kaiserreich, created by the Prussian prime minister Otto von
   Bismarck through several successful wars and diplomacy. After World War
   I, the monarchy broke down and the Free State of Württemberg was
   established, as a part of the Weimar Republic. In 1920, Stuttgart was
   the seat of the German National Government (since the administration
   had to flee from Berlin, see Kapp Putsch). During World War II, the
   city centre of Stuttgart was nearly completely destroyed due to Allied
   air raids.

   In 1945 the Allied Forces took control of Germany. They merged parts of
   the former German States of Baden and Württemberg and later in 1952 on
   the new, democratic state Baden-Württemberg (3rd largest German state)
   with Stuttgart as its capital was created by a referendum.

   After World War II, an early concept of the Marshall Plan to support
   the reconstruction and economic/political recovery of Europe was
   presented during a speech given by US Secretary of State James F.
   Byrnes at the Stuttgart Opera House ( September 6, 1946). This speech
   led directly to the unification of the British and American occupation
   zones, resulting in the so called bi-zone. Two years later, the French
   also joined the bi-zone, creating the tri-zone and thereby paving the
   way for the foundation of the Federal Republic of Germany. Stuttgart,
   like Frankfurt, was a serious contender to become the federal capital,
   but finally Bonn succeeded.

   In the late seventies, the city district of Stammheim was centre stage
   of one of the most controversial periods of German post-war history:
   The Red Army Faction trial at the Stammheim high-security court and the
   subsequent suicides of Ulrike Meinhof, Andreas Baader, Gudrun Ensslin
   and Jan-Carl Raspe (all imprisoned in the Stammheim jail). The trial
   and the period thereafter were accompanied by several new terroristic
   assaults to liberate the inmates ( German Autumn 1977: i.a. the
   abduction and murder of the German industrialist and President of the
   German Employers' Association Hanns Martin Schleyer resp. the hijacking
   of Lufthansa flight LH181, redirecting the jet to Mogadishu).

   During the Cold War, the joint command centre of all United States
   military forces in Europe, Africa and the Atlantic was moved to
   Stuttgart (US European Command, EUCOM). EUCOM is still headquartered
   there today.

   U.S. Army bases in and around Stuttgart include or included the
   following: Patch Barracks (HQ EUCOM), Robinson Barracks, Kelley
   Barracks (General Patton's son once lived there), and Panzer Kaserne.

   In the past American dependent schools, affiliated with either the
   United States Dependents Schools Europe (USDESEA) or Department of
   Defense Education Activity Schools (DODDEAS), included Stuttgart
   American High School ( Pattonville); Stuttgart Elementary and Junior
   High Schools (Robinson Barracks); Patch American High School (Patch
   Barracks); and Boeblingen Elementary School (Panzer Kaserne). American
   high school sports teams from Stuttgart would play against American
   high schools in Frankfurt, Kaiserslautern, Wiesbaden, and sometimes
   Munich, an international high school. In 1994 Pattonville, and
   subsequently Stuttgart American High School were returned to the local
   German governance.

Economy

   Approximately 150,000 companies are located in the Stuttgart region.
   The area is known for its high-tech industry; some of its most
   prominent companies include DaimlerChrysler, Porsche, Bosch, Celesio,
   Hewlett-Packard and IBM all of whom located their world or German
   headquarters here. In fact, the Porsche badge, as seen on the front of
   Porsche cars has this town's name in the centre of the badge, something
   that is unique amongst the world's vehicle makers. A theory even
   suggests that also the Ferrari logo " Cavallino Rampante" had its
   origin in the Stuttgart coat-of-arms. Stuttgart is the place where the
   motorbike and the four-wheeled automobile were invented (invented by
   Gottlieb Daimler and Carl Benz, industrialised 1887 by Gottlieb Daimler
   and Wilhelm Maybach in their 1887 Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft), it's
   hence the starting point of the worldwide automotive industry. Such
   famous and prestigious brands as Mercedes-Benz, Porsche and Maybach are
   produced there. Also the very first prototypes of the eventual VW
   Beetle were fabricated in Stuttgart, based on a design by Ferdinand
   Porsche.

   The region currently has Germany's highest density of scientific,
   academic and research organizations, and tops the national league for
   patent applications. More than 11% of all R&D-expenses in the Federal
   Republic of Germany are generated in the Stuttgart Region
   (approximately 4.3 billion Euro per year). In addition to several
   universities and colleges, the area has six institutes of the
   Fraunhofer Gesellschaft, four institutes for collaborative industrial
   research at local universities, two Max-Planck Institut, as well as one
   large-scale research centre—the German Aerospace Centre (DLR).

   Stuttgart holds top place of all European Union regions according to
   the share of employment in high-tech and medium-high tech manufacturing
   with a figure of 21.0% (2001 data from Eurostat).

   The Stuttgart Stock Exchange is the second largest in Germany (only
   behind Frankfurt) and important financial companies are headquartered
   in Stuttgart (e.g. Allianz Life Insurance, LBBW Bank or Wüstenrot), as
   well. In addition to these global players, the Stuttgart economy
   consists of many highly versatile and dynamic medium-sized enterprises
   (the so-called " Mittelstand").

   Furthermore, Stuttgart is still one of Germany's largest wine-growing
   towns with a century-long tradition and is situated at the geographic
   centre of the "Württemberg Wine Growing Area" (110.30 km², one of 13
   official German growing areas, according to the German Wine Law).

   Stuttgart is also home to Dinkel-Acker Brewing Co.

Public transportation

   Stuttgart, like other cities in Germany, is served by a regional rapid
   transit system called the S-Bahn. The S-Bahn trains operate on the
   rails of the Deutsche Bahn AG and are powered with normal traction
   current (single phase AC, 15 kV/16.67 hertz) taken from overhead wires.
   Stuttgart also has a light rail system ( Stadtbahn in German) which has
   incrementally replaced the city's tram lines. It runs with DC with a
   voltage of 750 volts and uses normal gauge. In the city centre as well
   as in other densely built-up districts of the city, the Stadtbahn runs
   underground; hence the "U"-symbol for U-Bahn is used to signify it.
   Because the old tram lines used metre gauge, some of the light rail
   system's trackage still has three rails.

   A peculiarity of Stuttgart is the Zahnradbahn, a rack railway operating
   from Marienplatz in the heart of the city to the Degerloch district; it
   is the only urban rack railway in Germany and is powered by
   electricity. Furthermore, there is a cable car that operates in the
   city's Heslach district to the forest cemetery (Waldfriedhof),
   employing cars built of wood. On the Killesberg, a prominent hill in
   the city, there is a park railway run by diesel (and on weekends with
   steam), which makes roundtrips through the Killesberg Park. At the
   forest hostel of the city's public transport provider, there is a small
   electric tram for children called "Rumpelstilzchen", which is closed to
   tourists.

People, culture, and architecture

   Opera House
   Enlarge
   Opera House
   Neues Schloss and Schlossplatz in Winter 2006
   Enlarge
   Neues Schloss and Schlossplatz in Winter 2006
   Stuttgart Palace Square - City Art Museum & King's Building
   Enlarge
   Stuttgart Palace Square - City Art Museum & King's Building
   Wilhelma Zoo and Botanical Garden, around 1900
   Enlarge
   Wilhelma Zoo and Botanical Garden, around 1900
   Main Building and Baroque Gardens of Ludwigsburg Palace, Germany's
   largest Baroque Palace
   Enlarge
   Main Building and Baroque Gardens of Ludwigsburg Palace, Germany's
   largest Baroque Palace

   Stuttgart is known for its cultural life, in particular the
   Staatstheater and Staatsgalerie. The Staatstheater contains an opera
   house and three smaller theaters, where opera, ballet, theatre and
   concerts are produced. The world-renowned Stuttgart Opera won the
   prestigious "Opera of the year" (Germany/Austria/Switzerland) award for
   five years running (1998-2002). The famous Stuttgart Ballet is
   connected to names like John Cranko and Marcia Haydée. The city also
   offers two broadway-style Musical theaters, the Apollo and the
   Palladium Theatre (each approx. 1800 seats).

   Stuttgart is home to ten institutes of higher education, the largest
   being University of Stuttgart, University of Stuttgart Hohenheim,
   Stuttgart Media University and University of Applied Sciences
   Stuttgart.

   Stuttgart's city centre was heavily destroyed during World War II.
   During the reconstruction of the city in the style of the 1950s and
   1960s many surviving historic buildings were demolished, e.g. the
   Kronprinzenpalais at Schlossplatz. The city today is thus poor in
   historic buildings. Nevertheless, many historic buildings have been
   reconstructed, and the city boasts of some fine pieces of modern
   post-war architecture.
     * 1200 - 1600 Collegiate Church (Stiftskirche; Exterior: Romanesque/
       Gothic); Interior: Romanesque/Gothic/Modern); reconstructed with
       simplified interior
     * 1300 - 1500 Old Palace (Altes Schloß; Renaissance Style);
       reconstructed
     * 1700 - 1800 New Palace (Neues Schloß; Baroque / Classicism);
       reconstructed with modern interior
     * 1700 - 1800 Castle Solitude (Baroque / Rococo);
     * 1850 King's Building (Königsbau; Classicism); reconstructed
     * 1910 Market Hall ( Art Nouveau);
     * 1920 Main Railway Station (Pre-Modern);
     * 1927 Weissenhof Estate ( International Style);
     * 1950 TV Tower (World's First concrete TV Tower);
     * 1980 New State Gallery ( Neue Staatsgalerie; Postmodern);
     * 2000 Stuttgart Airport Terminal Building (Modern) - located just
       outside the city in neighboring Leinfelden-Echterdingen
     * 2005 Kunstmuseum Stuttgart (Modern).

   In 1992, the VfB Stuttgart (a leading Bundesliga football team) claimed
   the first German Championship title after the reunification of the
   football federations of West and East Germany. The city also has a
   reputation for organizing other major sports events. It hosted the 1993
   World Championships in Athletics and many other world and European
   championships of all kind of sports. The town was one of the twelve
   hosts of the Football World Cup 2006. I.a. the 3rd and 4th place
   playoff of the World Cup was held at the City's Daimler Stadium.
   Stuttgart also is " European Sports Capital 2007" and will host the
   2007 UCI World Cycling Championships Road Race and Time Trials for
   elite men, women, and under-23 year old riders.

   Stuttgart has also one real football stadium, about 100 hundred meters
   away from the TV tower. It's called GAZI Stadion auf der Waldau and the
   Stuttgarter Kickers as well as the American Football team Stuttgart
   Scorpions play there.

   Stuttgart's Swabian cuisine, beer and wine (produced in the area since
   the 1600s) are also well known. The Gaisburger Marsch, a stew, was
   invented in Stuttgarts district Gaisburg. There are two famous annual
   beer festivals; the " Cannstatter Volksfest" on the " Cannstatter
   Wasen" and the slightly smaller " Stuttgarter Frühlingsfest" - However,
   both are second only in size to the Oktoberfest in Munich. The
   Christmas Market of Stuttgart is the largest and one of the oldest and
   most beautiful in Europe, especially renowned for the abundant
   decorations.

   The famous " Wilhelma" is Germany's only combined zoological and
   botanical garden. The whole compound was built around 1850 as a summer
   palace in moorish style for King Wilhelm I of Württemberg. Close to the
   Wilhelma, there are the Stuttgart city districts of Bad Cannstatt and
   Berg which are the second largest mineral spas in Europe (only
   surpassed by Budapest).

   Other important towns in the Stuttgart Region are Ludwigsburg with its
   enormous baroque palace, Sindelfingen and Esslingen.

Stuttgart Town Hall

   The Stuttgart Town Hall is a highrise-building desined by Paul Schmohl
   and Pal Stohrer in 1956 with a 61 metre tall clock tower. Stuttgart
   Town Hall has a paternoster elevator. It was renovated in 2004.
   Stuttgart Town Hall has a bell that plays Swaebian Folk songs at 11:06
   am, 12:06 pm, 2:36 pm and 6:36 pm.

Site

     * Marktplatz 1
     * 70173 Stuttgart
     * Geographical coordinates: 48°46′30" N, 09° 10′ 41" E

Weblinks

     * http://www.architekten24.de/projekt/rathaus-stuttgart/uebersicht/25
       69/index.html
     * http://www.stgt.com/stuttgart/rathausd.htm

Famous people from Stuttgart

   Notable people born in Stuttgart or residents who influenced the
   history of the city:
     * Günther Behnisch - architect
     * Robert Bosch - inventor (founded the Robert Bosch GmbH)
     * Gottlieb Daimler - inventor of the motorbike and automobile,
       founded what would become Mercedes-Benz
     * Dominic Dobson, race car driver
     * Wilhelm Maybach - inventor together with Gottlieb Daimler
     * Ferdinand Porsche - creator of the VW Beetle, founder of the
       Porsche car company
     * Roland Emmerich - film producer, director and writer
     * Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel - philosopher
     * Theodor Heuss - First German Post-War President
     * Jürgen Klinsmann - football player, former coach of the German
       football squad
     * Hermann Lang - Grand Prix race car driver
     * Fritz Leonhardt - structural engineer
     * Frei Otto - architect
     * Friedrich von Schiller - famous German poet
     * Peter Schilling - popular musician and Neue Deutsche Welle artist
     * Count Stauffenberg - member of the German Resistance who tried to
       kill Hitler
     * Richard von Weizsäcker - German President, Lord Mayor of Berlin
     * Bernard Tomic - Tennis child prodigy

Sister cities

     * United Kingdom Wales Wales Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom, since
       1955
     * United States St. Louis St. Louis, USA, since 1960
     * France Strasbourg Strasbourg, France, since 1962
     * India Mumbai Mumbai (formerly known as Bombay), India, since 1968
     * Tunisia Menzel Bourguiba, Tunisia, since 1971
     * Egypt Cairo Cairo, Egypt, since 1979
     * Poland Łódź Łódź, Poland, since 1988
     * Japan Ogaki Ogaki', Gifu Prefecture, Japan, since 1988
     * Czech Republic Brno Brno, Czech Republic, since 1989
     * Russia Samara Samara, Russia, since 1992

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stuttgart"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
