   #copyright

Suburbs of Johannesburg

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography


   This is a featured article. Click here for more information.
   A map of Johannesburg indicating regions and freeways.
   Enlarge
   A map of Johannesburg indicating regions and freeways.

   The suburbs of Johannesburg are officially demarcated areas within the
   city of Johannesburg, South Africa. As in other countries that use
   Commonwealth English, the term "suburb" refers to a "neighbourhood",
   although the term has a somewhat stronger meaning in South Africa as
   most suburbs have legally recognised borders and separate postal codes.
   The municipal functions for the area, such as police and social
   services, are still managed by either the local region or the city
   government.

   Johannesburg, like many other boom towns, grew rapidly and with little
   planning, and thus the city covers an extremely large area. The main
   differences between the city's suburbs tend to be socioeconomic: The
   wealthy live to the north of the City Centre in the northern suburbs,
   while the poor live to the south and on the fringes of the city in
   former townships. Many people see themselves as being a resident of
   their suburb first and foremost to being a resident of Johannesburg
   secondarily.

History

   The Central Business District around 1931.
   Enlarge
   The Central Business District around 1931.
   A street in central Hillbrow. Under apartheid Hillbrow used to be one
   of the nicest suburbs in the city; however, it is now extremely
   dangerous.
   Enlarge
   A street in central Hillbrow. Under apartheid Hillbrow used to be one
   of the nicest suburbs in the city; however, it is now extremely
   dangerous.

   The first major modern settlements in Johannesburg were loosely
   planned, as they grew up quickly in order to service the need for
   labour in the gold mines on the Witwatersrand. However, the population
   of Johannesburg increased rapidly and the city quickly established
   formal neighbourhoods, most of which were racially mixed as labourers
   lived together. The earliest formal settlement to house people of all
   races, Kliptown, is located near today's Soweto.

   The Central Business District (CBD) grew rapidly in the early 1900s as
   many formal European style buildings were constructed, such as the
   city's main post office. The Central Business District was the first
   part of the city to be built in a grid, which was designed around the
   major road known as Commissioner Street, which served as the central
   artery for the city. During this time period, the city invested in
   street cars, which mostly served to connect wealthier white suburbs
   with the CBD. Physical growth, although somewhat limited by
   transportation, continued quickly as immigration to South Africa, and
   Johannesburg in particular, increased dramatically.

   This problem was solved in the 1930s when the automobile was introduced
   in mass production to South Africa.^ Automobiles were, for the most
   part, confined to the wealthy, and permitted them to move to the north
   of the city and commute into the centre. The South African economy did
   extremely well at the end of World War II and many new immigrants came
   to South Africa from Europe. Most poor suburbs were mixed, with poor
   blacks and whites living together, although the wealthy suburbs were
   usually reserved for whites. This changed with the election of the
   National Party in the 1948 elections, who began to formalise the system
   known as apartheid. Apartheid formally designated which suburbs each
   race could live in under the Group Areas Act.

   Consequently, the city was divided into white and black suburbs. The
   white suburbs were mostly wealthy and well-developed, and located in
   the nicest areas in the Johannesburg region. Black people lived in
   poorly developed townships and suburbs out of view of the white
   suburbs. Many large freeways were built to link Johannesburg with the
   rest of South Africa, although this permitted the further outward
   expansion of the city along the N1, N3, and M2 roadways. Public
   transport construction was completely abandoned, except for a minor bus
   system.^ ^

   This system continued until the 1980s, when international sanctions and
   a poor security situation lead to a large contraction in the economy.
   Many companies abandoned skyscrapers that had been built in the Central
   Business District (CBD) in the 1960s and 1970s, and left warehouses
   empty or little used.

   When the Group Areas Act was repealed, there was a mass migration of
   former township dwellers and illegal immigrants to buildings in the CBD
   and surrounding areas, which caused crime rates to increase
   dramatically in the Central area of the city.^ ^Many businesses that
   had not closed their CBD offices left for more secured Northern
   suburbs, and in particular, Sandton. The amount of business and
   population of the northern suburbs increased exponentially, while the
   CBD was left empty and abandoned as a "no-go zone". The previous owners
   of buildings in the CBD abandoned them as their value decreased, and
   more illegal immigrants moved in. Many suburbs near the CBD also felt
   the demographic change as previously white and middle class suburbs
   like Yeoville became mostly black and dangerous within the space of two
   to three years.^

   The city government has attempted to rectify this situation as of 2005
   by installing CCTV cameras all over the city centre, and increasing
   police presence. Some businesses and residents have returned, although
   most businesses have built permanent and better facilities in the
   northern suburbs, so a large-scale return is unlikely.^ The city has
   grown so quickly to the north that the border between Johannesburg,
   Midrand, and Centurion is mostly an arbitrary political border, as the
   two cities have grown together so there is no space between them.

Inner city

   Marshalltown, as seen from the top of the Carlton Centre. The M1 and M2
   run behind the buildings, and the southern suburbs extend past the
   highway boundary.
   Enlarge
   Marshalltown, as seen from the top of the Carlton Centre. The M1 and M2
   run behind the buildings, and the southern suburbs extend past the
   highway boundary.
   The main area of Hillbrow with the Ponte Tower in the foreground and
   many other large apartment towers.
   Enlarge
   The main area of Hillbrow with the Ponte Tower in the foreground and
   many other large apartment towers.

   The inner city of Johannesburg is located within the city's Region 8.
   The inner city is an extremely diverse region, with areas ranging from
   severely degraded residential areas such as Bertrams, to the somewhat
   stable commercial area of Braamfontein. The estimated population of the
   region is 200,000, but the number of people living in the inner city on
   an informal basis is unknown, as many are illegal immigrants.^ Most
   higher-income residents and white people have moved to the northern
   suburbs and have been replaced by lower-income black people. The
   unemployment, education, and age profiles of the area are all unknown,
   due to the difficulty of obtaining reliable information about the area.
   There have been significant movements to revitalise the CBD, most of
   which have focused on the reduction of crime, especially street crime
   in the central area, and the redevelopment of Newtown as a cultural hub
   for the city.

   Centred around the CBD, the region includes the suburbs of Yeoville,
   Bellevue, Troyeville, Jeppestown, and Berea to the east. To the west it
   spreads to Pageview and Fordsburg. There are small industrial areas to
   the south, such as City West-Denver and Benrose.

   Around 800,000 commuters pass through the inner city every day, and it
   functions as a regional shopping node for visitors from the southern
   suburbs.^ All major arterial roads originate from the inner city and
   spread out into other parts of the city. Johannesburg's main railway
   station, bus terminal, and minibus taxi centre are all located in the
   inner city.

   The suburbs close to the CBD, in particular Joubert Park, Hillbrow, and
   Berea, have a large number of high-rise apartment blocks. These areas
   were formerly extremely desirable; however, due to the increase in
   crime, the housing stock has greatly deteriorated as many wealthier
   residents have left for the northern suburbs. The existing buildings in
   the CBD area are insufficient to meet the current demands for housing
   in the area, and as a result, many under-utilised or abandoned office
   buildings have been taken over by squatters, or converted into
   residential housing units. Yeoville and Bellevue have a mix of
   apartment buildings and single residential units on small lots.

   The region is located on a mountainous divide that runs from east to
   west. The most conspicuous geographic feature is Observatory Ridge,
   which is named for the large observatory located on it.^ The
   recreational spaces are no longer used, due to security problems. The
   CBD area lacks open spaces; although there are small neighbourhood
   parks in all suburbs, they are also not used due to mugging concerns.
   Both the University of the Witwatersrand and the University of
   Johannesburg are located in the inner city. Johannesburg Stadium, home
   of one of South Africa's most famous football sides, is located in
   Doornfontein.

Eastern suburbs

   The eastern suburbs of Johannesburg are located in the city's seventh
   and ninth regions. They have generally suffered the same fate as the
   city centre, although to a lesser extent, and extend out along the M2
   and N12 towards Johannesburg International Airport. The eastern region
   includes some of the oldest areas in the city; however, it has
   historically been less fashionable than the northern suburbs because of
   its proximity to the gold reefs. The reefs all created great amounts of
   dust, and there is also greater exposure to winter winds. The area also
   includes the township of Alexandra, and other mixed residential and
   industrial areas towards the northeast of the city near Kempton Park.
   The area is also functionally integrated with border cities outside of
   the official boundary of Johannesburg, such as Germiston and Boksburg.
   The major freeway in the area is the N3 Eastern Bypass, and its largest
   arterial is Louis Botha Avenue, which runs near the western border of
   the city. The total population for the area is 533,000.

   There has been strong growth to the south of the area in newly
   developed gated communities and residential areas, such as Mondeor,
   Mulbarton, and Kibler Park. Other older communities are mixed in terms
   of stability, population density, and income level. In general, the
   further from the inner city, the more stable the suburb. Bezuidenhout
   Valley, an extension of the inner city, is in transition. Malvern, on
   the other hand, is rapidly deteriorating along the lines of Hillbrow,
   due to slum lording.^

   The condition of the main river in the area, the Jukskei River, has
   been severely affected by runoff from informal settlements around
   Alexandra, which all lack proper plumbing. Properties located below the
   flood line of the Jukskei River have been damaged or destroyed several
   times due to flooding.^ ^

   The region also has well-developed entertainment and shopping areas.
   Gold Reef City and the Eastgate shopping centre have made the area an
   important centre for points located to the south and east of the inner
   city.

South-eastern suburbs and Soweto

   Soweto and the south-eastern suburbs, located in Region 6 and Region
   10, border the city's mining belt in the north. The area is mostly
   composed of old "matchbox" houses, or four-room houses built by the
   government, that were built to provide cheap accommodation for black
   workers during apartheid.

   Soweto is an abbreviation, standing for "South Western Townships".
   Street after street in this area is lined with matchboxes; however,
   there are a few smaller areas where prosperous Sowetans have built
   houses that are more similar in stature with those in more affluent
   suburbs. Many people who still live in matchbox houses have improved
   and expanded their homes, and the City Council has enabled the planting
   of more trees and the improving of parks and green spaces in the area.^

   Hostels are another prominent physical feature of Soweto.^ ^Originally
   built to house male migrant workers, many have been improved as
   dwellings for couples and families. The N1 Western Bypass skirts the
   eastern boundary of Soweto. The suburb was not historically allowed to
   create employment centres within the area, so almost all of its
   residents are commuters to other parts of the city.^ There is efficient
   road access for many parts of the region along busy highways to the CBD
   and Roodepoort, but commuters are largely reliant on trains and taxis.

Northern suburbs

   Sandton City, the first building to be built in Sandton to replace the
   commercial function of the CBD.
   Enlarge
   Sandton City, the first building to be built in Sandton to replace the
   commercial function of the CBD.

   The northern suburbs, located in Regions 2, 3, 4, and 7, include the
   most wealthy and developed parts of the city.^ Spreading to the north
   from the inner city to the border with Midrand, the northern suburbs
   include both large housing developments and commercial centres. The
   northern suburbs benefited greatly from the deterioration of the CBD,
   as many people and businesses moved. The northern suburbs have
   developed along the M1 and N1 highways, which serve as their major
   arterial roads. The N1 Western Bypass connects the northern suburbs
   with the north-western suburbs.

   The residential areas in the northern suburbs are mainly formal, with
   no significant areas of informal housing, or housing that lacks a
   permanent structure. Although this is an established area, there is a
   trend of land use change from residential to commercial, especially
   along main arterial roads and around established nodes.^ The area is
   also becoming more dense, as large residential properties are
   subdivided, or redeveloped, as townhouse and cluster house complexes.^
   The area is well connected to road networks, especially along the
   north-south axis formed by the M1 and N1. Roads to the east and west
   are less well developed, as there are no freeways travelling in that
   direction.

   Towards the northern border of the city, the density of development
   decreases, leaving large areas of undeveloped land around Midrand.^
   Grand Central Airport is also located in the area, which makes the
   northern suburbs more accessible to the rest of South Africa. The first
   suburb to the north of the inner city is Parktown, which is located on
   a hill overlooking the inner city and Hillbrow. It has many wealthy
   residents and Edwardian-style mansions. Just to the west of Parktown is
   Westcliff, which is one of the wealthiest areas in Johannesburg, as it
   is located on the side of a very tall hill and overlooks the inner city
   as well as the northern suburbs. Other wealthy residential suburbs,
   Saxonwold and Houghton continue to the north of Westcliff. Nelson
   Mandela has a house in Houghton, and it is also the location of the
   most prestigious secondary schools in Johannesburg. Houghton is also
   the former electoral district of Helen Suzman, a famous anti-apartheid
   Member of Parliament.

   The suburbs become more commercial to the north of Houghton. Rosebank
   is the centre of high-end retail and shopping for northern suburb
   residents. Most retail development has centred on the Zone@Rosebank,
   one of the most prestigious shopping centres in Gauteng. Many smaller
   companies who cannot afford to be located in Sandton also are located
   in Rosebank. The suburbs near Rosebank, including Parkhurst, Parktown
   North, Craighall Park and Greenside are collectively known as "The
   Parks". Parkhurst is known for its village atmosphere and pavement
   cafés and restaurants. Greenside is next to Parkhurst and has developed
   Parkhurst-style restaurants.

   Hyde Park, Sandton, and Morningside are all to the north of Rosebank,
   all of which are extremely wealthy and well policed. Sandton has become
   the new business area of Johannesburg, and features many corporate
   headquarters, as well as Nelson Mandela Square and Wanderers Stadium,
   the most prestigious cricket ground in South Africa. The skyline of
   Sandton has grown rapidly and there are many projects under development
   in the area. Sandton is also the location of the JSE Securities
   Exchange, Africa's largest stock exchange, which relocated from the CBD
   in 2000.

   The quality of life deteriorates on the outer fringes of the northern
   suburbs. One of the poorest townships, Alexandra, is located in this
   border area, to the east of Sandton.

North-western suburbs

   The Radiopark Centre with the Sentech Tower in the background. The
   Radiopark Centre is one of the most visible landmarks throughout the
   north-western suburbs.
   Enlarge
   The Radiopark Centre with the Sentech Tower in the background. The
   Radiopark Centre is one of the most visible landmarks throughout the
   north-western suburbs.

   The north-western suburbs, located in Regions 1, 3, and 5, exist
   between the northern suburbs, Soweto, and the inner city. They are
   mostly low-rise and there are few skyscrapers, although there are a few
   new developments in the recently incorporated city of Randburg, which
   is the main business centre for the area. The area is also connected to
   the rest of the city by the N1 Western Bypass.

   Roodepoort is another major formerly independent municipality, recently
   incorporated into Johannesburg. Roodepoort's previously predominantly
   white population is changing as its proximity to Soweto has made it
   attractive to middle-class black people who want to move to nicer
   houses while maintaining ties to their old communities. There is ample
   access from the more affluent northern residential areas to the inner
   city. However, links are poor towards high economic and commercial
   areas in the north, such as Randburg and Sandton. This gives rise to
   increasing numbers of secondary roads, creating congestion and putting
   pressure on residential areas and infrastructure.

   Towards the extreme north-west of the city, there are well-developed
   farms, as well as smaller formal and informal residential areas. There
   are also large manufacturing and industrial nodes. The informal
   settlements in this area are growing rapidly, with 76 per cent of the
   population of Diepsloot living in informal housing. The industrial
   areas along Hans Strijdom Drive in the south-west form part of the Kya
   Sand area. Fourways, in the south-east, is the major retail, office and
   entertainment area.

   The first suburb to be grouped in the north-west is Auckland Park.
   Auckland Park is where one finds the headquarters of the South African
   Broadcasting Corporation, which is located in Radiopark, and the main
   campus of the University of Johannesburg.

   North of Auckland Park lies Melville, which changed into a
   Bohemian-style enclave of restaurants, cafés, and bookstores on 7th
   Avenue, after the South African Broadcasting Corporation moved its
   headquarters to Auckland Park. Melville's main entertainment strip is
   7th road. A local Soap, 7de Laan, shows the strip in its opening
   credits, mistakenly referring to the road as 7th lane. In Melville,
   lanes run east to west while roads lie north to south; both lanes.
   Melville borders on the north to the Melville Koppies, a small
   protected reserve. The road that cuts though Melville's business area
   (called 'New Melville', 7th road is referred to as Old Melville), Beyer
   Naude, has two intersections notorious in the metropolitan for
   accidents. The closest is just north out of Melville, intersecting with
   Judith road. The second is just to the south, intersecting with Empire
   road. Currently Melville has seen several businesses depart to the
   newly renovated Newtown area.

   West of Melville is Sophiatown, once one of the most vibrant black
   suburbs in the city. Considered a criminal and political hotbed, the
   entire suburb was razed to the ground in the 1950s. The all-white
   suburb of Triomf, meaning "triumph" in Afrikaans, was built in its
   place. The only remaining original Sophiatown building is the Church of
   Christ the King. The area has since reverted to its original name of
   "Sophiatown".

Southern suburbs

   The skyline of Johannesburg as seen from Kyalami.
   Enlarge
   The skyline of Johannesburg as seen from Kyalami.

   The southern suburbs, located in Regions 9, 10, and 11, extend to the
   south of the inner city, and are somewhat isolated from the rest of
   Johannesburg. On a map, the southern suburbs appear to hang down from
   the border of Soweto and Johannesburg South. It is about 40 kilometres
   south of the inner city. It is actually the most isolated, least
   integrated area of Johannesburg, with its east, west, and southern
   boundaries also forming Johannesburg proper's boundaries in the area.
   It is diagonally traversed by the N1, with the N12 running along its
   northern border.

   The southern suburbs tend to be either solely industrial or solely
   residential, with most residents in the residential areas being
   long-term residents in well-established communities. The majority of
   houses in these formal settlements are included in one of
   Johannesburg's lowest income brackets. At the extreme south end of the
   city, there are extremely large informal settlements, such as Orange
   Farm, which suffer from widespread poverty and unemployment, which are
   compounded by their isolation from the rest of the city, which in turn
   makes it costly to extend much-needed infrastructure from the more
   integrated suburbs.

   A significant amount of underdeveloped and vacant agricultural land is
   publicly owned, and the city government is currently in the process of
   selling large tracts of it for development, which is hoped to provide
   jobs for the residents of the informal settlements. Rand Stadium, the
   oldest football stadium in the city, is located in the southern suburb
   of Rosettenville.

   Turffontein was the largest concentration camp in Johannesburg during
   the Anglo Boer War. The camp was located where the Turffontein
   Racecourse is now, and housed about 5000 people. The 700 who died of
   that group were buried on a farm called Klipriviers Berg in Winchester
   Hills. The racecourse hosts the Summer Cup one of three major races in
   South Africa.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Suburbs_of_Johannesburg"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
