   #copyright

Sudan

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Countries;
Countries

   SOS Children works in Sudan. For more information see SOS Children in
   Sudan, Africa

   'جمهورية السودان'
   Jumhūriyyat as-Sūdān
   Republic of (the) Sudan

   Flag of Sudan Coat of arms of Sudan
   Flag          Coat of arms
   Motto: "Al-Nasr Lana"  (Arabic)
   "Victory is Ours"
   Anthem: نحن جند للہ جند الوطن  (Arabic)
   "We Are the Army of God and of Our Land"
   Location of Sudan
   Capital Khartoum
   15°31′N 32°35′E
   Largest city Omdurman
   Official languages Arabic, English
   Government Authoritarian dictatorship
    - President Omar al-Bashir
   {{{sovereignty_type}}}
    - Date January 1, 1956
   Area
    - Total 2,505,813 km² ( 10th)
   967,495 sq mi
    - Water (%) 6
   Population
    - July 2006 estimate 36,992,490 ( 33rd)
    - 1993 census 24,940,683
    - Density 14/km² ( 194th)
   36/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total $84.755 billion ( 62nd)
    - Per capita $2,522 ( 134th)
   Currency Sudanese dinar ( SDD)
   Time zone EAT ( UTC+3)
    - Summer ( DST) not observed ( UTC+3)
   Internet TLD .sd
   Calling code +249

   Sudan (or The Sudan; officially the Republic of the Sudan or Republic
   of Sudan)( Arabic :السودان) is the largest country by area in Africa
   and the largest Arab country by area. It is bordered by Egypt to the
   north, the Red Sea to the northeast, Eritrea and Ethiopia to the east,
   Kenya and Uganda to the southeast, Democratic Republic of the Congo and
   the Central African Republic to the southwest, Chad to the west, and
   Libya to the northwest. It is the tenth largest country in the world by
   area.

History

   Statue of a Nubian king, Sudan.
   Enlarge
   Statue of a Nubian king, Sudan.

Early history of Sudan

   Three ancient kings of the Kushite kingdoms existed consecutively in
   northern Sudan. This region was also known as Nubia and Meroë, and
   these civilizations flourished mainly along the Nile River from the
   first to the sixth cataracts. The kingdoms were influenced by, and in
   turn influenced Pharaonic Egypt. In ancient times, Nubia was ruled by
   Egypt from 1500 BC to around 1000 BC when the Napatan Dynasty was
   founded under Alara and regained independence for the kingdom of Kush.
   Borders, however, fluctuated greatly.

   Much of the region was converted to Coptic Christianity by missionaries
   during the third and fourth centuries AD. Islam was introduced in 640
   AD with an influx of Muslim Arabs who had conquered Egypt, although the
   Christian Kingdoms of Nubia managed to persist until the 15th Century.

   A merchant class of Arabs became economically dominant in feudal Sudan.
   An important kingdom in Nubia was the Makuria, which reached its height
   in the 8th-9th centuries, and was of the Melkite Christian faith,
   unlike its Coptic neighbours, Nobatia and Alodia.

Kingdom of Sennar

   During the 1500s the people called the Funj conquered much of Sudan,
   establishing the Kingdom of Sennar. By the time the kingdom was
   conquered by Egypt in 1820, the government was substantially weakened
   by a series of succession arguments and coups within the royal family.

Foreign control: the Egyptian and British

   In 1820, Northern Sudan came under Egyptian rule when Mehemet Ali, the
   Ottoman viceroy of Egypt, sent armies led by his son Ismail Pasha and
   Mahommed Bey to conquer eastern Sudan. The Egyptians developed Sudan’s
   trade in ivory and slaves. Ismail Pasha, khedive of Egypt from
   1863-1879, tried to extend Egyptian (and therefore British) influence
   south. This led to a revolt led by religious leader Muhammad ibn
   Abdalla, the self-proclaimed Mahdi ( Messiah), who sought to purify
   Islam in Sudan. He led a nationalist revolt against Egyptian/British
   rule culminating in the fall of Khartoum and the death of the British
   General Charles George Gordon in 1885. The revolt was successful and
   Egypt and the British abandoned Sudan, and the resulting state was a
   theocratic Mahdist state.

   In the 1890s the British sought to regain control of Sudan. Lord
   Kitchener led military campaigns from 1896-98. An agreement was reached
   in 1899 establishing Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, under which Sudan was run by
   a governor-general appointed by Egypt with British consent. In reality,
   Sudan was a colony of Great Britain.

   From 1924, until independence in 1956, the British had a policy of
   running Sudan as two essentially separate colonies, the south and the
   north.

Independence

   The first real Independence attempt was carried out on 1924 by a group
   of Sudanese military officers known as 'The White Flag Association'
   also known in Sudan history as ' The White Flag Revolution'. The leader
   of that group was ' Ali Abdullatif' and his peer ' Abdul Fadil Almaz'
   who was a southern Sudanese citizen and it has ended up by the
   assassination of the founders. A famous incident is always mentioned in
   Sudanese history for the assassination of Abdul Fadil Almaz where he
   was fighting from inside the palace using a maroon and when he was
   injured he tried to deceive the enemy by scaring them so that he could
   buy time for his colleagues (Ali Abdul latif and group to escape) so
   when he was injured and realized that he will die, he pulled the maroon
   and put himself next to it as if he is always ready to shoot whoever
   opens the gate and enters the palace and he succeeded on that because
   whenever the enemy used to approach the palace main gate they used to
   run away thinking that he will shoot them till they realized the fact
   that he is dead after three days as his body was not moving, and when
   the British Colonel entered the palace and saw this scene, he stood in
   front of Abdul Fadil's body and rose his hand close to his head on a
   military-like greeting and said his famous phrase: "GREAT FIGHTER MR.
   ALMAZ".

   The newly elected government went ahead with the process of
   Sudanization of the state's organs and bodies, with the help and
   supervision of an international committee. In November 1955, it
   declared the intentions of the Sudanese people to exercise their right
   to independence. This was duly granted and on the 1st of January 1956,
   Sudan was formally declared independent. In a special ceremony held at
   the People's Palace, the British and Egyptian flags were brought down
   and the new Sudanese flag, composed of green, blue and yellow stripes,
   was raised in their place.

First Sudanese Civil War

   The year before independence, a civil war began between Northern and
   Southern Sudan. Southerners, who knew independence was coming, were
   afraid the new nation would be dominated by the North.

   The North of Sudan had historically closer ties with Egypt and was
   predominantly Arab and Muslim. The South of Sudan was predominantly
   black, with a mixture of Christianity and Animism. These divisions had
   been further emphasized by the British policy of ruling Sudan’s North
   and South administratively separate. From 1924 it was illegal for
   people living above the 10th parallel to go further south, and people
   below the 8th parallel to go further north. The law was ostensibly
   enacted to prevent the spread of malaria and other tropical diseases
   that had ravaged British troops, as well as to prevent Northern
   Sudanese from raiding Southern tribes for slaves. The result was
   increased isolation between the already distinct north and south and
   arguably laid the seeds of conflict in the years to come.

   The resulting conflict, although known as the civil war, was heavy
   influenced by support from Islamic jihadists expanding Salafist Arabic
   fundamtenalism, lasting from 1955 to 1972. In 1972, under what is known
   as the Addis Ababa Agreement, a cessation of the north-south conflict
   was agreed upon. This led to a ten-year hiatus in the conflict.

Second Sudanese Civil War

   In 1983, the civil war was reignited following President Gaafar
   Nimeiry's decision to circumvent the Addis Ababa Agreement. President
   Gaafar Nimeiry attempted to create a Federated Sudan including states
   in Southern Sudan, which violated the Addis Ababa Agreement that had
   granted the South considerable autonomy. The Sudan People's Liberation
   Army formed in May 1983 as a result. Finally, in June 1983, the
   Sudanese Government under President Gaafar Nimeiry abrogated the Addis
   Ababa Peace Agreement (A.A.A.) . The situation was exacerbated after
   President Gaafar Nimeiry went on to implement Sharia Law in September
   of the same year .

   In 1989 a coup d'etat brought control of Khartoum to the hands of Umar
   al Bashir and the National Islamic Front headed by Dr. Hassan Turabi.
   Both groups are Sunni fundamentalists drawing most of their ideology
   from the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood. Together they formed the Popular
   Defense Forces (al Difaa al Shaabi) and began to invade the tribal
   south and eliminate the Christian minority.

   The attempted genocide went on for more than twenty years, including
   the use of Sukhoi sorties, Tupolev bombers and napalm to devasting
   effect on villages and tribal rebels alike, resulting in the deaths of
   2.2 million Christians, Animists, and black Muslims, and displacing
   roughly 4.5 million people within Sudan and into neighbouring
   countries. It damaged Sudan's economy and led to food shortages,
   resulting in starvation and malnutrition. The lack of investment during
   this time, particularly in the south, meant a generation lost access to
   basic health services, education, and jobs.

   In 1992 Turabi arranged a conference in Khartoum, amongst his guests
   were the NIF of Sudan, the FIS of Algeria, Gamaat Islamiya of Egypt,
   Islamic Jihad, Hamas and Islamic Jihad of Palestine, the graduates of
   madrassas (Islamic schools) that later become the Taliban, the Islamic
   Republic of Iran, Hezbollah, Saddam Hussein's Baath party, and
   Lebanon's Salafists.

   Peace talks between the southern rebels and the government made
   substantial progress in 2003 and early 2004. The peace was consolidated
   with the official signing by both sides of the Naivasha treaty on 9
   January 2005, granting Southern Sudan autonomy for six years, to be
   followed by a referendum about independence. It created a co-vice
   president position and allowed the north and south to split oil
   equally, but also left both the North's and South's armies in place.
   John Garang, the south's elected co-vice president died in a helicopter
   crash on August 1, 2005, three weeks after being sworn in. This
   resulted in riots, but the peace was eventually able to continue.

   The United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) was established under UN
   Security Council Resolution 1590 of March 24, 2005. Its mandate is to
   support implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, and to
   perform functions relating to humanitarian assistance, and protection
   and promotion of human rights.

Darfur conflict

   Map of Northeast Africa highlighting the Darfur region of Sudan.
   Map of Northeast Africa highlighting the Darfur region of Sudan.

   Just as the long North-South civil war was reaching a resolution, a new
   rebellion in the western region of Darfur began in the early 1970s,
   right after Africa's greatest famine. The rebels accused the central
   government of neglecting the Darfur region economically, although there
   is uncertainty regarding the objectives of the rebels and whether they
   merely seek an improved position for Darfur within Sudan or outright
   "secession." Both the government and the rebels have been accused of
   atrocities in this war, although most of the blame has fallen on Arab
   militias Janjaweed armed men appointed by Al Saddiq Al Mahdi
   administration to stop the long standing chaotic disputes between
   Darfur tribes. The rebels have alleged that these militias have been
   engaging in genocide; the fighting has displaced hundreds of thousands
   of people, many of them seeking refuge in neighboring Chad. The
   government claimed victory over the rebels after capturing a town on
   the border with Chad, in early 1994. However, the fighting resumed in
   2003.

   On September 9, 2004 the United States Secretary of State Colin Powell
   termed the Darfur conflict as a "genocide," acknowledging it as one of
   the worst humanitarian crises of the 21st century. There have been
   reports that the Janjaweed have been launching raids, bombings, and
   attacks on villages, killing civilians based on ethnicity, raping
   women, stealing land, goods, and herds of livestock. So far, an
   estimated 400,000 civilians have been killed with over 2.5 million
   displaced.

   On May 5, 2006, the Sudanese government and Darfur's largest rebel
   group the SLM (Sudan Liberation Movement) signed the Darfur Peace
   Agreement, which aimed at ending the three-year long conflict. The
   agreement specified the disarmament of the janjaweed and the
   disbandment of the the rebel forces, and aimed at establishing a
   temporal government in which the rebels could take part. The agreement,
   which was brokered by the African Union, however, was not signed by all
   of the rebel groups.

   Since the agreement was signed, however, there still have been reports
   of wide-spread violence throughout the region. A new rebel group has
   emerged called the "National Redemption Front" (which is made up of the
   4 main rebel groups who refused to sign the May peace agreement).
   Recently, both the Sudanese government and government-sponsored
   militias have launched large offensives against the rebel groups,
   resulting in the more deaths and more displacements. Clashes among the
   rebel groups have also contributed to the violence. Recent fighting
   along the Chad border has left hundreds of soldiers and rebel forces
   dead and nearly a quarter of a million refugees cut from aid. In
   addition, villages have been continuously bombed and more innocent
   civilians have been killed. UNICEF recently reported that around 80
   infants die each day in Darfur as a result of malnutrition.

   The people in Darfur are predominantly black Africans of Muslim
   beliefs, whereas the Janjaweed militia is made up of Arabs. Some
   believe the Janjaweed militia is the Karthoum government's unofficial
   fighting force, allowing the government to disguisedly break human
   rights rule in Darfur.

Chad-Sudan conflict

   The Chad-Sudan conflict officially started on December 23, 2005, when
   the government of Chad declared a state of war with Sudan and called
   for the citizens of Chad to mobilize themselves against the "common
   enemy," which the Chadian government sees as the Rally for Democracy
   and Liberty (RDL) militants, Chadian rebels backed by the Sudanese
   government, and Sudanese militiamen. The government of chad claims that
   the militants attacked villages and towns in eastern Chad, stealing
   cattle, murdering citizens, and burning houses. Over 200,000 refugees
   from the Darfur region of northwestern Sudan currently claim asylum in
   eastern Chad. Chadian president Idriss Déby accuses Sudanese President
   Omar Hasan Ahmad al-Bashir of trying to "destabilize our country, to
   drive our people into misery, to create disorder and export the war
   from Darfur to Chad."

   The incident prompting the declaration of war was an attack on the
   Chadian town of Adré near the Sudanese border that led to the deaths of
   either one hundred rebels (as most news sources reported) or three
   hundred rebels. The Sudanese government was blamed for the attack,
   which was the second in the region in three days, but Sudanese foreign
   ministry spokesman Jamal Mohammed Ibrahim denied any Sudanese
   involvement, "We are not for any escalation with Chad. We technically
   deny involvement in Chadian internal affairs." The Adre attack led to
   the declaration of war by Chad and the alleged deployment of the
   Chadian airforce into Sudanese airspace, which the Chadian government
   denies.

Politics

   Map of Sudan showing Khartoum.
   Enlarge
   Map of Sudan showing Khartoum.

   Sudan has an authoritarian government in which all effective political
   power is in the hands of President Umar Hassan al-Bashir. Bashir and
   his party have controlled the government since he led the military coup
   on 30 June 1989.

   From 1983 to 1997, the country was divided into five regions in the
   north and three in the south, each headed by a military governor. After
   the April 6, 1985 military coup, regional assemblies were suspended.
   The RCC was abolished in 1996, and the ruling National Islamic Front
   changed its name to the National Congress Party. After 1997, the
   structure of regional administration was replaced by the creation of 26
   states. The executives, cabinets, and senior-level state officials are
   appointed by the president, and their limited budgets are determined by
   and dispensed from Khartoum. The states, as a result, remain
   economically dependent upon the central government. Khartoum state,
   comprising the capital and outlying districts, is administered by a
   governor.

   In December 1999, a power struggle climaxed between President al-Bashir
   and then- speaker of parliament Hassan al-Turabi, who was the NIF
   founder and an Islamist ideologue. Al-Turabi was stripped of his posts
   in the ruling party and the government, parliament was disbanded, the
   constitution was suspended, and a state of national emergency was
   declared by presidential decree. Parliament resumed in February 2001
   after the December 2000 presidential and parliamentary elections, but
   the national emergency laws remain in effect. Al-Turabi was arrested in
   February 2001, and charged with being a threat to national security and
   the constitutional order for signing a memorandum of understanding with
   the SPLA. Since then his outspoken style has had him in prison or under
   house-arrest, his most recent stint beginning in March of 2004 and
   ending in June of 2005. During that time he was under house-arrest for
   his role in a failed coup attempt in September of 2003, an allegation
   he has denied. According to some reports, the president had no choice
   but to release him, given that a coalition of National Democratic Union
   (NDA) members headquartered in both Cairo and Eritrea, composed of the
   political parties known as the SPLM/A, Umma Party, Mirghani Party, and
   Turabi's own National People's Congress, were calling for his release
   at a time when an interim government was preparing to take over in
   accordance with the Naivasha agreement and the Machokos Accord.

Foreign relations

   Sudan has had a troubled relationship with many of its neighbors and
   much of the international community due to what is viewed as its
   aggressively Islamic stance. For much of the 1990s, Uganda, Kenya and
   Ethiopia formed an ad-hoc alliance called the "Front Line States" with
   support from the United States to check the influence of the National
   Islamic Front government. The southern Sudanese rebels supported
   anti-Uganda rebel groups such as the Lord's Resistance Army. Beginning
   from the mid-1990s Sudan gradually began to moderate its positions as a
   result of increased US pressure following the 1998 U.S. embassy
   bombings and the new development of oil fields previously in rebel
   hands. Sudan also has a territorial dispute with Egypt over the Hala'ib
   Triangle. Since 2003, the foreign relations of Sudan have centered on
   the support for ending the Second Sudanese Civil War and condemnation
   of government support for militias in the Darfur conflict.

   U.S. firms have been barred from doing business in Sudan since 1997.

   On December 23, 2005, Chad, Sudan's neighbour to the west, declared war
   on Sudan and accused the country of being the "common enemy of the
   nation (Chad)." This happened after the December 18 attack on Adre,
   which left about 100 people dead. A statement issued by Chadian
   government on December 23, accused Sudanese militias of making daily
   incursions into Chad, stealing cattle, killing innocent people and
   burning villages on the Chadian border. The statement went on to call
   for Chadians to form a patriotic front against Sudan. The Organization
   of the Islamic Conference(OIC) have called on Sudan and Chad to
   exercise self-restraint to defuse growing tensions between the two
   countries.

   On December 27, 2005, Sudan became one of the few states to recognize
   Moroccan sovereignty over Western Sahara.

   On June 20, 2006 President Omar al-Bashir told reporters that he would
   not allow any UN peacekeeping force into Sudan. President al-Bashir
   denounced any such mission as "colonial forces."

Human rights

   An August 14th letter from the Executive Director of the Human Rights
   Watch found that the Sudanese government is both incapable and
   unwilling to protect its own citizens in Darfur and that its militias
   are guilty of crimes against humanity. The letter added that these
   human rights abuses have existed since 2004.

   Both government forces and militias allied with the government are
   known not only to attack civilians in Darfur, but also humanitarian
   workers. Sympathizers of rebel groups are arbitrarily detained, as are
   foreign journalists, human rights defenders, student activists, and
   displaced people in and around Khartoum, some of whom face torture.

   Sudan practices capital punishment and it can be applied to minors.

   Slavery has been carried out by the Dinka tribe in the south. Former
   vice president and rebel leader, John Garang, enforced child military
   conscription in the south in order to strengthen his movement.

Administrative divisions

   Political map of Sudan.
   Enlarge
   Political map of Sudan.

   Sudan is divided into twenty-six states ( wilayat, sing. wilayah) which
   in turn are subdivided into 133 districts. The states are:
     * Al Jazirah
     * Al Qadarif
     * Bahr al Jabal
     * Blue Nile
     * East Equatoria
     * Junqali
     * Kassala

     * Khartoum
     * Lakes
     * North Bahr al Ghazal
     * North Darfur
     * North Kurdufan
     * Northern
     * Red Sea

     * River Nile
     * Sennar
     * South Darfur
     * South Kurdufan
     * Unity
     * Upper Nile

     * Warab
     * West Bahr al Ghazal
     * West Darfur
     * West Equatoria
     * West Kurdufan
     * White Nile

   A map of Sudan's districts indicating autonomous and insurgent regions.
   Enlarge
   A map of Sudan's districts indicating autonomous and insurgent regions.

Autonomy, separation, conflicts

     * Southern Sudan is an autonomous region intermediate between the
       states and the national government. Southern Sudan is scheduled to
       have a referendum on independence in 2011.
     * Darfur is a region of three western states affected by the current
       Darfur conflict.
     * There is also an insurgency in the east led by the Eastern Front,
       although as of 14 October 2006 a peace agreement has been signed by
       both the Sudanese government and the Eastern Front, constituting a
       lasting negotiation of power-sharing.

Geography

   Mount Dair in central Sudan.
   Enlarge
   Mount Dair in central Sudan.

   Satellite image of Sudan, generated from raster graphics data supplied
   by The Map Library
   Enlarge
   Satellite image of Sudan, generated from raster graphics data supplied
   by The Map Library
   A swamp in southern Sudan.
   Enlarge
   A swamp in southern Sudan.

   Sudan is situated in Northern Africa, bordering the Red Sea, between
   Egypt and Eritrea. It is dominated by the River Nile and its
   tributaries. With an area of 2,505,810 square kilometres (967,499
   sq mi), it is the largest country in the continent and tenth largest in
   the world. The terrain is generally flat plains, though there are
   mountains in the east and west. The climate is tropical in the south;
   arid desert conditions in the north, with a rainy season from April to
   October. Soil erosion and desertification are environmental hazards.

Economy

   Sudan has turned around a struggling economy with sound economic
   policies and infrastructure investments, but it still faces formidable
   economic problems as it must rise from a very low level of per capita
   output. Since 1997 Sudan has been implementing the macroeconomic
   reforms recommended by the IMF. In 1999. Sudan began exporting crude
   oil and in the last quarter of 1999 recorded its first trade surplus.
   Increased oil production (the current production is half a million
   barrels a day) revived light industry, and expanded export processing
   zones helped sustain GDP growth at 6.1% in 2003. These gains, along
   with improvements to monetary policy, have stabilized the exchange
   rate. Currently oil is Sudan's main export, and the production is
   increasing dramatically. With rising oil revenues the Sudanese economy
   is booming at a growth rate of nearly 7% in 2005.

   Agriculture production remains Sudan's most important sector, employing
   80% of the work force and contributing 39% of GDP, but most farms
   remain rain-fed and susceptible to drought. Chronic instability —
   including the long-standing civil war between the Muslim north and the
   Christian/animist south, adverse weather, and weak world agricultural
   prices — ensure that much of the population will remain at or below the
   poverty line for years.

Demographics

   In Sudan's 1993 census, the population was calculated at 25 million. No
   comprehensive census has been carried out since that time due to the
   continuation of the civil war. Current estimates from the United
   Nations as of 2006 estimate the population to be about 37 million. The
   population of metropolitan Khartoum (including Khartoum, Omdurman, and
   Khartoum North) is growing rapidly and is estimated at about 5-6
   million, including around 2 million displaced persons from the southern
   war zone as well as western and eastern drought-affected areas.

   Sudan has two distinct major cultures – Arabs with Nubian (Kushite)
   roots and non-Arab Black Africans – consisting of hundreds of ethnic
   and tribal divisions and language groups. This makes collaboration
   between them a major difficulty.

   The northern states cover most of the Sudan and include most of the
   urban centers. Most of the 22 million Sudanese who live in this region
   are Arabic-speaking Muslims, though the majority also use a traditional
   non-Arabic mother tongue (e.g. Nubian, Beja, Fur, Nuban, Ingessana,
   etc). Among these are several distinct tribal groups: the camel-raising
   Kababish of northern Kordofan; the Dongolese (الدنقلاويين); the Ga’alin
   (الجعلين); the Rubatab (الرباطاب); the Manasir (المناصير); the
   Shaiqiyah (الشايقيّة); the semi-nomadic Baggara of Kurdufan and Darfur;
   the Beja in the Red Sea area; and the Nubians of the northern Nile
   areas, some of whom have been resettled on the Atbara River. Shokrya in
   the Butana land, Bataheen bordering the Ga’alin and Shorya in the south
   west of Butana. Rufaa, Halaween and many other tribes in the Gazeera
   region and on the banks of the Blue Nile and the Dindir region. The
   Nuba of southern Kurdufan and Fur in the western reaches of the
   country.

   The southern region has a population of around 6 million and a
   predominantly rural, subsistence economy. This region has been affected
   by war for all but 10 years since independence in 1956, resulting in
   serious neglect, lack of infrastructure development, and major
   destruction and displacement. More than 2 million people have died, and
   more than 4 million are internally displaced or have become refugees as
   a result of the civil war and war-related impacts. Here a majority of
   the population practices traditional indigenous beliefs, although some
   practice Christianity, partly a result of Christian missionary efforts
   and partly a holdover from earlier Christian Nubian civilizations. The
   south also contains many tribal groups and many more languages are used
   than in the north. The Dinka, whose population is estimated at more
   than 1 million, are the largest of the many black African tribes of the
   Sudan. Along with the Shilluk and the Nuer they are Nilotic tribes. The
   Azande, Bor, and Jo Luo are “Sudanic” tribes in the west, and the
   Acholi and Lotuhu live in the extreme south, extending into Uganda.

Peoples of Sudan

     * Ja'alein
     * Arakeien
     * Shigia
     * Rubatab
     * Shokrya
     * Ababda

                 * Azande
                 * Baggara peoples
                 * Beja tribe
                 * Dinka tribe
                 * Luo tribe

                                    * Fur people
                                    * Hawsa
                                    * Horefaen
                                    * Mahas
                                    * Manasir tribe

                                                     * Masalit
                                                     * Nuba peoples
                                                     * Nuer tribe
                                                     * Rashaida people
                                                     * Zaghawa

   People         Location
   Acholi         east
   Pari           east
   Ayuak          south central
   Barit          Juba
   Didiga         east
   Fulbe (Fulani) Blue Nile, East and Tulus
   Kakua          southwest
   Latuga         east
   Madi
   Shililuk
   Toposa

Official languages

   According to the 2005 constitution, Sudan's official languages are
   Arabic and English:

     Article 8:
     1) All indigenous languages of the Sudan are national languages and
     shall be respected, developed and promoted.
     2) Arabic is a widely-spoken national language in the Sudan.
     3) Arabic, as a major language at the national level and English
     shall be the official working languages of the national government
     and the languages of instruction for higher education.
     4) In addition to Arabic and English, the legislature of any
     sub-national level of government may adopt any other national
     language as an additional official working language at its level.
     5) There shall be no discrimination against the use of either Arabic
     or English at any level of government or stage of education.

Education

   Institutions of higher education in the Sudan include:
     * Academy of Medical Sciences
     * Ahfad University for Women
     * Bayan Science and Technology College
     * Computerman College
     * Omdurman Ahlia University
     * Omdurman Islamic University

     * University of Gezira
     * University of Juba
     * University of Khartoum
          + Mycetoma Research Centre
     * Sudan University of Science and Technology

Geographic locale

   Flag of Libya  Libya Flag of Egypt  Egypt Flag of Saudi Arabia  Saudi
   Arabia
   Image:Template CanadianCityGeoLocation North.png
   Red Sea
   Flag of Chad  Chad North Red Sea  Image:Template
   CanadianCityGeoLocation East.png   Flag of Saudi Arabia  Saudi Arabia
   Flag of Eritrea  Eritrea
   Flag of Ethiopia  Ethiopia
   West    Flag of Sudan  Sudan     East
   South
   Flag of Central African Republic  Central African Republic
   Flag of Democratic Republic of the Congo  Democratic Republic of the
   Congo Flag of Uganda  Uganda Flag of Kenya  Kenya

    Sudan topics

   States
   Al Jazirah • Al Qadarif • Bahr al Jabal • Blue Nile • East Equatoria •
   Junqali • Kassala • Khartoum • Lakes • North Bahr al Ghazal •
   North Darfur • North Kurdufan • Northern • Red Sea • River Nile •
   Sennar • South Darfur • South Kurdufan • Unity • Upper Nile • Warab •
   West Bahr al Ghazal • West Darfur • West Equatoria • West Kurdufan •
   White Nile

   History
   Timeline
   Early Sudan • Coming of Islam • The Turkiyah • The Mahdiyah •
   Anglo-Egyptian rule • Independent Sudan • First Civil War •
   Nimeiri Era • Second Civil War • Transitional Military Council •
   Mahdi Coalition Governments
   Demographic • Economic • Military

   Politics • Economy • Military
   Prime Minister • Foreign relations • Economic history • Transport •
   Communications • Companies • Merowe Dam • Sudanese dinar • Banks •
   Taxation • Sudanese Air Force • Military history

   Geography • Demographics
   Geology • Mountains • Lakes • Rivers • Volcanoes • Languages • Religion
   (Islam) • Social order • Ethnic groups • Ethnic minorities •
   Human rights • States • Cities

   Culture
   Art • Literature • Media • Music • Sport
   Countries and territories of North Africa

   Algeria • Egypt • Libya • Mauritania • Morocco • Sudan • Tunisia •
   Western Sahara (SADR)
   Countries of Africa

   Sovereign states: Algeria • Angola • Benin • Botswana • Burkina Faso •
   Burundi • Cameroon • Cape Verde • Central African Republic • Chad •
   Democratic Republic of the Congo • Republic of the Congo • Comoros •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Djibouti • Egypt ^1 • Equatorial Guinea • Eritrea •
   Ethiopia • France ^2 • Gabon • The Gambia • Ghana • Guinea-Bissau •
   Guinea • Kenya • Lesotho • Liberia • Libya • Madagascar • Malawi • Mali
   • Mauritania • Mauritius • Morocco • Mozambique • Namibia • Niger •
   Nigeria • Portugal ^2 • Rwanda • Senegal • Seychelles • Sierra Leone •
   Somalia • South Africa • Spain ^2 • Sudan • Swaziland • São Tomé and
   Príncipe • Tanzania • Togo • Tunisia • Uganda • Yemen ^3 • Zambia •
   Zimbabwe

   Dependencies: British Indian Ocean Territory (UK) • French Southern
   Territories (France) • Mayotte (France) • Réunion (France) • Saint
   Helena ^4 (UK)

   Unrecognized countries: Somaliland • Western Sahara •

   ^1  Partly in Asia. ^2  Mostly in Europe. ^3  Mostly in Asia.
   ^4 Includes the dependencies of Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha.
   Countries on the Red Sea

   Flag of Djibouti  Djibouti • Flag of Egypt  Egypt • Flag of Eritrea
   Eritrea • Flag of Israel  Israel • Flag of Jordan  Jordan • Flag of
   Saudi Arabia  Saudi Arabia • Flag of Somalia  Somalia •
   Flag of Sudan  Sudan • Flag of Yemen  Yemen
   Countries and territories on the Indian Ocean

   Eurasia: Bahrain • Bangladesh • Christmas Island • Cocos (Keeling)
   Islands • India • Indonesia • Iran • Iraq • Israel • Kuwait • Malaysia
   • Maldives • Myanmar • Oman • Pakistan • Qatar • Saudi Arabia • Sri
   Lanka • Thailand • United Arab Emirates • Yemen

   Africa: Comoros • Djibouti • Eritrea • Kenya • Madagascar • Mauritius •
   Mayotte • Mozambique • Seychelles • Somalia • Somaliland • South Africa
   • Sudan • Tanzania

   Oceania: Australia • Christmas Island • Cocos (Keeling) Islands

   Islands: Bahrain • Christmas Island • Cocos (Keeling) Islands •
   Madagascar • Maldives • Mauritius • Mayotte • Seychelles • Sri Lanka
   Member states of the African Union

   Algeria • Angola • Benin • Botswana • Burkina Faso • Burundi •
   Cameroon • Cape Verde • Central African Republic • Chad • Comoros •
   Democratic Republic of the Congo • Republic of the Congo •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Djibouti • Egypt • Eritrea • Ethiopia •
   Equatorial Guinea • Gabon • The Gambia • Ghana • Guinea •
   Guinea-Bissau • Kenya • Lesotho • Liberia • Libya • Madagascar •
   Malawi • Mali • Mauritania • Mauritius • Mozambique • Namibia • Niger •
   Nigeria • Rwanda • São Tomé and Príncipe • Senegal • Seychelles •
   Sierra Leone • Somalia • South Africa • Sudan • Swaziland • Tanzania •
   Togo • Tunisia • Uganda • Western Sahara  (SADR) • Zambia • Zimbabwe
   Arab League
   Flag of the League of Arab States

   Algeria • Bahrain • Comoros • Djibouti • Egypt • Iraq • Jordan • Kuwait
   • Lebanon • Libya • Mauritania • Morocco • Oman • State of Palestine •
   Qatar • Saudi Arabia • Somalia • Sudan • Syria • Tunisia • United Arab
   Emirates • Yemen
   Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC)
   Flag of the OIC

   Afghanistan • Albania • Algeria • Azerbaijan • Bahrain • Bangladesh •
   Benin • Burkina Faso • Brunei • Cameroon • Chad • Comoros •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Djibouti • Egypt • Gabon • Gambia • Guinea •
   Guinea-Bissau • Guyana • Indonesia • Iran • Iraq • Jordan • Kuwait •
   Kazakhstan • Kyrgyzstan • Lebanon • Libya • Maldives • Malaysia •
   Mali • Mauritania • Morocco • Mozambique • Niger • Nigeria • Oman •
   Pakistan • State of Palestine • Qatar • Saudi Arabia • Senegal •
   Sierra Leone • Somalia • Sudan • Surinam • Syria • Tajikistan •
   Turkey • Tunisia • Togo • Turkmenistan • Uganda • Uzbekistan •
   United Arab Emirates • Yemen

   Observer countries: Bosnia and Herzegovina • Central African Republic •
   Russia • Thailand • Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus

   Observer Muslim organizations and communities:
   Moro National Liberation Front

   Observer international organizations:
   Economic Cooperation Organization • Organisation of African Unity •
   League of Arab States • Non-Aligned Movement • United Nations
   Semitic-speaking nations

   Arabic and Maltese

   Flag of Algeria  Algeria • Flag of Bahrain  Bahrain • Flag of Egypt
   Egypt • Flag of Iraq  Iraq • Flag of Jordan  Jordan • Flag of Kuwait
   Kuwait • Flag of Lebanon  Lebanon • Flag of Libya  Libya • Flag of
   Malta  Malta • Flag of Mauritania  Mauritania • Flag of Morocco
   Morocco • Flag of Oman  Oman • Flag of Palestinian National Authority
   Palestine • Flag of Qatar  Qatar • Flag of Saudi Arabia  Saudi Arabia •
   Flag of Sudan  Sudan • Flag of Syria  Syria • Flag of Tunisia  Tunisia
   • Flag of United Arab Emirates  United Arab Emirates • Flag of Western
   Sahara  Western Sahara • Flag of Yemen  Yemen

   Northwest Semitic ( Aramaic and Hebrew)

   Flag of Iraq  Iraq • Flag of Israel  Israel • Flag of Syria  Syria

   South Semitic

   Flag of Eritrea  Eritrea • Flag of Ethiopia  Ethiopia • Flag of Oman
   Oman • Flag of Yemen  Yemen
   Cushitic-speaking nations

   Cushitic
   Flag of Djibouti  Djibouti • Flag of Eritrea  Eritrea • Flag of
   Ethiopia  Ethiopia • Flag of Kenya  Kenya • Flag of Somalia  Somalia
   Beja
   Flag of Egypt  Egypt • Flag of Eritrea  Eritrea • Flag of Sudan  Sudan
   Niger-Congo-speaking nations
   Kordofanian

   Flag of Sudan  Sudan
   Mande

   Flag of The Gambia  The Gambia • Flag of Guinea  Guinea • Flag of
   Guinea-Bissau  Guinea-Bissau • Flag of Mali  Mali • Flag of Mauritania
    Mauritania • Flag of Senegal  Senegal • Flag of Sierra Leone  Sierra
   Leone
   Atlantic-Congo

   Atlantic

   Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Burkina Faso  Burkina Faso • Flag of
   Cameroon  Cameroon • Flag of Central African Republic  Central African
   Republic • Flag of Chad  Chad • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire •
   Flag of The Gambia  The Gambia • Flag of Guinea  Guinea • Flag of
   Guinea-Bissau  Guinea-Bissau • Flag of Liberia  Liberia • Flag of Mali
    Mali • Flag of Mauritania  Mauritania • Flag of Niger  Niger • Flag of
   Senegal  Senegal • Flag of Sierra Leone  Sierra Leone • Flag of Sudan
   Sudan • Flag of Togo  Togo

   Ijoid: Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria - Dogon: Flag of Mali  Mali
   Volta-Congo

   Senufo: Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire •
   Flag of Mali  Mali

   Gur: Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Burkina Faso  Burkina Faso • Flag
   of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire • Flag of Ghana  Ghana • Flag of Mali
   Mali • Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria • Flag of Togo  Togo

   Adamawa-Ubangi: Flag of Cameroon  Cameroon • Flag of Central African
   Republic  Central African Republic • Flag of Chad  Chad • Flag of
   Nigeria  Nigeria

   Kru: Flag of Burkina Faso  Burkina Faso • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte
   d'Ivoire • Flag of Liberia  Liberia

   Kwa: Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire • Flag
   of Ghana  Ghana • Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria • Flag of Togo  Togo
   Benue-Congo

   Bantu

   Flag of Angola  Angola • Flag of Botswana  Botswana • Flag of Burundi
   Burundi • Flag of Cameroon  Cameroon • Flag of Democratic Republic of
   the Congo  Democratic Republic of the Congo • Flag of Republic of the
   Congo  Republic of the Congo • Flag of Equatorial Guinea  Equatorial
   Guinea • Flag of Gabon  Gabon • Flag of Kenya  Kenya • Flag of Nigeria
    Nigeria • Flag of Malawi  Malawi • Flag of Mozambique  Mozambique •
   Flag of Namibia  Namibia • Flag of Rwanda  Rwanda • Flag of Somalia
   Somalia • Flag of South Africa  South Africa • Flag of Swaziland
   Swaziland • Flag of Tanzania  Tanzania • Flag of Uganda  Uganda • Flag
   of Zambia  Zambia • Flag of Zimbabwe  Zimbabwe

   Yoruba and Igbo: Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sudan"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
