   #copyright

Sumer

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Ancient History,
Classical History and Mythology

     Ancient Mesopotamia
   Euphrates – Tigris
   Assyriology
       Cities / Empires
   Sumer: Uruk – Ur – Eridu
   Kish – Lagash – Nippur
   Akkadian Empire: Akkad
   Babylon – Isin – Susa
   Assyria: Assur – Nineveh
   Dur-Sharrukin – Nimrud
   Babylonia – Chaldea
   Elam – Amorites
   Hurrians – Mitanni
   Kassites – Urartu
          Chronology
   Kings of Sumer
   Kings of Assyria
   Kings of Babylon
           Language
   Cuneiform script
   Sumerian – Akkadian
   Elamite – Hurrian
          Mythology
   Enûma Elish
   Gilgamesh – Marduk

   Sumer (or Šumer, Sumerian ki-en-gir, Egyptian Sangar, possibly Biblical
   Shinar) was one of the early civilizations of the Ancient Near East,
   located in the southern part of Mesopotamia (modern day southeastern
   Iraq) from the time of the earliest records in the mid 4th millennium
   BC until the rise of Babylonia in the late 3rd millennium BC. The term
   "Sumerian" applies to all speakers of the Sumerian language. Sumer
   together with Ancient Egypt is considered the first settled society in
   the world to have manifested all the features needed to qualify fully
   as a "civilization".

Ethnonym

   The term "Sumerian" is an exonym first applied by the Akkadians. The
   Sumerians called themselves SAG.GI.GA "black-headed people" and their
   land KI.EN.GIR "land of the civilized lords". The Akkadian word Šumer
   possibly represents this name in dialect.

   The Sumerians were a non- Semitic people and were at one time believed
   to have been invaders, as a number of linguists believed they could
   detect a substrate language beneath Sumerian. However, the
   archaeological record shows clear uninterrupted cultural continuity
   from the time of the Early Ubaid period (5200-4500 BC C-14, 6090-5429
   calBC) settlements in southern Mesopotamia. The Sumerian people who
   settled here farmed the lands in this region that were made fertile by
   silt deposited by the Tigris and the Euphrates rivers.

City states

   By the late 4th millennium BC, Sumer was divided into about a dozen
   independent city-states, whose limits were defined by canals and
   boundary stones. Each was centered on a temple dedicated to the
   particular patron god or goddess of the city and ruled over by a priest
   ( ensi) or king ( lugal), who was intimately tied to the city's
   religious rites.

   The principal Sumerian sites (from North to South) were the cities of:
     * Mari -- 34°27′N 40°55′E
     * Agade -- 33°06′N 44°06′E
     * Kish (Tell Uheimir & Ingharra) -- 32°33′N 44°39′E
     * Borsippa (Birs Nimrud) -- 32°23′30″N, 44°20′30″E
     * Nippur (Nuffar) -- 32°10′N 45°11′E
     * Isin (Ishan al-Bahriyat) -- 31°56′N 45°17′E
     * Adab (Tell Bismaya) -- 31°57′N 45°58′E
     * Shuruppak (Fara) -- 31°46′N 45°30′E
     * Girsu (Tello) -- 31°37′N 46°09′E
     * Lagash (Al-Hiba) -- 31°26′N 46°32′E
     * Bad-Tibira (Al Medina) -- 31°46′N 46°00′E
     * Uruk (Warka) -- 31°18′N 45°40′E
     * Larsa (Tell as-Senkereh) -- 31°14′N 45°51′E
     * Ur (al Muqayyar) -- 30°57′45″N, 46°06′11″E
     * Eridu (Abu Shahrain) -- 30°48′57.02″N, 45°59′45.85″E

   minor cities:
     * Sippar (Abu Habba) -- 33°03′N 44°18′E
     * Kutha (Tell Ibrahim) -- 32°44′N 44°40′E
     * Dilbat (Tell ed-Duleim) -- 32°09′N 44°30′E
     * Marad ((Wanna es-) Sadun) -- 32°04′N 44°47′E
     * Kisurra (Abu Hatab) -- 31°50′N 45°26′E
     * Zabala (Tell Ibzeikh) -- 31°44′N 45°52′E
     * Umma (Tell Jokha) -- 31°38′N 45°52′E
     * Kisiga (Tell el-Lahm) -- 30°50′N 46°20′E
     * Awan
     * Hamazi
     * Eshnunna
     * Akshak
     * Zimbir

   Apart from Mari, which lies full 330 km northwest of Agade, but which
   is credited in the king list to have "exercised kingship" in the Early
   Dynastic II period, these cities are all in the Euphrates-Tigris
   alluvial plain, south of Baghdad in what are now the Bābil, Wāsit, Dhi
   Qar, Al-Muthannā and Al-Qādisiyyah governorates of Iraq.

History

   The Sumerian city states rise to power during the prehistorical Ubaid
   and Uruk periods. The historical record gradually opens with the Early
   Dynastic period from ca. the 29th century BC, but remains scace until
   the Lagash period begins in the 26th century. Classical Sumer ends with
   the Akkadian Empire in the 24th century. Following the Gutian period,
   there is a brief " Sumerian renaissance" in the 22nd century, cut short
   in ca. 2000 BC by Amorite invasions. The Amorite "dynasty of Isin"
   persists until ca. 1730 BC when Mesopotamia is united under Babylonian
   rule.
     * Ubaid period 5300-3900 BC
     * Uruk IV period 3900-3200 BC
     * Uruk III period 3200-2900 BC
     * Early Dynastic I period 2900-2800 BC
     * Early Dynastic II period 2800-2600 BC
     * Early Dynastic IIIa period 2600-2500 BC
     * Early Dynastic IIIb period 2500-2334 BC
     * Lagash dynasty period 2550-2380 BC
     * Akkad dynasty period 2450-2250 BC
     * Gutian period 2250-2150 BC
     * Ur III period 2150-2000 BC

Ubaid period

   A distinctive style of fine quality painted pottery spread throughout
   Mesopotamia and the Persian Gulf region in the Ubaid period, when the
   ancient Sumerian religious centre of Eridu was gradually surpassed in
   size by the nearby city of Uruk. The archaeological transition from the
   Ubaid period to the Uruk period is marked by a gradual shift from
   painted pottery domestically produced on a slow wheel, to a great
   variety of unpainted pottery mass-produced by specialists on fast
   wheels. The date of this transition, from Ubaid 4 to Early Uruk, is in
   dispute, but calibrated radiocarbon dates from Tell Awayli would place
   it as early as 4500 BC.

   The Ubaid pottery of southern Mesopotamia has been connected via Choga
   Mami Transitional ware to the pottery of the Samarra period culture (c.
   5700-4900 BC C-14, 6640-5816 BC calBC) in the north, who were the first
   to practice a primitive form of irrigation agriculture along the middle
   Tigris River and its tributaries. The connection is most clearly seen
   at Tell Awayli (Oueilli, Oueili) near Larsa, excavated by the French in
   the 1980s, where 8 levels yielded pre-Ubaid pottery resembling Samarran
   ware. Sumerian speakers spread down into southern Mesopotamia perhaps
   because they had developed a social organization and a technology that
   enabled them, through their control of the water, to survive and
   prosper in a difficult environment then occupied by the
   fisher-hunter-gatherer population using a pre-pottery Arabian bifacial
   toolkit in the marshlands near the Persian Gulf and proto-Akkadian
   nomadic pastoralists.

Uruk period

   By the time of the Uruk period (4500- 3100 BC calibrated), the volume
   of trade goods transported along the canals and rivers of southern
   Mesopotamia facilitated the rise of many large temple-centered cities
   where centralized administrations employed specialized workers. It is
   fairly certain that it was during the Uruk period that Sumerian cities
   began to make use of slave labor (Subartu) captured from the hill
   country, and there is ample evidence for captured slaves as workers in
   the earliest texts. Artifacts, and even colonies of this Uruk
   civilization have been found over a wide area - from the Taurus
   Mountains in Turkey, to the Mediterranean Sea in the west, and as far
   east as Central Iran.

   The Uruk period civilization, exported by Sumerian traders and
   colonists (like that found at Tell Brak), had an effect on all
   surrounding peoples, who gradually evolved their own comparable,
   competing economies and cultures. The cities of Sumer could not
   maintain remote, long-distance colonies by military force.

   The end of the Uruk period coincided with the Priora oscillation, a dry
   period from c. 3200- 2900 BC that marked the end of a long wetter,
   warmer climate period from about 9,000 to 5,000 years ago, called the
   Holocene climatic optimum. When the historical record opens, the
   Sumerians appear to be limited to southern Mesopotamia — although very
   early rulers such as Lugal-Anne-Mundu are indeed recorded as expanding
   to neighboring areas as far as the Mediterranean, Taurus and Zagros,
   and not long after legendary figures like Enmerkar and Gilgamesh, who
   are associated in mythology with the historical transfer of culture
   from Eridu to Uruk, were supposed to have reigned.

Early Dynastic

   The ancient Sumerian king list recounts the early dynasties. Like many
   other archaic lists of rulers, it may include legendary names. The
   first king on the list whose name is known from any other source is
   Etana, 13th king of the first Dynasty of Kish. The first king
   authenticated through archaeological evidence is that of Enmebaragesi
   of Kish, the 22nd and penultimate king of that Dynasty, whose name is
   also mentioned in the Gilgamesh epic, and who may have been king at the
   time hegemony passed from Kish to Uruk once again. This has led to the
   suggestion that Gilgamesh himself really was a historical king of Uruk.

   Lugal-Zage-Si, the priest-king of Umma, overthrew the primacy of the
   Lagash dynasty, took Uruk, making it his capital, and claimed an empire
   extending from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean. He is the last
   ethnically Sumerian king before the arrival of the Semitic named king,
   Sargon of Akkad.

Lagash dynasty

   The dynasty of Lagash is well known through important monuments, and
   one of the first empires in recorded history was that of Eannatum of
   Lagash, who annexed practically all of Sumer, including Kish, Uruk, Ur,
   and Larsa, and reduced to tribute the city-state of Umma, arch-rival of
   Lagash. In addition, his realm extended to parts of Elam and along the
   Persian Gulf. He seems to have used terror as a matter of policy - his
   stele of the vultures has been found, showing violent treatment of
   enemies.

Akkadian dynasty

   The Semitic Akkadian language is first attested in proper names around
   2800 BC. From about 2500 BC one finds texts written entirely in Old
   Akkadian. The Old Akkadian language period was at its height during the
   rule of Sargon the Great (2350 - 2330), but most administrative tablets
   even during that period are still written in Sumerian, as that was the
   language used by the scribes. Gelb and Westenholz differentiate between
   three dialects of Old Akkadian - from the pre-Sargonic period, the
   period of rule by king Sargon and the city of Agade, and the Ur III
   period. Speakers of Akkadian and Sumerian coexisted for about one
   thousand years, from 2800 to 1800, at the end of which Sumerian ceased
   to be spoken. Thorkild Jacobsen has argued that there is little break
   in historical continuity between the pre- and post-Sargon periods, and
   that too much emphasis has been placed on the perception of a "Semitic
   vs. Sumerian" conflict. However, it is certain that Akkadian was also
   briefly imposed on neighboring parts of Elam that were conquered by
   Sargon.

Gutian period

   Following the downfall of the Akkadian Empire at the hands of Gutians,
   another native Sumerian ruler, Gudea of Lagash, rose to local
   prominence, promoting artistic development and continuing the practices
   of the Sargonid kings' claims to divinity.

Sumerian renaissance

   Later, the 3rd dynasty of Ur under Ur-Nammu and Shulgi, whose power
   extended as far as northern Mesopotamia, was the last great "Sumerian
   renaissance", but already the region was becoming more Semitic than
   Sumerian, with the influx of waves of Martu ( Amorites) who were later
   to found the Babylonian Empire. Sumerian, however, remained a
   sacerdotal language taught in schools, in the same way that Latin was
   used in the Medieval period, for as long as cuneiform was utilised.

   Ecologically, the agricultural productivity of the Sumerian lands was
   being compromised as a result of rising salinity. The evaporation of
   irrigated waters left dissolved salts in the soil, making them
   difficult for agriculture. There was a major depopulation of southern
   Mesopotamia, affecting many of the smaller sites, from about 2000 BC,
   leading to the collapse of Sumerian culture.

Downfall

   Following an Elamite invasion and sack of Ur during the rule of
   Ibbi-Sin (ca. 2004 BC), Sumer came under Amorite rule (taken to
   introduce the Middle Bronze Age). The independent Amorite states of the
   20th to 18th centuries are summarized as the " Dynasty of Isin" in the
   Sumerian king list, ending with the rise of Babylonia under Hammurabi
   in the ca. 1730 BC.

Agriculture and hunting

   The Sumerians adopted the agricultural mode of life which had been
   introduced into Lower Mesopotamia and practised the same irrigation
   techniques as those used in Egypt. Adams says that irrigation
   development was associated with urbanization , and that 89% of the
   population lived in the cities .

   They grew barley, chickpeas, lentils, wheat, dates, onions, garlic,
   lettuce, leeks and mustard. They also raised cattle, sheep, goats, and
   pigs. They used oxen as their primary beasts of burden and donkeys or
   equidss as their primary transport animal. Sumerians caught many fish
   and hunted fowl and gazelle.

   Sumerian agriculture depended heavily on irrigation. The irrigation was
   accomplished by the use of shadufs, canals, channels, dykes, weirs, and
   reservoirs. The frequent violent floods of the Tigris, and less so, of
   the Euphrates, meant that canals required frequent repair and continual
   removal of silt, and survey markers and boundary stones continually
   replaced. The government required individuals to work on the canals in
   a corvee, although the rich were able to exempt themselves.

   After the flood season and after the Spring Equinox and the Akitu or
   New Year Festival, using the canals, farmers would flood their fields
   and then drain the water. Next they let oxen stomp the ground and kill
   weeds. They then dragged the fields with pickaxes. After drying, they
   plowed, harrowed, raked the ground three times, and pulverized it with
   a mattock, before planting seed. Unfortunately the high evaporation
   rate resulted in gradual salinity of the fields. By the Ur III period,
   farmers had converted from wheat to the more salt-tolerant barley as
   their principle crop.

   Sumerians harvested during the dry fall season in three-person teams
   consisting of a reaper, a binder, and a sheaf arranger. The farmers
   would use threshing wagons to separate the cereal heads from the stalks
   and then use threshing sleds to disengage the grain. They then winnowed
   the grain/chaff mixture.

Architecture

   The Tigris-Euphrates plain lacked minerals and trees. Sumerian
   structures were made of plano-convex mudbrick, not fixed with mortar or
   with cement. Mud-brick buildings eventually deteriorate, and so they
   were periodically destroyed, leveled, and rebuilt on the same spot.
   This constant rebuilding gradually raised the level of cities, so that
   they came to be elevated above the surrounding plain. The resultant
   hills are known as tells, and are found throughout the ancient Near
   East.

   The most impressive and famous of Sumerian buildings are the ziggurats,
   large terraced platforms which supported temples. Some scholars have
   theorized that these structures might have been the basis of the Tower
   of Babel described in Genesis. Sumerian cylinder seals also depict
   houses built from reeds not unlike those built by the Marsh Arabs of
   Southern Iraq until as recently as A.D. 400.

   Sumerian temples and palaces made use of more advanced materials and
   techniques, such as buttresses, recesses, half columns, and clay nails.

Culture

   Sumerian culture may be traced to two main centers, Eridu in the south
   and Nippur in the north. Eridu and Nippur may be regarded as
   contrasting poles of Sumerian religion.

   The deity Enlil, around whose sanctuary Nippur had grown up, was
   considered lord of the ghost-land, and his gifts to mankind were said
   to be the spells and incantations that the spirits of good or evil were
   compelled to obey. The world he governed was a mountain (E-kur from
   E=house and Kur=Mountain); the creatures that he had made lived
   underground.

   Eridu, on the other hand, was the home of the culture god Enki
   (absorbed into Babylonian mythology as the god Ea), the god of
   beneficence, ruler of the freshwater depths beneath the earth (the Abzu
   from Ab=water and Zu=far), a healer and friend to humanity who was
   thought to have given us the arts and sciences, the industries and
   manners of civilization; the first law-book was considered his
   creation. Eridu had once been a seaport, and it was doubtless its
   foreign trade and intercourse with other lands that influenced the
   development of its culture. Its cosmology was the result of its
   geographical position: the earth, it was believed, had grown out of the
   waters of the deep, like the ever widening coast at the mouth of the
   Euphrates. Long before history is recorded, however, the cultures of
   Eridu and Nippur had coalesced. While Babylon seems to have been a
   colony of Eridu, Eridu's immediate neighbour, Ur, may have been a
   colony of Nippur, since its moon god was said to be the son of Enlil of
   Nippur. However, in the admixture of the two cultures, the influence of
   Eridu was predominant.

   Historian Alan Marcus has been quoted as saying that "Sumerians held a
   rather dour perspective on life." One Sumerian wrote: "Tears, lament,
   anguish, and depression are within me. Suffering overwhelms me. Evil
   fate holds me and carries off my life. Malignant sickness bathes me."
   Another wrote, "Why am I counted among the ignorant? Food is all about,
   yet my food is hunger. On the day shares were allotted, my allotted
   share was suffering."

   Though women were protected by late Sumerian law and were able to
   achieve a higher status in Sumer than in other contemporary
   civilizations, the culture was male-dominated.

   There is much evidence that the Sumerians loved music. It seemed to be
   an important part of religious and civic life in Sumer. Lyres were
   popular in Sumer, see Sumerian music.

Economy and trade

   Discoveries of obsidian from far-away locations in Anatolia and lapis
   lazuli from northeastern Afghanistan, beads from Dilmun (modern
   Bahrain), and several seals inscribed with the Indus Valley script
   suggest a remarkably wide-ranging network of ancient trade centered
   around the Persian Gulf.

   The Epic of Gilgamesh refers to trade with far lands for goods such as
   wood that were scarce in Mesopotamia. In particular, cedar from Lebanon
   was prized.

   The Sumerians used slaves, although they were not a major part of the
   economy. Slave women worked as weavers, pressers, millers, and porters.

   Sumerian potters decorated pots with cedar oil paints. The potters used
   a bow drill to produce the fire needed for baking the pottery. Sumerian
   masons and jewelers knew and made use of alabaster (calcite), ivory,
   gold, silver, carnelian and lapis lazuli.

Military

   Early chariots on the Standard of Ur, ca. 2600 BC.
   Early chariots on the Standard of Ur, ca. 2600 BC.

   The almost constant wars among the Sumerian city-states for 2000 years
   helped to develop the military technology and techniques of Sumer to a
   high level. The first war recorded was between Lagash and Umma in 2525
   BC on a stele called the Stele of Vultures. It shows the king of Lagash
   leading a Sumerian army consisting mostly of infantry. The infantrymen
   carried spears, equipped with copper helmets and leather shields . The
   spearmen are shown arranged in a phalanx formation, which required
   training and discipline, and so implies they were professional
   soldiers.

   The Sumerian military used carts harnessed to onagers. These early
   chariots functioned less effectively in combat than did later designs,
   and some have suggested that these chariots served primarily as
   transports, though the crew carried battle-axes and lances. The
   Sumerian chariot comprised a four or two- wheeled device manned by a
   crew of two and harnessed to four onagers. The cart was composed of a
   woven basket and the wheels had a solid three-piece design.

   Sumerian cities were surrounded by defensive walls. The Sumerians
   engaged in siege warfare between their cities, but the mudbrick walls
   failed to deter some foes.

Religion

   Like other cities of Asia Minor and the Mediterranean, Sumer was a
   polytheistic, or henotheistic, society. There was no organized set of
   gods, with each city-state having its own patrons, temples, and
   priest-kings; but the Sumerians were probably the first to write down
   their beliefs. Sumerian beliefs were also the inspiration for much of
   later Mesopotamian mythology, religion, and astrology.

   The Sumerians worshipped An as the primary god, equivalent to
   "heaven"-- indeed, the word "an" in Sumerian means "sky", and his
   consort Ki, meaning "earth". Collectively the Gods were known as
   Anunaki ("heaven and earth"). An's closest cohorts were Enki in the
   south at the Abzu temple in Eridu, Enlil in the north at the Ekur
   temple of Nippur and Inana, the deification of Venus, the morning
   (eastern) and evening (western) star, at the Eanna temple (shared with
   An) at Uruk. The sun was Utu, was worshipped at Sippar, the moon was
   Nanna, worshipped at Ur and Nammu or Namma was one of the names of the
   Mother Goddess, probably considered to be the original matrix; there
   were hundreds of minor deities. The Sumerian gods (Sumerian dingir,
   plural dingir-dingir or dingir-a-ne-ne) thus had associations with
   different cities, and their religious importance often waxed and waned
   with the political power of the associated cities. The gods were said
   to have created human beings from clay for the purpose of serving them.
   The gods often expressed their anger and frustration through
   earthquakes and storms: the gist of Sumerian religion was that humanity
   was at the mercy of the gods.

   Sumerians believed that the universe consisted of a flat disk enclosed
   by a tin dome. The Sumerian afterlife involved a descent into a gloomy
   netherworld to spend eternity in a wretched existence as a Gidim
   (ghost).

   Sumerian temples consisted of a forecourt, with a central pond for
   purification (the Abzu). The temple itself had a central nave with
   aisles along either side. Flanking the aisles would be rooms for the
   priests. At one end would stand the podium and a mudbrick table for
   animal and vegetable sacrifices. Granaries and storehouses were usually
   located near the temples. After a time the Sumerians began to place the
   temples on top of multi-layered square constructions built as a series
   of rising terraces: the ziggurats.

Technology

   Examples of Sumerian technology include: the wheel, cuneiform,
   arithmetic and geometry, irrigation systems, sumerian boats, lunisolar
   calendar, bronze, leather, saws, chisels, hammers, braces, bits, nails,
   pins, rings, hoes, axes, knives, lancepoints, arrowheads, swords, glue,
   daggers, waterskins, bags, harnesses, armor, quivers, scabbards, boots,
   sandal (footwear), harpoons, and beer.

   The Sumerians had three main types of boats:
     * skin boats comprising of animal skins and reeds
     * clinker-built sailboats stitched together with hair, featuring
       bitumen waterproofing
     * wooden-oared ships, sometimes pulled upstream by people and animals
       walking along the nearby banks

Language and writing

   The most important archaeological discoveries in Sumer are a large
   number of tablets written in Sumerian. Sumerian pre- cuneiform script
   has been discovered on tablets dating to around 3500 BC.

   The Sumerian language is generally regarded as a language isolate in
   linguistics because it belongs to no known language family; Akkadian
   belongs to the Afro-Asiatic languages. There have been many failed
   attempts to connect Sumerian to other language groups. It is an
   agglutinative language; in other words, morphemes ("units of meaning")
   are added together to create words.

   Sumerians invented picture- hieroglyphs that developed into later
   cuneiform, and their language vies with Ancient Egyptian for credit as
   the oldest known written human language. An extremely large body of
   hundreds of thousands of texts in the Sumerian language has survived,
   the great majority of these on clay tablets. Known Sumerian texts
   include personal and business letters and transactions, receipts,
   lexical lists, laws, hymns and prayers, magical incantations, and
   scientific texts including mathematics, astronomy, and medicine.
   Monumental inscriptions and texts on different objects like statues or
   bricks are also very common. Many texts survive in multiple copies
   because they were repeatedly transcribed by scribes-in-training.
   Sumerian continued to be the language of religion and law in
   Mesopotamia long after Semitic speakers had become the ruling race.

   Understanding Sumerian texts today can be problematic even for experts.
   Most difficult are the earliest texts, which in many cases don't give
   the full grammatical structure of the language.

Legacy

   Most authorities credit the Sumerians with the invention of the wheel,
   initially in the form of the potter's wheel. The new concept quickly
   led to wheeled vehicles and mill wheels. The Sumerians' cuneiform
   writing system is the oldest we have evidence of (with the possible
   exception of the highly controversial Old European Script), pre-dating
   Egyptian hieroglyphics by at least seventy-five years. The Sumerians
   were among the first formal astronomers, correctly formulating a
   heliocentric view of the solar system, to which they assigned 5 planets
   (all that can be seen with the naked eye).

   They invented and developed arithmetic using several different number
   systems including a Mixed radix system with an alternating base 10 and
   base 6. This sexagesimal system became the standard number system in
   Sumer and Babylonia. Using this sexagesimal system they invented the
   clock with its 60 seconds, 60 minutes, and 12 hours, and the 12 month
   calendar which is still in use. They may have invented military
   formations and introduced the basic divisions between infantry, cavalry
   and archers. They developed the first known codified legal and
   administrative systems, complete with courts, jails, and government
   records. The first true city states arose in Sumer, roughly
   contemporaneously with similar entities in what is now Syria and
   Israel. Several centuries after their invention of cuneiform, the
   practice of writing expanded beyond debt/payment certificates and
   inventory lists and was applied for the first time about 2600 BC to
   written messages and mail delivery, history, legend, mathematics,
   astronomical records and other pursuits generally corresponding to the
   fields occupying teachers and students ever since. Accordingly, the
   first formal schools were established, usually under the auspices of a
   city-state's primary temple.

   Finally, the Sumerians ushered in the age of intensive agriculture and
   irrigation. Emmer wheat, barley, sheep (starting as mouflon) and cattle
   (starting as aurochs) were foremost among the species cultivated and
   raised for the first time on a grand scale. These inventions and
   innovations easily place the Sumerians among the most creative cultures
   in human pre-history and history.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sumer"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
