   #copyright

Switzerland

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Countries; European
Countries

   Confoederatio Helvetica
   Schweizerische Eidgenossenschaft
   Confédération suisse
   Confederazione Svizzera
   Confederaziun svizra
   Swiss Confederation

   Flag of Switzerland Coat of arms of Switzerland
   Flag                Coat of arms
   Motto: Latin: Unus pro omnibus, omnes pro uno (traditional)
   (English: "One for all, all for one")
   Anthem: Swiss Psalm
   Location of Switzerland
   Capital Bern (federal capital)
   46°57′N 7°27′E
   Largest city Zürich
   Official languages German, French, Italian, Romansh
   Government Direct democracy
   Federal republic
    - Federal Council Moritz Leuenberger ( Pres. 06)
   Pascal Couchepin
   Samuel Schmid
   Micheline Calmy-Rey (V P 06)
   Christoph Blocher
   Hans-Rudolf Merz
   Doris Leuthard
   Independence
    - De facto 22 September 1499
    - Recognised October 24, 1648
    - Federal state 12 September 1848
   Area
    - Total 41,285 km² ( 136th)
   15,940 sq mi
    - Water (%) 4.2
   Population
    - July 2005 estimate 7,252,000 ( 95th)
    - 2000 census 7,288,010
    - Density 182/km² ( 61st)
   472/sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total $264.1 billion ( 39th)
    - Per capita $32,300 ( 10th)
   GDP (nominal) 2005 estimate
    - Total $367.5 billion ( 18th)
    - Per capita $50,532 ( 4th)
   HDI  (2004) 0.947 (high) ( 9th)
   Currency Swiss franc ( CHF)
   Time zone CET ( UTC+1)
    - Summer ( DST) CEST ( UTC+2)
   Internet TLD .ch
   Calling code +41
   Switzerland portal
   1548 view of Zug
   Enlarge
   1548 view of Zug

   Switzerland (German: die Schweiz, French: la Suisse, Italian: Svizzera
   and Romansh: Svizra), officially the Swiss Confederation, is a
   landlocked Alpine country in Central Europe. The country, which borders
   Germany to the north, France to the west, Italy to the south, and
   Austria and Liechtenstein to the east, was historically a
   confederation, and has been a federation since 1848. Switzerland has a
   strong economy in finance and banking, and a long and strong tradition
   of political and military neutrality. This background allows
   Switzerland to host various international co-operations and
   organizations.

   Confoederatio Helvetica, the country's official Latin name, means
   Helvetic Confederation. The use of Latin avoids having to favour one of
   the four national languages. The abbreviation (CH) is used for the same
   reason. The titles commonly used in French (Confédération suisse),
   Italian (Confederazione Svizzera) and Romansh (Confederaziun svizra)
   translate as "Swiss Confederation", while the German name of
   Schweizerische Eidgenossenschaft translates literally as "Swiss Oath
   Fellowship" or "Swiss Commonwealth of the Covenant". A male native of
   Switzerland is said to be a Schweizer and a female is a Schweizerin in
   Swiss German; Suisse (male) or Suissesse (female) in Swiss French and
   svizzero (male) or svizzera (female) in Swiss Italian.

History

Early history

   In 1291 representatives of the three forest cantons of Uri, Schwyz, and
   Unterwalden signed the Federal Charter. The charter united the involved
   parties in the struggle against the rule by the Hapsburgs, the family
   then holding the Duchy of Austria in the Holy Roman Empire. At the
   Battle of Morgarten on November 15, 1315, the Swiss defeated the
   Habsburg army and secured existence of the Swiss Confederation within
   the Holy Roman Empire.

   By 1353, the three original cantons had been joined by the cantons of
   Glarus and Zug and the city states of Lucerne, Zürich and Berne,
   forming the "Old Federation" of eight states that persisted during much
   of the 15th century (although Zürich was expelled from the
   confederation during the 1440s due to a territorial conflict) and led
   to a significant increase of power and wealth of the federation, in
   particular due to the victories over Charles the Bold of Burgundy
   during the 1470s, and the success of the Swiss mercenaries. The
   traditional listing order of the cantons of Switzerland reflects this
   state, listing the eight "Old Cantons" first, with the city states
   preceding the founding cantons, followed by cantons that joined the
   federation after 1481, in historical order. The Swiss victory in the
   Swabian War against the Swabian League of emperor Maximilian I in 1499
   amounted to de facto independence from the Holy Roman Empire.

   In 1506 Pope Julius II engaged the Swiss Guard that continues to serve
   the Vatican to the present day. The expansion of the federation, and
   the reputation of invincibility acquired during the earlier wars,
   suffered a first setback in 1515 with the Swiss defeat in the Battle of
   Marignano. The success of Zwingli's Reformation in some cantons led to
   inter-cantonal wars in 1529 and 1531 (Kappeler Kriege). The conflict
   between Catholic and Protestant cantons persisted, erupting in further
   violence at the battles of Villmergen in 1656 and 1712. Under the
   Treaty of Westphalia in 1648, European countries recognised
   Switzerland's independence from the Holy Roman Empire and its
   neutrality (ancien régime).

French invasion of 1798

   In 1798, the armies of the French Revolution conquered Switzerland and
   imposed a new unified constitution. This centralised the government of
   the country and effectively abolished the cantons. The new regime was
   known as the Helvetic Republic and was highly unpopular. It had been
   imposed by a foreign invading army, and had destroyed centuries of
   tradition, including the right to worship. It had made Switzerland
   nothing more than a French satellite state. Uprisings were common and
   only the presence of French troops kept them from succeeding. The
   brutal French suppression of the Nidwalden revolt in September was
   especially infamous.

   When war broke out between France and other countries Switzerland found
   itself being invaded by other outside forces from Austria and Russia.
   The Swiss were divided mainly between "Republicans" who were in favour
   of a centralised government, and "Federalists" who wanted to restore
   autonomy to the cantons. In Paris in 1803, Napoleon Bonaparte organised
   a meeting of the leading Swiss politicians from both sides. The result
   was the Act of Mediation which largely restored Swiss autonomy and
   introduced a Confederation of 19 Cantons. From then on much of Swiss
   politics would be about balancing the cantons' tradition of self-rule
   with the need for a central government. The Congress of Vienna in 1815
   fully re-established Swiss independence and the European powers agreed
   to permanently recognise the Swiss neutrality. At this time,
   Switzerland experienced its last increase in territory to date, with
   the admission of the cantons of Valais, Neuchâtel and Geneva.

Constitution of 1848

   In 1845, a civil war broke out between the Catholic and the Protestant
   cantons (Sonderbundskrieg). The Catholics disliked the moves towards a
   more united Switzerland which the Radical Party, then in government,
   was promoting. The Catholics therefore came up with a 'special treaty'
   ( Sonderbund) which the Radicals objected to. The war lasted for less
   than a month, causing fewer than 100 casualties. Apart from small
   riots, this was the most recent armed conflict on Swiss territory.

   As a consequence of the civil war, Switzerland adopted the use of
   referenda and a federal constitution in 1849. This constitution
   provided for a central authority while leaving the cantons the right to
   self-government on local issues. The constitution was amended
   extensively in 1872 in order to take into account the rise in
   population, the Industrial Revolution and the settling of a single
   currency. It also established federal responsibility for defence,
   trade, and legal matters.

   In 1893, the constitution was revised with unusually strong elements of
   direct democracy, which remains unique even today. Since then,
   continued political, economic, and social improvement has characterised
   Swiss history.

20th century

   The Grossmünster of Zürich during Christmas Season
   Enlarge
   The Grossmünster of Zürich during Christmas Season

   In 1920, Switzerland joined the League of Nations, and in 1963 the
   Council of Europe. Switzerland proclaimed neutrality in World War I and
   was not involved militarily in the conflict. Neutrality was again
   proclaimed in World War II, and although a German intervention was both
   planned and anticipated, it ultimately did not occur. The massive
   mobilisation of Swiss armed forces under the leadership of General
   Henri Guisan is often cited as a decisive factor that the German
   invasion was never initiated. These findings also imply that
   Switzerland's neutrality was compromised, as some Swiss citizens may
   have helped to launder the wealth allegedly stolen in the Holocaust. On
   the other hand, during the war, Switzerland became a hub for spying
   activities against Germany and the Axis Powers, which helped to bring
   about their defeat.

   Women were granted the right to vote in the first cantons in 1959, at
   the federal level in 1971, and in the last canton, Appenzell
   Innerrhoden, in 1990. In 1979, parts of the canton of Bern attained
   independence, forming the new canton of Jura. On April 18, 1999 the
   Swiss population and the cantons voted in favour of a completely
   revised federal constitution.

21st century

   In 2002 Switzerland became a full member of the United Nations, leaving
   the Vatican as the last widely recognised State without full UN
   membership. Switzerland is a founding member of the EFTA, but is not a
   member of the European Economic Area. An application for membership in
   the European Union was sent in May 1992, but not advanced since the EEA
   was rejected in December 1992 when Switzerland was the only country to
   launch a referendum on the EEA. There have since been several referenda
   on the EU issue, but, as these are initiated by marginal groups within
   the country they have never been supported by the government. However,
   Swiss law is gradually being adjusted to conform with that of the EU
   and the government has signed a number of bilateral agreements with the
   European Union. Switzerland, together with Liechtenstein, has been
   completely bordered by the EU since Austria's membership in 1995. On
   June 5, 2005, Swiss voters agreed, by a 55% majority, to join the
   Schengen treaty, a result that was welcomed by EU commentators as a
   sign of goodwill by Switzerland, a country that is traditionally
   perceived as isolationist.

Politics

   Federal Palace in Bern
   Enlarge
   Federal Palace in Bern

   The bicameral Swiss parliament, the Federal Assembly, is the primary
   seat of power, apart from the Federal Council. Both houses, the Council
   of States and the National Council, have equal powers in all respects,
   including the right to introduce legislation.

   Under the 1999 constitution, cantons hold all powers not specifically
   delegated to the federation.

   The 46 members of the Council of States (two from each canton and one
   from former half cantons) are directly elected in each canton, whereas
   the 200 members of the National Council are elected directly under a
   system of proportional representation. Members of both houses serve for
   4 years. Through referenda, citizens may challenge any law voted by
   federal parliament and through initiatives introduce amendments to the
   federal constitution, making Switzerland a direct democracy.

   The top executive body and collective Head of State is the Federal
   Council, a collegial body of seven members. Although the constitution
   provides that the Assembly elects and supervises the members of the
   Council, the latter (and its administration) has gradually assumed a
   pre-eminent role in directing the legislative process as well as
   executing federal laws. The President of the Confederation is elected
   from the seven to assume special representative functions for a
   one-year term.

   From 1959 to December 2003, the four major parties were represented in
   the Federal Council according to the "magic formula", proportional to
   their representation in federal parliament: 2 Christian Democrats
   (CVP/PDC), 2 from the Social Democrats (SPS/PSS), 2 Liberal Democrats
   (FDP/PRD), and 1 from the Swiss People's Party (SVP/UDC). This
   traditional distribution of seats, however, is not backed up by any
   law, and in the 2003 elections to the Federal Council the CVP/PDC lost
   their second seat to the SVP/UDC, which became the strongest party in
   Switzerland's legislative the same year.

   The function of the Federal Supreme Court is to hear appeals of
   cantonal courts or the administrative rulings of the federal
   administration. The judges are elected by the Federal Assembly for
   six-year terms.

Direct democracy

   Since the entry into force of the 1848 federal constitution,
   Switzerland features a system of government not seen at the national
   level in any other place on Earth: direct democracy, sometimes called
   half-direct democracy since it is complemented by the more commonplace
   institutions of a parliamentary democracy. The instruments of Swiss
   direct democracy at the federal level are the constitutional initiative
   and the referendum, also called people's rights. These instruments also
   exist at the cantonal and municipal level, occasionally in an expanded
   or different form.

   By calling a federal referendum a group of citizens may challenge a law
   that has been passed by Parliament, if they can gather 50,000
   signatures against the law within 100 days. If so, a national vote is
   scheduled where voters decide by a simple majority whether to accept or
   reject the law. Eight cantons together can also call a referendum on a
   federal law.

   Similarly, the federal constitutional initiative allows citizens to put
   a constitutional amendment to a national vote, if they can get 100,000
   voters to sign the proposed amendment within 18 months. Parliament can
   complement the proposed amendment with a counter-proposal, with voters
   having to indicate a preference on the ballot in case both proposals
   are accepted. Constitutional amendments, whether introduced by
   initiative or in Parliament, must be accepted by a double majority of
   both the national popular vote and a majority of the cantonal popular
   votes.

International institutions in Switzerland

   An unusual number of international institutions have their seats in
   Switzerland, in part due to its politics of neutrality. The Red Cross
   was founded there in 1863 and still has its institutional centre in the
   country. It is not a member of the European Union; a major referendum
   proposing the Swiss people rejected membership in the early 1990s.
   Switzerland was one of the last countries to join the United Nations,
   in 2002.

Energy politics

   The energy generated in Switzerland comprises around 40% nuclear power
   and 60% from hydroelectricity.

   On May 18, 2003, a popular initiative named Moratorium Plus asked about
   an extension of an existing law forbidding the building of new nuclear
   power plants. Both were turned down: Moratorium Plus by a margin of
   41.6% for and 58.4% opposed, and Electricity Without Nuclear by a
   margin of 33.7% for and 66.3% opposed. The former ten-year moratorium
   on the construction of new nuclear power plants was the result of a
   citizens' initiative voted on in 1990 which had passed with 54.5% Yes
   vs. 45.5% No votes (see Nuclear power phase-out in Switzerland for
   details).

Cantons (states)

   Valais
   Ticino
   Graubünden
   (Grisons)
   Geneva
   Vaud
   Neuchâtel
   Jura
   Berne
   Thurgau
   Zurich
   Aargau
   Lucerne
   Solothurn
   Basel-Land
   Schaffhausen
   Uri
   Schwyz
   Glarus
   St. Gallen
   Appenzell Innerrhoden
   Appenzell Ausserrhoden
   Obwalden
   Nidwalden
   Zug
   Fribourg
   Basel-City
   France
   Italy
   Liechenstein
   Austria
   Germany
   Cantons of Switzerland

   The Swiss Confederation consists of 26 cantons:
     * Aargau
     * Appenzell Innerrhoden*
     * Appenzell Ausserrhoden*
     * Basel-Stadt*
     * Basel-Landschaft*
     * Bern
     * Fribourg
     * Geneva
     * Glarus
     * Graubünden
     * Jura

                                * Lucerne
                                * Neuchâtel
                                * Nidwalden*
                                * Obwalden*
                                * Schaffhausen
                                * Schwyz
                                * Solothurn
                                * St. Gallen

                                                * Thurgau
                                                * Ticino
                                                * Uri
                                                * Valais
                                                * Vaud
                                                * Zug
                                                * Zürich

   *These cantons are represented by only one councillor in the Council of
   States.

   Their populations vary between 15,000 (Appenzell Innerrhoden) and
   1,253,500 (Zürich), and their area between 37 km² (Basel-Stadt) and
   7,105 km² (Graubünden). The Cantons comprise a total of 2,889
   municipalities.

   Within Switzerland there are two enclaves: Büsingen belongs to Germany,
   Campione d'Italia belongs to Italy.

   In a referendum held in the Austrian state of Vorarlberg on 11 May 1919
   over 80% of those voting supported a proposal that the state should
   join the Swiss Confederation. However, this was prevented by the
   opposition of the Austrian Government, the Allies, Swiss liberals, the
   Swiss-Italians and the Swiss-French.

Geography

   Map of Switzerland (detailed)
   Enlarge
   Map of Switzerland (detailed)
   Wintertime view of Sent, in the eastern canton of Graubünden
   Enlarge
   Wintertime view of Sent, in the eastern canton of Graubünden

   With an area of 41,285 square kilometres (15,940  sq mi), Switzerland
   is a relatively small country. The population is about 7.4 million,
   resulting in a population density of 182 people per square kilometre
   (472/sq mi).

   Switzerland comprises three basic topographical areas: the Swiss Alps,
   the Swiss plateau, and the Jura mountains. The Alps are a high mountain
   range running across the central-south of the country. Among the high
   peaks of the Swiss Alps, the highest of which is the Dufour Peak at
   4,634 metres (15,203 ft), are found countless valleys, some with
   glaciers. From these the headwaters of several major European rivers
   such as the Rhine, the Rhône, the Inn, the Aare, and the Ticino flow
   down into lakes such as Lake Geneva, Lake Zürich, Lake Neuchâtel, and
   Lake Constance.

   The northern, more populous part of the country is more open, but can
   still be mountainous, for example, in the Jura Mountains, a smaller
   range in the northwest. The Swiss climate is generally temperate, but
   can vary greatly between the localities, from harsh conditions on the
   high mountains to the often pleasant Mediterranean climate at
   Switzerland's southern tip.

   Switzerland's eco-systems can be particularly vulnerable due to the
   many valleys separated by high mountains, often forming unique
   ecologies, and the mountainous regions themselves, with a rich range of
   plants not found at other altitudes.

   See also: Swisstopo topographical survey, List of lakes of Switzerland,
   List of rivers of Switzerland, List of mountain passes in Switzerland.

Economy

   A view of Saas-Grund (right) and Saas-Fee (left) in southern
   Switzerland
   Enlarge
   A view of Saas-Grund (right) and Saas-Fee (left) in southern
   Switzerland

   Switzerland is a prosperous and stable modern market economy, with a
   nominal per capita GDP that is higher than those of the big western
   European economies, United States and Japan, though on a PPP basis, it
   ranks tenth. For much of the 20th century, Switzerland was the
   wealthiest country in Europe by a considerable margin. However, since
   the early 1990s it has suffered from slow growth and, in 2005, fell to
   fourth among European states with populations above one million in
   terms of nominal Gross Domestic Product per capita behind Ireland,
   Denmark and Norway and to the tenth position in terms of Gross Domestic
   Product per capita at purchasing power parity (also behind the European
   countries Austria and Iceland; (see list). Switzerland is a member of
   the European Free Trade Association.

   In recent years, the Swiss have brought their economic practices
   largely into conformity with those of the European Union, in an effort
   to enhance their international competitiveness, but this has not
   produced strong growth. Full EU membership is a long-term objective of
   the Swiss government, but there is considerable popular sentiment
   against this. To this end, it has established an Integration Office
   under the Department of Foreign and Economic Affairs. To minimise the
   negative consequences of Switzerland's isolation from the rest of
   Europe, Bern and Brussels signed seven agreements, called bilateral
   agreements, to further liberalise trade ties. These agreements were
   signed in 1999 and took effect in 2001. This first series of bilateral
   agreements included the free movement of persons. A second series
   covering nine areas was signed in 2004 and awaits ratification. The
   second series includes the Schengen treaty and the Dublin Convention.
   They continue to discuss further areas for cooperation. Preparatory
   discussions are being opened on four new areas: opening up the
   electricity market, participation in the European GPS system Galileo,
   cooperating with the European centre for disease prevention and
   recognising certificates of origin for food products. Switzerland voted
   against membership in the European Economic Area in December 1992 and
   has since maintained and developed its relationships with the European
   Union and European countries through bilateral agreements. A full
   report on the potential advantages and inconveniences of full EU
   membership is expected to be published in June 2006 by the Department
   of Foreign affairs. EU membership supporters hope this report could
   help reopen the internal debate, which has been dormant since March
   2001, when the Swiss people refused in a popular vote to start
   accession negotiations with the EU.

Demographics

   Main languages in Switzerland:German, French, Italian, Romansh
   Enlarge
   Main languages in Switzerland:
   German, French, Italian, Romansh

   Switzerland lies at the crossroads of several major European cultures
   that have heavily influenced the country's languages and culture.
   Switzerland has four official languages: German (74%) in the north and
   centre; French (19%) to the west; Italian (7%) in the south; and
   Romansh (a Romance language), that is spoken locally by a small
   minority (< 1%) in the southeastern canton of Graubünden. (Some
   dialects of Franco-Provençal have speakers in rural communities in the
   region where French is spoken. This language has no legal status.) The
   federal government is obliged to communicate in the four official
   languages. In the federal parliament, German, French, Italian and
   Romansh are the official languages and simultaneous translation is
   provided. The German spoken in Switzerland is predominantly a group of
   dialects collectively known as Swiss German, but written communication
   and broadcasts typically use standard High German. Similarly, there are
   some dialects in the other speaking part of Switzerland, called Swiss
   French and Ticinese (a dialect of Italian). Also the official languages
   (German, French and Italian) borrow some terms not understood outside
   of Switzerland, i.e. terms from other languages (German Billette from
   French), from similar term in another language (Italian azione used not
   as act but as discount from German Aktion). Learning one of the other
   national languages at school is obligatory for all Swiss, so most Swiss
   are supposed to be at least bilingual (in reality, many Swiss are more
   fluent in English than in their own country's other languages,
   particularly the German-speaking Swiss).

   Resident foreigners and temporary foreign workers make up about 21% of
   the population. Most of these are from European Union countries
   (Italians being the largest group, at 4%), with smaller numbers from
   the rest of the world, including refugees from the former Yugoslavia
   (5%) and Turks (1%).

   The country has seen growth in the population of Hmong, Lao and
   Vietnamese people, and also immigrants from Mexico and South America.

Religion

   A church in Fischenthal, a village in the canton of Zürich
   Enlarge
   A church in Fischenthal, a village in the canton of Zürich

   Switzerland has no country-wide state religion, though most of the
   cantons (except for Geneva and Neuchâtel) financially support through
   taxation either the Roman Catholic Church, the Old Catholic Church, or
   the Swiss Reformed Church.

   The most popular religion in Switzerland is the Roman Catholic Church
   (44% of the population). There are various Protestant denominations
   (38.5%), while immigration has brought Islam (4.3%) and Eastern
   Orthodoxy (1.8%) as sizeable minority religions. The stability and
   prosperity of Switzerland, combined with a linguistically diverse
   population, has led some to describe the country as a consensus, or
   consociational state.

   The country is historically about evenly balanced between Catholic and
   Protestant, with a confusing patchwork of majorities over most of the
   country. Some cantons, such as Appenzell, are even officially divided
   into Catholic and Protestant sections, and many villages have the
   predominant religion posted on the signs leading into them, stating in
   effect "this is a Catholic/Protestant village". However, there are some
   overall patterns. Among the larger cities, the capital Bern, the
   banking centre Zürich, and Basel are predominately Protestant, whereas
   others such as Luzern are mostly Catholic. Geneva is famous as an early
   Calvinist centre, and a majority of Swiss French are Protestant, in
   contrast to French elsewhere in the world who are mainly Catholic. On
   the other hand, the founding core of Switzerland, the German-speaking
   cantons of Schwyz, Uri, and Unterwalden, are mainly Catholic, as is
   Italian-speaking Ticino.

Culture

   Folkloric dance demonstration in Lausanne
   Enlarge
   Folkloric dance demonstration in Lausanne

   The culture of Switzerland is influenced by its neighbours, but over
   the years a distinctive culture with strong regional differences has
   developed. In particular, French-speaking regions have tended to orient
   themselves on French culture, German-speaking on German culture, and
   Italian-speaking on Italian culture; thus, a region may be more
   strongly culturally connected to the neighboring country that shares
   its language than to the rest of its own land. The linguistically
   isolated Rhaeto-Romanic culture in the eastern mountains of Switzerland
   is also robust. This strong regionalism in Switzerland makes it
   difficult to speak of a homogeneous Swiss culture.

   A number of culturally active Swiss have chosen to move abroad,
   probably given the limited opportunities in their homeland. At the same
   time, the neutrality of Switzerland and the low taxes have attracted
   many creative people from all over the world. In war times the
   tradition of political asylum helped to attract artists, whilst
   recently low taxes seem predominant.

International Rankings

Political and economic rankings

   Switzerland is one of the least corrupt countries in the world,
   according to Transparency International.
   Enlarge
   Switzerland is one of the least corrupt countries in the world,
   according to Transparency International.
     * Political freedom ratings - Free; political rights and civil
       liberties both rated 1 (the highest score available)
          + Press freedom - 8th equal freest in the world at 2.50
     * GDP per capita - 10th highest in the world at I$32,571
     * Human Development Index - 7th highest in world at 0.947
     * Income Equality - 37th most equal in world at 33.1 ( Gini Index)
     * Literacy Rate - Equal first with a ranking of 99.9%
     * Unemployment rate - 22nd equal lowest in the world at 3.40%
     * Corruption - 12th equal least corrupt in world at 8.4 on index
     * Economic Freedom - 15th equal freest at 1.89 on index

Health rankings

     * Fertility rate- 155th most fertile in the world at 1.43 per woman
          + Birth rate - 176th most births in the world at 9.71 per 1000
            people
               o Infant mortality - 213th most deaths in the world at 4.39
                 per 1000 live births
     * Death rate - 93rd highest death rate in the world at 8.48 per 1000
       people
     * Life Expectancy - 6th highest in the world at 80.51 years
          + Suicide Rate - 15th highest suicide rate in the world at 26.5
            for males and 10.6 for females
     * HIV/AIDS rate - 78th most cases in the world at 0.40%

Other rankings

     * CO[2] emissions - 67th highest emissions in world at 5.6 tonnes per
       capita
     * Electricity Consumption - 37th highest consumption of electricity
       in world at 55,860,000,000 kWh
     * Broadband uptake - 5th highest uptake in OECD at 23.1%
     * Beer consumption - 27th highest at 57.3 litres per capita
     * Cheese consumption - 4th highest at 20.6 kg per capita

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Switzerland"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
