   #copyright

Tehran

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of the Middle
East

   تهران
   Tehran
   View from Jamaran looking southwest toward Elahiyeh, Jordan, and
   Shemiran districts of Tehran.
   View from Jamaran looking southwest toward Elahiyeh, Jordan, and
   Shemiran districts of Tehran.
   Nickname: "The city of 72 nations."
   Coordinates: 35°41′46.28″N, 51°25′22.66″E
   Mayor Mohammad Ghalibaf
   Area
    - City 1500 km²  (579  sq mi)
    - Urban 686 km² (265 sq mi)
    - Metro 18,814 km² (7,264 sq mi)
   Elevation 1200 m  (3900 ft)
   Population
    - City (est.) 7,314,000
    - Density 10,000/km²
    - Metro 12,150,742
     Data refers to Tehran Province

   Tehran ( IPA: [tʰehˈɾɒn]; Persian: تهران, also transliterated as
   Teheran or Tehrān), population (as of 2005) 7,314,000 (metropolitan:
   12,151,000), and a land area of 658 square kilometers, is the capital
   city of Iran ( Persia) and the centre of Tehran Province.

   More than half of the country's industry is based there. Industries
   include the manufacturing of automobiles, electronics and electrical
   equipment, military weaponry, textiles, sugar, cement, and chemical
   products. It is also a leading centre for the sale of carpets and
   furniture. There is an oil refinery nearby.

   Tehran is a sprawling city at the foot of the Alborz mountain range
   with an immense network of highways unparalleled in western Asia. It is
   also the hub of the country's railway network. The city has numerous
   large museums, art centers, palace complexes and cultural centers.

   In addition to Persians, there is a large population of Azeris in
   Tehran, as well as other ethnicities including Armenian, Assyrian,
   Kurdish, Jewish and Zoroastrian communities. The majority of Tehran's
   residents speak Persian. The city is dotted with mosques, churches,
   synagogues and Zoroastrian fire temples.

Etymology

   There are various theories pertaining to the origin of the name Tehran.
   One plausible theory is that the word "Tehran" is derived from
   Tiran/Tirgan, "The Abode of Tir" (Tir being the Zoroastrian deity
   equivalent to the Greek deity Mercury). The ancient Parthian town of
   Tiran was a neighbour to the town of Mehran ("The Abode of
   Mehr/Mithra", the Zoroastrian sun god). Both of these were mere
   villages in the suburbs of the great city of Ray/Rhages. Mehran is
   still extant and forms a residential district inside the Greater
   Tehran, as is also Ray—which forms the southern suburbs of Tehran.

   Another theory is that Tehran means "a warm place", as opposed to "a
   cool place" (e.g. Shemiran)—a cooler district in northern Tehran. Some
   current texts in this regard claim that the word Tehran in Persian
   means "warm mountain slope" (دامنه گرم).

   The official City of Tehran website says that "Tehran" comes from the
   Persian words "Tah" meaning "end or bottom" and "Ran" meaning
   "[mountain] slope"—literally, bottom of the mountain slope. Given
   Tehran's geographic position at the bottom of the slope of the Alborz
   Mountains, this appears to be the most plausible explanation of the
   origin of the name of the city (دامنه ی بین دو کوه).

History

   Toopkhaneh Square, Tehran, the early to mid-1900s.
   Enlarge
   Toopkhaneh Square, Tehran, the early to mid-1900s.
   Azadi Square is currently the symbol of Tehran.
   Enlarge
   Azadi Square is currently the symbol of Tehran.

   Excavations place the existence of settlements in Tehran as far back as
   6000 BC. Tehran was well known as a village in the 9th century, but was
   less well-known than the city of Rhages which was flourishing nearby in
   the pre- Mongol era. In the 13th century, following the destruction of
   Ray by Mongols, many of its inhabitants fled to Tehran. In some sources
   of the Mongol era the city is mentioned as "Rhages's Tehran" (طهرانِ
   ری). The city is later mentioned in Hamdollah Mostowfi's Nuz'hat
   al-Qulub (written in 1340) as a famous village.

   Don Ruy Gonzáles de Clavijo, a Castilian ambassador, was probably the
   first European to visit Tehran, stopping in July 1404, while on a
   journey to Samarkand (now in Uzbekistan) and the Mongol capital at the
   time. At this time, the city of Tehran was unwalled.

   Tehran became a residence of the Safavid rulers in the 17th century.
   Tahmasp I built a bazaar and a wall around the city, but it somewhat
   fell out of favour after Abbas I turned sick when he was passing the
   city to go to a war with the Uzbeks.

   In the early 18th century, Karim Khan Zand ordered a palace, a harem,
   and a government office to be built in Tehran, possibly to declare the
   city his capital, but later moved his government to Shiraz. Tehran
   finally became the capital of Persia in 1795, when the Qajar king Agha
   Mohammad Khan was crowned in the city. It remains the capital to this
   day.

   During World War II, British and Soviet troops entered the city. Tehran
   was the site of the Teheran Conference in 1943, attended by U.S.
   President Franklin D. Roosevelt, British Prime Minister Winston
   Churchill, and Soviet Premier Joseph Stalin.

   Following the war, the city's older landmarks suffered under the rule
   of Mohammad Reza Shah. The Shah believed that ancient buildings such as
   large parts of the Golestan Palace, Takieh-ye Dowlat, the Toopkhooneh
   Square (pictured to the right), and others should not be part of a
   modern city. They were systematically destroyed and modern 1950s and
   1960s buildings were built in their place. The decision to carry this
   out is presently largely seen as a foolish mistake that hurt the visual
   fabric of the city beyond repair.
   Khalvat Karimkhani.
   Enlarge
   Khalvat Karimkhani.

   On September 8, 1978, demonstrations against the Shah led to riots. The
   army reportedly opened fire on the demonstrating mob. Martial law was
   installed in the wake of the ensuing revolution, from 1978–79.

   During the 1980–88 Iran-Iraq War, Tehran was the scene of repeated Scud
   missile attacks and air strikes against random residential and
   industrial targets within the city, resulting in thousands of civilian
   casualties. Material damage was repaired soon after each strike.

Modern Tehran

   Borj-e Sefid (The White Tower) in Pasdaran Ave. district.
   Enlarge
   Borj-e Sefid (The White Tower) in Pasdaran Ave. district.

   The Azadi Tower is the first landmark visitors come across when
   arriving from the Mehrabad International Airport. The tower has become
   an icon for Tehran and a national symbol of Iran.

   Tehran suffers from extremely serious traffic congestion and pollution
   problems. Respiratory ailments such as asthma are very common. Tehran
   has become so congested over the past decade that the government has
   considered moving the nation's capital to another city to alleviate
   these problems and help de-centralize the economy and population. But
   because Iran's economy and politics are so centralized, millions have
   little choice but to live and work in Tehran.

   The Peacock Throne of the Persian Shahs can be found in Tehran's
   Golestan Palace. Some of the important museums are National Museum of
   Iran, Sa'dabad Palaces Complex, Glassware and Ceramics Museum of Iran,
   The Carpet Museum of Iran, Tehran's Underglass painting Museum, and
   Niavaran Palace Complex. The Tehran Museum of Contemporary Art is also
   appealing to many because it features the works of great artists such
   as Van Gogh, Pablo Picasso and Andy Warhol.

   The huge Tehran International Fair organises many expositions. Its book
   expositions are especially popular. Tehran is also the seat of Iran's
   Parliament (the Majles). And Tehran is also home to the world's fourth
   tallest free standing structure, the Milad Tower.

The Milad Complex

   The Tehran International Trade and Convention Centre, also called The
   Milad Complex, is one of the largest structures in Iranian
   architecture. It is scheduled to be finished in late 2007. The complex
   contains the world's 4th highest tower which has several restaurants, a
   five star hotel, a convention center, a world trade centre, and an IT
   park (to be completed by March 2007). The complex seeks to respond to
   the needs of business in the globalized world of the 21st century by
   offering facilities combining trade, information, communication,
   convention and accommodation all in one place. The Milad Tower is
   predicted to replace the long-time symbol of Tehran, the Azadi Tower.

Location and Subdivisions

   Tehran county borders Shemiranat county to the north, Damavand county
   to the east, Eslamshahr, Pakdasht, and Ray counties to the south, and
   Karaj and Shahriar counties to the west.

Neighborhoods and Districts of Tehran

   Hasanabad district near the old Bazaar of Tehran.
   Enlarge
   Hasanabad district near the old Bazaar of Tehran.
   Keshavarz Blvd.
   Enlarge
   Keshavarz Blvd.

   The city of Tehran is divided into 22 municipal districts, each with
   its own administrative centers. Within these 22 districts, Tehran
   contains the following major neighborhoods :

   Abbas Abad, Afsariyeh, Amir Abad, Bagh Feiz, Baharestan, Darakeh,
   Darband, Dardasht, Dar Abad, Darrous, Dehkadeh Olampik, Ekhtiyariyeh,
   Elahiyeh, Evin, Farmanieh, Gheitariye, Gholhak, Gisha, Gomrok, Hasan
   Abad, Jamaran, Jannat Abad, Javadiyeh, Jomhuri, Jordan, Narmak, Navvab,
   Nazi Abad, Niavaran, Park-e Shahr, Pasdaran, Punak, Ray, Sa'adat Abad,
   Sadeghiyeh, Shahrara, Shahr-e ziba, Shahrak-e Gharb, Shemiran, Tajrish,
   Tehranpars, Vanak, Velenjak, Yaft Abad, Yusef Abad, Zafaraniyeh, etc.

   For the full list, see List of the localities around Tehran.

The older neighborhoods of Tehran

   Tehran's old city fabric changed dramatically during the Pahlavi era.
   Some of the older remaining districts of Tehran are: Udlajan, Sangelaj,
   Bazaar, Chaleh Meydan, Doulat. Chaleh Meydan is the oldest
   neighbourhood of the aforementioned.

Economy

   About 30% of Iran’s public-sector workforce and 45% of large industrial
   firms are located in Tehran and almost half of these workers work for
   the government. Most of the remainder of workers are factory workers,
   shopkeepers, labourers, and transport workers. Few foreign companies
   operate in Tehran because of the Islamic government and its poor
   relations with the west. But before the Islamic revolution many western
   companies were active in this region. Today many modern industries of
   this city include the manufacturing of automobiles, electronics and
   electrical equipment, weaponry, textiles, sugar, cement, and chemical
   products. It is also a leading centre for the sale of carpets and
   furniture. There is an oil refinery nearby. The city has two airports,
   including Mehrabad International Airport, and Imam Khomeini
   International Airport. Tehran relies heavily on private cars, buses,
   motorcycles, and taxis, and is one of the most car-dependent cities in
   the world. The Tehran Stock Exchange, which is a full member of the
   Federation Internationale des Bourses de Valeurs (FIBV) and a founding
   member of the Federation of Euro-Asian Stock Exchanges, was one of the
   world's best performing stock exchanges in recent years. .

Transport

   Tehran currently has 3 operational metro lines (Line 1, 2 and 5)
   Enlarge
   Tehran currently has 3 operational metro lines (Line 1, 2 and 5)
   Traffic in Tehran.
   Enlarge
   Traffic in Tehran.

   In 2001 a metro system that had been in planning since the 1970s opened
   the first two of seven envisaged lines -- even though the city is prone
   to earthquakes. Work has been slow and coverage remains very limited.
   Development of the Tehran metro system had been interrupted by the
   Islamic Revolution and the Iran-Iraq War. Problems arising from the
   late completion of the metro led to buses taking on the role of the
   metro lines, serving mainly long distance routes. Taxis filled the void
   for local journeys. The taxis only drive on main roads, and only within
   the local area, so it can be necessary to take several taxis to get to
   one's final destination. This has all led to extreme congestion and air
   pollution within the city.

   Tehran is served by Mehrabad International Airport, the old airport
   which doubles as a military base located in the western part of the
   city, and Imam Khomeini International Airport, 50 kilometers south,
   which handles flights from the Persian Gulf but which will eventually
   handle all international flights. The new airport is more than overdue,
   but is efficient, although security concerns have made the governments
   of Britain and Australia warn their foreign nationals in Iran.

   Tehran also has a central train station with connecting services round
   the clock to various cities in the country. There are four bus
   terminals that also provide connections at low fares. These are the
   South, East, West, and Bei-haghi Park-Drive Terminals.

   While the centre of the city houses the government ministries and
   headquarters, the commercial centers are more located toward Valiasr
   Street, Taleghani Ave, and Beheshti Ave. further north. Although
   administratively separate, Rey, Shemiran, and Karaj are often
   considered part of the larger Tehran metropolitan area.

   See also: List of Tehran metro stations, Tehran Monorail.

Pollution

   View from Modarres Highway. Rainy days help reduce pollution.
   Enlarge
   View from Modarres Highway. Rainy days help reduce pollution.

   Tehran, like many big cities, suffers from severe air pollution and the
   city is often covered by smog making breathing difficult and causing
   widespread pulmonary illnesses. It is estimated that about 27 people
   die each day from pollution-related diseases.

   The air pollution is due to several different reasons: 1) Economical:
   most Iranian industries are located on the outskirts of Tehran. The
   city is also overrun with old and aging cars which do not meet today's
   emission regulations. Furthermore, Iran's busiest airport, Mehrabad
   International Airport, is located in the west of the city; 2)
   Infrastructure: Tehran has a poor public transportation network. Buses
   and metros do not cover every area of the city. Most people are then
   obliged to either use private cars or hire taxis. This has created
   severe traffic and congestion; 3) Geographical: Tehran is bound in the
   north by the massive Alborz mountain range that is stopping the flow of
   the humid Caspian wind. As a result, thermal inversion that traps
   Tehran's polluted air is frequently observed. The lack of humidity and
   clouds makes Tehran a very sunny city. The UV radiations then combined
   with the existing pollutants significantly raise the level of the
   ozone.

   The government, however, is engaged in a battle to reduce the air
   pollution. It has for instance encouraged taxis and buses to convert
   from petrol engines to engines that run on compressed natural gas.
   Furthermore, since 1979 the government of the Islamic Republic of Iran
   has setup a "Traffic Zone" (طرح ترافیک) covering the city centre during
   peak traffic hours. Entering and driving inside this zone is only
   allowed with a special permit. The government is also trying to raise
   people's awareness about the hazards of the pollution. One method that
   is currently been employed is the installation of Pollution Indicator
   Boards all around the city to monitor the current level of particulate
   matter (PM10), nitrogen dioxide (NO[2]), ozone (O[3]), sulfur dioxide
   (SO[2]), and carbon monoxide (CO). The board also displays the
   Pollutant Standard Index (PSI), which is a general indication of air
   quality based on the measurements of the above-mentioned five
   pollutants. The Pollution Indicator Boards classify the level of each
   pollutants as either safe, hazardous or dangerous.

Research and education

   Ever since the establishment of Darolfonoon in the mid 1800s, Tehran
   has amassed an abundance of institutions of higher education. Some of
   these institutions have played crucial roles in the unfolding of
   Iranian political events. Tehran University is the earliest state
   university and the largest university of Iran. Samuel M. Jordan, whom
   "Jordan Avenue" in Tehran is named after, was also one of the founding
   pioneers of the American College of Tehran. Today There are nearly 50
   major colleges and universities in total in Greater Tehran, listed
   below:
     * K.N.Toosi University of Technology (KNTU)
     * Allameh Tabatabaii University (ATU)
     * Amirkabir University of Technology (Tehran Polytechnic)
     * Alzahra University (AU)
     * Imam Hossein University (IHU)
     * Imam Sadeq University (ISU)
     * Institute for Studies in Theoretical Physics and Mathematics (IPM)
     * Iran University of Medical Sciences (IUMS
     * Iran University of Science and Technology (IUST)
     * Islamic Azad University of Karaj
     * Islamic Azad University of Roodehen
     * Islamic Azad University of Tehran-Medical Sciences
     * Islamic Azad University of Tehran-North
     * Islamic Azad University of Tehran-South
     * Islamic Azad University of Tehran-Central
     * Islamic Azad University of Tehran-Region one
     * Islamic Azad University of Shahr-e-Rey
     * Shahed University
     * Shahid Beheshti University (SBU)
     * Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences (SBUMS)
     * Sharif University of Technology
     * Tarbiat Modares University (TMU)
     * Tehran University of Medical Sciences (TUMS)
     * Farabi Institute of Virtual Higher Education

     * Tarbiat Moallem University
     * University of The Arts
     * University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences
     * University of Tehran
     * University of Emam Reza
     * Hadith College of Tehran
     * Imam Ali University for Army Officers
     * Comprehensive University of Technology
     * Tehran University of Applied Science and Technology
     * Tehran College of Environment
     * Bagher Aloloum University
     * International University of Iran
     * Iran College of Tele-communications
     * Medical University for the Islamic Republic of Iran's Army
     * NAJA University of Police
     * School of Economic Affairs (SEA)
     * School of International Relations (SIR)
     * Shahed University of Medical Sciences
     * Shahid Sattari University of Aeronautical Engineering
     * University of Islamic Sects
     * The Research Institute of The Petroleum Industry
     * Iran Polymer and Petrochemical Institute
     * Power and Water Institute of Technology(PWIT) ( website)
     * Baqiyatallah Medical Sciences University

   Tehran also contains Iran's largest military academy, and several
   religious schools and seminaries. See List of colleges and universities
   in Tehran for a more comprehensive listing.

Sport

   Tehran was the first city in the Middle East to host the Asian Games.
   The 7th Asian Summer Games in 1974, was held with the participation of
   2,363 athletes and officials from 25 countries.

   Tehran is also the site of Iran's national football stadium on Azadi
   Sport Complex with 100,000 seating capacity. Many of the top matches of
   Iran's Premier League are held here. In 2005, FIFA ordered Iran to
   limit spectators allowed into Azadi stadium because of a fatal crush
   and inadequate safety procedures. Other stadiums in Tehran are Shahid
   Dastgerdi Stadium, Takhti Stadium, and Shahid Shirudi Stadium, among
   others.
   The French (Poma) built gondolas that carry tourists and skiers to
   Tochal mountain.
   Enlarge
   The French (Poma) built gondolas that carry tourists and skiers to
   Tochal mountain.

   Within 10 minutes of driving distance from Tehran lies a ski resort.
   Tochal is the world's fifth highest ski resort at over 3730m at its
   highest 7th station. The resort was completed in 1976 shortly before
   the overthrow of the Shah.

   Here, one must first ride the eight km (five mile) long gondola lift
   which covers a huge vertical. The 7th station has three slopes. The
   resort's longest slope is the south side U shaped slope which goes from
   the 7th station to 5th station. The other two slopes are located on the
   north side of the 7th station. Here, there are two parallel chair ski
   lifts that go up to 3900m near Tochal's peak (at 4000m), rising higher
   than the gondola 7th station. This altitude is higher than any of the
   European resorts.

   From the Tochal peak, one has a spectacular view of the Alborz range,
   including the 5671 metre (18606 ft) high Mt. Damavand, a dormant
   volcano.

   At the bottom of the lifts in a valley behind the Tochal peak is Tochal
   hotel, located at 3500m altitude. From there a T lift takes skiers up
   the 3800 metres of Shahneshin peak, where the third slope of Tochal is.

   Tochal 7th station has skiing eight months of the year. But there are
   also some glaciers and year-round snow fields near Tehran where skiing
   began in 1938, thanks to the efforts of two German railway engineers.
   Today, 12 ski resorts operate in Iran, but the most famous are Tochal,
   Dizin, and Shemshak, all within one to three hours of Tehran.

Football

   In football (soccer), Tehran is host to seven football clubs in Iran's
   Premier Football League, namely:
     * Pirouzi/Persepolis
     * Saba Battery
     * Saipa
     * Paykan

                           * Rah Ahan
                           * Pas Tehran
                           * Esteghlal

   These clubs have on numerous occasions won Asian titles, and some of
   their players are known internationally. The prominent matches are
   usually held at Azadi stadium.

Outdoors

     * Tochal Ski resort
     * Darband hiking trail
     * Chitgar Park
     * Mellat Park
     * Laleh Park
     * Jamshidieh Park
     * Niavaran Park
     * Sa'ei Park
     * Daneshju Park
     * Shahr-e Bazi amusement park.
     * Shatranj Park
     * Darabad hiking trail
     * Darakeh hiking trail
     * Jahan-e Kudak Park
     * Azadi Sports complex
     * Enghelab Sports Complex and Golf course
     * Several caves, springs, and waterfalls outisde Tehran.
     * Latyan Lake
     * Lavizan Forest Park
     * Vardavard Forest Park
     * Khajeer National Park
     * Kavir National Park
     * Tar Lake
     * Amir Kabir Lake
     * Lar Protected Natural Habitat
     * Varjeen Protected Natural Habitat
     * Pardisan
     * Tangeh Savashi
     * Shahr-e Bazi

Images of Tehran

   A panoramic photograph of Tehran
   Enlarge
   A panoramic photograph of Tehran

Landmarks

   Bagh-e Melli (National Garden)

   Iran's National Rug Gallery
   AzaImagedi1.jpg

   Azadi Tower, Azadi Square.

   The largest flower clock in the world, Modarres Expwy.

   Khalvat-e Karimkhani, Golestan Palace.

   Toghrol Tower, 12th century.

   "Khushk-i Ahmad Shah", Niavaran Palace Complex

   "Shamsol emareh", Golestan Palace

Its culture

   Zafaraniyeh and Sa'd abad district have a wealth of cultural
   attractions: Sa'd Abad Palace

   Hasanabad near the Bazaar of Tehran.

   A bowl from the 4th Millennium BCE in the National Museum of Iran.

   National Library of Iran, Niavaran branch.

   Imamzadeh Saleh

   Tehran University

   Shahid Beheshti University

   Tomb of Rahi Moayeri

   Sharif University of Technology

Its nature and life

   Pol-e Rumi district has a wealth of restaurants and fast food outlets,
   both western and traditional.

   Tehran's autumn.

   Tehran Metro

   Tehran's winter

   Tehran receives fairly large amounts of snowfall every year.

   Tehran from Modarres highway

   Niavaran Park

   Laleh Park

   Ferdowsi square

Culture and attractions

   Tehran, as Iran's showcase and historical capital city, has a wealth of
   cultural attractions, some of which are listed below.
   Cultural Attractions of Tehran
    Palaces Golestan Palace and Takht-e Marmar, Niavaran Palace Complex,
     Sadabad Palace, Saltanat Abad Palace, Firouzeh Palace, Soleymaniyeh
         Palace, Baharestan Palace, Morvarid Palace, The new Majlis
     Museums Sa'd Abad Gallery of Fine Arts, Glassware Museum of Tehran,
      Iran's National Rug Gallery, Reza Abbasi Museum, Tehran Museum of
    Contemporary Art, Tehran Theatre of the Performing Arts, Talar Vahdat
    Theatre, National Museum of Iran, Dar-abad Nature & Wildlife Museum,
    National Library of Iran, Malek National Library, National Car Museum
                                   of Iran
   Castles and Forts Arzhang fort in Taleqan, Iraj Fort in Varamin, Gol e
     Khandan Fort in Rudehen from Sassanid era, Rashkan Fort in Ray from
    Parthian era, Tabbarok Fort from Abbasid era, Sorkheh-Hesar Fort from
     Seljuqi era, Kei-Qobad Fort in Taleqan from Ismaili era, Gabri Fort
    from Parthian era in Ray, Ghal'eh Dokhtar Tang Goseel near Karaj from
      Seljuqi era, Harun Prison from Sassanid era, Bagh e Melli foreign
                             ministry compounds.
   Famous Houses Etehadiyeh House ( Qajar era), Amir Bahador House ( Qajar
     era), Emam Jom'eh House (1863CE), Amin ol-Soltan House (Qajar era),
    Shaqāqi (Kushak) House ( Qajar era), Emārat e Bagh e Ferdows (Qajar
   era), Emārat Farmaniyeh ( Qajarid era), Shahid Modarres House, Vothuq
    House (1837CE), Moshir o-Dowleh Pir Nia House, House of Nima Yooshij,
     House of Mohammed Mossadegh, House of Ayatollah Taleghani, House of
     Ghavam o-Dowleh, House of Imam Khomeini, House of Mahmoud Hessaby.
   Archeological sites Cheshme Ali Teppe (5th millennium BCE) excavated by
     Jacques de Morgan, Shoghali Teppe (6th millennium BCE), Qeytariyeh
     Cemetery (2nd millennium BCE), Teppe Meel (excavated by Jacques de
      Morgan) believed to be the temple of the legendary ancient leader
    Bahram Gur, Vavan Teppe of Sassanid era, Ghareh Teppe (6th millennium
    CE) excavated by the British Burton Brown, Ozbaki Teppe in Hashtgerd
    Others Iran National Library, The Milad Tower, Darolfonoon, Morvarid
      Canon of the Afsharid dynasty era, Tughrul Tower of Seljuqi era,
   Tehran's Grand Bazaar (1523CE), Pol e Rumi from the Safavid era (today
   a property of the Embassy of Turkey), Alborz High School, Firouz Bahram
        High School, Stodan Of Zoroastrian located in Aminabad area.

Religious centers

     * Hosseiniye Ershad
     * Soltani Mosque, built by Fath Ali Shah
     * Atiq Mosque, built in 1663.
     * Mo'ezz o-dowleh mosque, built by Fath Ali Shah
     * Haj Seyd Azizollah mosque, built by Fath Ali Shah
     * Al-javad mosque, Iran's first modernist design mosque.
     * The Old Sepahsalar mosque, another prominent Qajar era mosque.
     * The new Sepahsalar mosque (Madreseh e Motahari)
     * Filsuf o-dowleh Mosque, Qajar era
     * Moshir ol-Saltaneh Mosque, Qajar era
     * Mo'ayyer ol-Mamalik Mosque, Qajar era
     * Shahr Banu Mausoleum
     * Javan-mard Qassab Mausoleum, a pre-Islamic semi-mythical hero
     * Dozens of Imam-zadeh shrines, hundreds of years old, including that
       of Imam Zadeh Saleh.
     * Dozens of Saqa Khanehs: traditional places of prayer
     * Several Tekyehs: traditional places for mourning Muharram
       ceremonies for Husayn ibn Ali.
     * Ibn Babviyeh cemetery, where many Iranian giants such as Takhti and
       Ali Akbar Dehkhoda are buried.
     * Zahir o-dowleh cemetery, where many Iranian giants of art and
       culture such as Iraj Mirza, Mohammad Taghi Bahar, Forough
       Farrokhzad, Abolhasan Saba, Ruhollah Khaleghi, and Darvish-khan are
       buried.
     * Kordan Tomb, Seljuqi era, Karaj.
     * Maydanak Tomb, 13th century, Karaj
     * The Polish Cemetery 1-north of Tehran in British Gholhak Garden,
       where numerous World War II western Allied soldiers are buried. 2-
       Polish cemetery (Catholic cemetery) Dulab south of Tehran
     * Orthodox Cemetery, Dulab/The Russian Unknown Soldier's Tomb
       (Cenotaph) is located here with a red star over it
     * Tower of silence (Dakhme gabrha). Located on Moshiryh Road behind
       7th unit of Tehran cement factory. It is circular in shape.
     * Naghare Khane Tower. Located on a mountain with same name
       (Nagharekhane) in Haftdastagh District, beside Amin Abad Road. Its
       age is not clear but it is related to the Seljuk Era. This tower is
       the tomb of a Seljuk king. Under the tower you can see other
       historical ruins (Einanj Dome). This place is a royal cemetery and
       was used in the early years of the Islamic Era in Persia.

Churches

     * Surep Georg Church, 1790
     * Thaddeus Bartoqimus Church, 1808
     * Tatavus Church, from the Qajar era
     * Enjili Church, 1867
     * Assyrian Church

The Mayor of Tehran

     * See also: List of mayors of Tehran
     * See also: City Council of Tehran

Sister cities

     * Los Angeles, USA (linked before 1979)
     * Havana, Cuba (2001)
     * Pretoria, South Africa (planned 2002)
     * Caracas, Venezuela (2005)
     * Beijing, China (planned 2006)
     * Belarus Minsk, Belarus (2006)

Famous Tehranis

     * Abbas Kiarostami
     * Abbas Marufi
     * Abdolkarim Soroush
     * Abol-Ghasem Kashani
     * Ahmad Allahyari
     * Ahmad Matin-Daftari
     * Ali Amini
     * Ali Akbar Dehkhoda
     * Ali Parvin
     * Amir Ansari
     * Anousheh Ansari
     * Arash Labaf
     * Ardeshir Zahedi
     * Arfa Atrai
     * Azar Nafisi
     * Behrouz Vossoughi
     * Bita Farrahi
     * Bozorg Alavi
     * Camila Batmanghelidjh
     * Deep Dish
     * DJ Aligator
     * Ebrahim Hamedi ( Ebi)
     * Firouzeh
     * Forough Farrokhzad
     * Gholam Ali Haddad-Adel
     * Hadi Saei
     * Hassan Ali Mansur
     * Hosein Ala'
     * Ingrid Dracula (fictional)
     * Jalal Al-e-Ahmad
     * Kamran Shirdel
     * Khosrow Vaziri
     * Mehdi Mahdavikia
     * Mírzá Husayn-'Alí
     * Mohsen Makhmalbaf
     * Mostafa Chamran
     * Niki Karimi
     * Rahi Mo'ayeri
     * Simin Behbahani
     * Shirin Ebadi
     * Soleiman Haim
     * Said Nafisi

Events

2005 plane crash

   On December 6th 2005 a military plane crashed into a ten story building
   killing 128 people and injuring 90. Many others are left homeless.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tehran"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
