   #copyright

Tenzin Gyatso, 14th Dalai Lama

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Religious figures and
leaders

          Tenzin Gyatso, 14th Dalai Lama
   17 November 1950 - present
         Name:       His Holiness Tenzin Gyatso,
                     the 14th Dalai Lama
        Birth:       July 6, 1935 (1935-07-06)
                     Takster, Amdo, Tibet
   School/tradition: Gelug

   Tenzin Gyatso ( Tibetan: བསྟན;  Wylie: Bstan-'dzin Rgya-mtsho) (born 6
   July 1935) is the fourteenth and current Dalai Lama, and as such, is
   often referred to in Western media simply as the Dalai Lama, without
   any qualifiers. The fifth of sixteen children of a farming family in
   the Tibetan province of Amdo, he was proclaimed the tulku ( rebirth) of
   the thirteenth Dalai Lama at the age of two. On 17 November 1950, at
   the age of fifteen, he was enthroned as Tibet's Head of State and most
   important political ruler, while Tibet faced occupation by the forces
   of the People's Republic of China.

   After the collapse of the Tibetan resistance movement in 1959, Tenzin
   Gyatso fled to India, where he was active in establishing the Central
   Tibetan Administration (the Tibetan government in exile) and seeking to
   preserve Tibetan culture and education among the thousands of refugees
   who accompanied him.

   A charismatic figure and noted public speaker, Tenzin Gyatso is the
   first Dalai Lama to travel to the West, where he has helped to spread
   Buddhism and to publicise the ideal of Free Tibet. In 1989, he was
   awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.

Early life

   Tenzin Gyatso as a boy.
   Tenzin Gyatso as a boy.

   Gyatso was born to a farming family as Lhamo Thondup ( Wylie: Lha-mo
   Don-'grub; also spelled "Dhondrub") on 6 July 1935 in far northeastern
   Amdo province in the village of Taktser, a small and poor settlement
   that stood on a hill overlooking a broad valley. His parents, Choekyong
   and Diki Tsering, were moderately wealthy farmers among about twenty
   other families making a precarious living off the land raising barley,
   buckwheat, and potatoes. He was the fifth surviving child of nine
   children; counting the children that did not live there would have been
   16 children. The eldest child of his family being his sister Tsering
   Dolma, who was sixteen years older than he. His eldest brother, Thupten
   Jigme Norbu, has been recognised as the rebirth of the high lama,
   Takser Rinpoche. His sister Jetsun Pema went on to depict their mother
   in the 1997 film Seven Years in Tibet. His other elder brothers are
   Gyalo Thondup and Lobsang Samden. When the Dalai Lama was about two
   years old, a search party was sent out to find the new incarnation of
   the Dalai Lama. Among other omens, the head on the embalmed body of the
   thirteenth Dalai Lama (originally facing south) had mysteriously turned
   to face the northeast, indicating the direction in which the next Dalai
   Lama would be found. Shortly afterwards, the Regent Reting Rinpoche had
   a vision indicating Amdo (as the place to search) and a one-story house
   with distinctive guttering and tiling. After extensive searching, they
   found that Thondup's house resembled that in Reting's vision. They thus
   presented Thondup with various relics and toys — some had belonged to
   the previous Dalai Lama while others hadn't. Thondup correctly
   identified all items owned by the previous Dalai Lama, stating "It's
   mine! It's mine!"

   Thondup was recognised as the rebirth of the Dalai Lama and renamed
   Jetsun Jamphel Ngawang Lobsang Yeshe Tenzin Gyatso ("Holy Lord, Gentle
   Glory, Compassionate, Defender of the Faith, Ocean of Wisdom"). Tibetan
   Buddhists normally refer to him as Yeshe Norbu ("Wish-Fulfilling Gem")
   or just Kundun ("the Presence"). In the West he is often called by
   followers "His Holiness the Dalai Lama", which is the style that the
   Dalai Lama himself uses on his website. Tenzin Gyatso began his
   monastic education at the age of six. At age eleven, he met Heinrich
   Harrer after spying him in Lhasa through his telescope. Harrer
   effectively became young Tenzin's tutor, teaching him about the outside
   world. The two remained friends until Harrer's death in 2006. At age
   twenty-five, he sat for his final examination in Lhasa's Jokhang Temple
   during the annual Monlam (prayer) Festival in 1959. He passed with
   honours and was awarded the Lharampa degree, the highest-level geshe
   degree (roughly equivalent to a doctorate in Buddhist philosophy).

Life as the Dalai Lama

             Styles of
   The Dalai Lama
    Reference style  His Holiness
     Spoken style    Your Holiness
   Alternative style Sir

   As well as being one of the most influential spiritual leaders of
   Tibetan Buddhism, the Dalai Lama traditionally claims to be Tibet's
   Head of State and most important political ruler. At the age of
   fifteen, faced with possible conflict with the People's Republic of
   China, on 17 November 1950, Tenzin Gyatso was enthroned as the temporal
   leader of Tibet; however, he was only able to govern for a brief time.
   In October of that year, an army of the People's Republic of China
   entered the territory controlled by the Tibetan administration, easily
   breaking through the Tibetan defenders.

   The People's Liberation Army stopped short of the old border between
   Tibet and Xikang and demanded negotiations. The Dalai Lama sent a
   delegation to Beijing, and, although he rejected the subsequent
   Seventeen Point Agreement for the Peaceful Liberation of Tibet, he did
   try to work with the Chinese government until 1959. During that year,
   there was a major uprising among the Tibetan population. In the tense
   political environment that ensued, the Dalai Lama and his entourage
   began to suspect that China was planning to kill him. Consequently, he
   fled to Dharamsala, India, on March 17 of that year, entering India on
   March 31 during the Tibetan uprising.

Exile in India

   The Dalai Lama met with the Prime Minister of India, Jawaharlal Nehru,
   to urge India to pressure China into giving Tibet an autonomous
   government when relations with China were not proving successful. Nehru
   did not want to increase tensions between China and India, so he
   encouraged the Dalai Lama to work on the Seventeen Point Agreement
   Tibet had with China. Eventually in 1959, the Dalai Lama fled Tibet and
   set up the government of Tibet in Exile in Dharamsala, India, which is
   often referred to as "Little Lhasa".

   After the founding of the exiled government, he rehabilitated the
   Tibetan refugees who followed him into exile in agricultural
   settlements. He created a Tibetan educational system in order to teach
   the Tibetan children what he believed to be traditional language,
   history, religion, and culture. The Tibetan Institute of Performing
   Arts was established in 1959, and the Central Institute of Higher
   Tibetan Studies became the primary university for Tibetans in India. He
   supported the refounding of 200 monasteries and nunneries in attempt to
   preserve Tibetan Buddhist teachings and the Tibetan way of life.

   The Dalai Lama appealed to the United Nations on the question of Tibet,
   which resulted in three resolutions adopted by the General Assembly in
   1959, 1961, and 1965. These resolutions required China to respect the
   human rights of Tibetans and their desire for self-determination. In
   1963, he promulgated a democratic constitution which is based upon the
   Universal Declaration of Human Rights. A Tibetan parliament-in-exile is
   elected by the Tibetan refugees scattered all over the world, and the
   Tibetan Government in Exile is likewise elected by the Tibetan
   parliament.

   At the Congressional Human Rights Caucus in 1987 in Washington, D.C.,
   he proposed a Five-Point Peace Plan regarding the future status of
   Tibet. The plan called for Tibet to become a "zone of peace" and for
   the end of movement by ethnic Chinese into Tibet. It also called for
   "respect for fundamental human rights and democratic freedoms" and "the
   end of China's use of Tibet for nuclear weapons production, testing,
   and disposal." Finally, it urged "earnest negotiations" on the future
   of Tibet.

   He proposed a similar plan at Strasbourg, France, on 15 June 1988. He
   expanded on the Five-Point Peace Plan and proposed the creation of a
   self-governing democratic Tibet, "in association with the People's
   Republic of China". This plan was rejected by the Tibetan
   Government-in-Exile in 1991. In October 1991, he expressed his wish to
   return to Tibet to try to form a mutual assessment on the situation
   with the Chinese local government. At this time he feared that a
   violent uprising would take place and wished to avoid it. The Dalai
   Lama has indicated that he wishes to return to Tibet only if the
   People's Republic of China sets no preconditions for the return, which
   they have refused to do.

   The Dalai Lama celebrated his seventieth birthday on 6 July 2005. About
   10,000 Tibetan refugees, monks and foreign tourists gathered outside
   his home. Patriarch Alexius II of the Russian Orthodox Church said, "I
   confess that the Russian Orthodox Church highly appreciates the good
   relations it has with the followers of Buddhism and hopes for their
   further development". President Chen Shui-bian of the Republic of China
   attended an evening celebrating the Dalai Lama's birthday that was
   entitled "Traveling with Love and Wisdom for 70 Years" at the Chiang
   Kai-shek Memorial Hall in Taipei. The President invited him to return
   to Taiwan for a third trip in 2005. His previous trips were in 2001,
   and 1997.

Foreign relations

   Conversations with U.S. President George W. Bush in the White House on
   May 23, 2001
   Conversations with U.S. President George W. Bush in the White House on
   May 23, 2001

   Since 1967, the Dalai Lama has initiated a series of tours in forty-six
   nations. He met with Pope Paul VI at the Vatican in 1973. Later on, he
   met with Pope John Paul II in 1980 and also later in 1982, 1986, 1988,
   1990 and 2003. In 2006, he met privately with Pope Benedict XVI. He has
   also met the Archbishop of Canterbury, the late Dr. Robert Runcie, and
   with other leaders of the Anglican Church in London. He has also met
   with senior Eastern Orthodox Church, Muslim, Hindu, Jewish, and Sikh
   officials.

Social and political stances

   The fourteenth Dalai Lama at an ecumenical reunion 2003 in Berlin
   The fourteenth Dalai Lama at an ecumenical reunion 2003 in Berlin

Tibetan independence movement

   Following the invasion, the Dalai Lama had little choice but to work
   with the 1951 Seventeen Point Agreement for the Peaceful Liberation of
   Tibet with the People's Republic of China. His brothers moved to
   Kalimpong in India and, with the help of the Indian and American
   governments, organized pro-independence literature and the smuggling of
   weapons into Tibet. Armed struggles broke out in Amdo and Kham in 1956
   and later spread to Central Tibet. However, the movement was a failure
   and forced to retreat to Nepal or go underground. Following
   normalisation of relations between the United States and the People's
   Republic of China, American support was cut off in the early 1970s. The
   Dalai Lama then began to formulate his policy towards a peaceful
   solution in which he would be reinstated in a democratic autonomous
   Tibet.

Social stances

   The Dalai Lama endorsed the founding of the Dalai Lama Foundation in
   order to promote peace and ethics worldwide. The Dalai Lama is not
   believed to be directly involved with this foundation. He has also
   stated his belief that modern scientific findings take precedence over
   ancient religions.

   He is reported to have said regarding homosexuality, "If the two people
   have taken no vows [of chastity], and neither is harmed, why should it
   not be acceptable?" He has repeatedly affirmed his belief that gays and
   lesbians should be accepted by society, although he has also stated
   that for Buddhists homosexual behaviour is considered sexual
   misconduct, meaning that homosexual sex is acceptable for society in
   general but not in Buddhism or for Buddhists. As he explains in his
   book Beyond Dogma: "homosexuality, whether it is between men or between
   women, is not improper in itself. What is improper is the use of organs
   already defined as inappropriate for sexual contact." However, more
   recently (1997) he has said that the basis of this teaching was unknown
   to him and that he has "willingness to consider the possibility that
   some of the teachings may be specific to a particular cultural and
   historic context."

   The Dalai Lama is generally opposed to abortion, although he has taken
   a nuanced position, as he explained to the New York Times:

          Of course, abortion, from a Buddhist viewpoint, is an act of
          killing and is negative, generally speaking. But it depends on
          the circumstances. If the unborn child will be retarded or if
          the birth will create serious problems for the parent, these are
          cases where there can be an exception. I think abortion should
          be approved or disapproved according to each circumstance.
          — The Dalai Lama, New York Times, November 28, 1993

   He has also expressed his concern for environmental problems:

          On the global level, I think the ecology problem is very
          serious. I hear about some states taking it very seriously.
          That's wonderful! So this blue planet is our only home, if
          something goes wrong at the present generation, then the future
          generations really face a lot of problems, and those problems
          will be beyond human control; so that's very serious. Ecology
          should be part of our daily life.
          — The Dalai Lama, University at Buffalo, The State University of
          New York, September 19, 2006

   In 1996, he described himself as half-Marxist, half-Buddhist:

          Of all the modern economic theories, the economic system of
          Marxism is founded on moral principles, while capitalism is
          concerned only with gain and profitability. Marxism is concerned
          with the distribution of wealth on an equal basis and the
          equitable utilization of the means of production. It is also
          concerned with the fate of the working classes—that is the
          majority—as well as with the fate of those who are
          underprivileged and in need, and Marxism cares about the victims
          of minority-imposed exploitation. For those reasons the system
          appeals to me, and it seems fair. . . I think of myself as
          half-Marxist, half-Buddhist.
          —Friendly Feudalism: The Tibet Myth and Dalai Lama's answer on
          various topics

Criticism

   In October 1998, The Dalai Lama's administration acknowledged that it
   received $1.7 million a year in the 1960s from the U.S. Government
   through the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), and also trained a
   resistance movement in Colorado (USA). When asked by CIA officer John
   Kenneth Knaus in 1995 whether the organization did a good or bad thing
   in providing its support, the Dalai Lama replied that though it helped
   the morale of those resisting the Chinese, "thousands of lives were
   lost in the resistance" and further, that "the U.S. Government had
   involved itself in his country's affairs not to help Tibet but only as
   a Cold War tactic to challenge the Chinese."

   British journalist Christopher Hitchens wrote a scathing criticism of
   the Dalai Lama in 1998, which questioned his alleged support for
   India's nuclear weapons testing, the "selling of indulgences" to
   Hollywood celebrities like Richard Gere, and his statements condoning
   prostitution.

   There has also been criticism that feudal Tibet was not as benevolent
   as the Dalai Lama had portrayed. Critics have suggested that in
   addition to serfdom there were conditions that effectively constituted
   slavery. Also the penal code included forms of corporal punishment, in
   addition to capital punishment. In response, the Dalai Lama has since
   condemned some of ancient Tibet's feudal practices and has added that
   he was willing to institute reforms before the Chinese invaded.
   However, historian Michael Parenti believes there was a connection
   between Dalai Lama's 1959 fleeing Tibet and the then PRC Central
   Government's decision to gradually phase out serfdom in Tibet.

International influence

   Tenzin Gyatso in 1994
   Tenzin Gyatso in 1994

   The Dalai Lama has been successful in gaining Western sympathy for
   Tibetan self-determination, including vocal support from numerous
   Hollywood celebrities, most notably the actor Richard Gere, as well as
   lawmakers from several major countries.

   Tenzin Gyatso has on occasion been denounced by the Chinese government
   as a supporter of Tibetan independence. Over time, he has developed a
   public position stating that he is not in favour of Tibetan
   independence and would not object to a status in which Tibet has
   internal autonomy while the PRC manages some aspects of Tibet's defense
   and foreign affairs. In his 'Middle Way Approach', he laid down that
   the Chinese government can take care of foreign affairs and defence,
   and that Tibet should be managed by an elected body.

   On April 18, 2005, TIME Magazine placed Tenzin Gyatso on its list of
   the world's 100 most influential people.

   On June 22, 2006, the Parliament of Canada voted unanimously to make
   Tenzin Gyatso an honorary citizen of Canada. This marks the third time
   in history that the Government of Canada has bestowed this honour, the
   others being Raoul Wallenberg posthumously in 1985 and Nelson Mandela
   in 2001.

   In September 2006, the United States Congress awarded the Dalai Lama
   the Congressional Gold Medal, the highest award which may be bestowed
   by the Legislative Branch of the United States government. The
   decoration is awarded to any individual who performs an outstanding
   deed or act of service to the security, prosperity, and national
   interest of the United States of America. Previous winners include
   Nelson Mandela, George Washington, Pope John Paul II, Martin Luther
   King, Jr, Mother Teresa and Robert F. Kennedy.

   In February 2007, the Dalai Lama was named Presidential Distinguished
   Professor at Emory University. This was the first time that the leader
   of the Tibetan exile community accepted a university appointment.

Writings of the Dalai Lama

     * The Art of Happiness, coauthored with Howard C. Cutler, M.D. ISBN
       0-9656682-9-0
     * The Art of Happiness at Work, coauthored with Howard C. Cutler,
       M.D. ISBN 1-59448-054-0
     * Ethics for the New Millennium, Riverhead Books, 1999, ISBN
       1-57322-883-4
     * A Simple Path, ISBN 0-00-713887-3
     * How to Practice: The Way to a Meaningful Life, Translated and
       edited by Jeffrey Hopkins, Ph.D. ISBN 0-7434-5336-0
     * Freedom in Exile: The Autobiography of the Dalai Lama, London:
       Little, Brown and Co, 1990 ISBN 0-349-10462-X
     * An Open Heart, edited by Nicholas Vreeland. ISBN 0-316-98979-7
     * The Gelug/Kagyü Tradition of Mahamudra, coauthored with Alexander
       Berzin. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications, 1997, ISBN
       1-55939-072-7
     * The Wisdom of Forgiveness: Intimate Conversations and Journeys,
       coauthored with Victor Chan, Riverbed Books, 2004, ISBN
       1-57322-277-1
     * Tibetan Portrait: The Power of Compassion, photographs by Phil
       Borges with sayings by Tenzin Gyatso. ISBN 0-8478-1957-4
     * The Heart of Compassion: A Practical Approach to a Meaningful Life,
       Twin Lakes, Wisconsin: Lotus Press, ISBN 0-940985-36-5
     * Ancient Wisdom, Modern World: Ethics for the new millenium, Abacus
       Press, 2000, ISBN 0-349-11443-9
     * My Tibet, coauthoured with Galen Rowell, ISBN 0-520-08948-0
     * The Universe in a Single Atom: The Convergence of Science and
       Spirituality, Morgan Road Books, 2005, ISBN 0-7679-2066-X
     * How to Expand Love: Widening the Circle of Loving Relationships,
       translated and edited by Jeffrey Hopkins, Ph.D., Atria Books, 2005,
       ISBN 0-7432-6968-3
     * Der Weg des Herzens. Gewaltlosigkeit und Dialog zwischen den
       Religionen (The Path of the Heart: Non-violence and the Dialogue
       among Religions), coauthored with Eugen Drewermann, Ph.D., Patmos
       Verlag, 2003, ISBN 3-4916-9078-1
     * How to See Yourself As You Really Are, Translated and edited by
       Jeffrey Hopkins, Ph.D. ISBN 0-7432-9045-3

Awards and honours given to the Dalai Lama

   Nobel Peace Prize Winners the Dalai Lama & Bishop Tutu. Vancouver,
   Canada, 2004. Photo by Carey Linde
   Nobel Peace Prize Winners the Dalai Lama & Bishop Tutu. Vancouver,
   Canada, 2004. Photo by Carey Linde

   The Dalai Lama has received numerous awards over his spiritual and
   political career.On June 22, 2006 he became one of only three people
   ever to be recognized with an Honorary Citizenship by the Canadian
   House of Commons. On May 28, 2005, he received the Christmas Humphreys
   Award from the Buddhist Society in the United Kingdom. Perhaps his most
   notable award was the Nobel Peace Prize in Oslo on December 10, 1989
   (see below). Some other notable awards and honours he has received:
     * Presidential Distinguished Professorship from Emory University in
       February 2007.
     * Honorary citizenship of Ukraine, during the anniversary of the
       Nobel Prize on December 9 2006 in Mc Leod Ganj.
     * Congressional Gold Medal on September 14, 2006
     * Jaime Brunet Prize for Human Rights on October 9, 2003
     * Hilton Humanitarian Award on September 24, 2003
     * International League for Human Rights Award on September 19, 2003
     * Life Achievement Award from Hadassah Women's Zionist Organization
       on November 24, 1999
     * Roosevelt Four Freedoms Award from the Franklin and Eleanor
       Roosevelt Institute on June 4, 1994
     * World Security Annual Peace Award from the New York Lawyer's
       Alliance on April 27, 1994
     * Peace and Unity Awards from the National Peace conference on August
       23, 1991
     * Earth Prize from the United Earth and U.N. Environmental Program on
       June 5, 1991
     * Advancing Human Liberty from the Freedom House on April 17, 1991
     * Le Prix De La Memoire from the Foundation Danielle Mitterrand,
       France on December 4, 1989
     * Raoul Wallenberg Human Rights Award from the Congressional Rights
       Caucus Human Rights on July 21, 1989
     * Key to Los Angeles from Mayor Bradley in September 1979.
     * Key to San Francisco from Mayor Feinstein on September 27, 1979
     * Key to New York from Mayor Bloomberg on September 25, 2005

Nobel Peace Prize

   On December 10th, 1989 Tenzin Gyatso was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize,
   the chairman of the Nobel committee saying that this was "in part a
   tribute to the memory of Mahatma Gandhi." The committee recognized
   officially his efforts in "the struggle of the liberation of Tibet and
   the efforts for a peaceful resolution instead of using violence". In
   his acceptance speech, he criticised China for the using force against
   student protesters during the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989. He
   stated however that their effort was not in vain. His speech focused on
   the importance of the continued use of non-violence and his desire to
   maintain a dialogue with China to try to resolve the situation.

Films about the Dalai Lama

   Among the films that have been recently made about the 14th Dalai Lama
   are Kundun and Seven Years in Tibet (both 1997).

   Other recent films include:
     * Dalai Lama Renaissance (2007), documentary film about the Dalai
       Lama (narrated by Harrison Ford)
     * Experiencing the Soul - Before Birth During Life After Death (2005)
     * What Remains of Us (2004)
     * Ethics for the New Millenium (DVD) (1999)
     * In Search of Kundun with Martin Scorsese (1999)
     * Kundun - (1998) directed by Martin Scorsese.
     * The Good Heart: A Buddhist Perspective on the Teachings of Jesus
       (1994)
     * Compassion In Exile (1993), documentary, directed by Mickey Lemle
     * Realizing Oneness in All Humanity - The Dalai Lama

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tenzin_Gyatso%2C_14th_Dalai_Lama"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
