   #copyright

TGV

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Railway transport


   This is a featured article. Click here for more information.
   TGV trains depart from Gare Montparnasse in Paris to western and
   southwestern destinations.
   Enlarge
   TGV trains depart from Gare Montparnasse in Paris to western and
   southwestern destinations.

   The TGV (train à grande vitesse, French for "high-speed train") is
   France's high-speed rail service, developed by GEC-Alsthom (now Alstom)
   and SNCF, the French national rail operator, and operated primarily by
   SNCF. Following the inaugural TGV service between Paris and Lyon in
   1981, the TGV network, centred on Paris, has expanded to connect cities
   across France and in adjacent countries. It holds the record for the
   fastest wheeled train, and the highest average speed for a regular
   passenger service.

   The success of the first line led to a rapid expansion of the service,
   with new lines built to the south, west and northeast of the country.
   Eager to emulate in the success of the French network, neighbouring
   countries such as Belgium, Italy and Switzerland have built their own
   high-speed lines. TGVs link with Belgium, Germany and the Netherlands
   through the Thalys network, and Eurostar links France and Belgium with
   the United Kingdom. Several lines are planned, including extensions
   within France and to surrounding countries. Towns such as Tours have
   become a part of a "TGV commuter belt".

   TGVs travel at up to 320  km/h (200  mph) in commercial use (over 500
   km/h (310 mph) on test runs), which is made possible through the use of
   specially designed LGVs (lignes à grande vitesse, high-speed lines)
   without sharp curves, high-powered electric motors, low axle weight,
   articulated carriages and in-cab signalling (removing the need for
   drivers to see lineside signals at high speed).

   TGVs are manufactured primarily by Alstom, now often with the
   involvement of subcontractor, such as Bombardier. Except for a small
   series of TGVs used for postal freight between Paris and Lyon, TGV is
   primarily a passenger service. Trains derived from TGV designs operate
   in South Korea ( KTX) and Spain ( AVE).

   Travel by TGV has largely replaced air travel between connected cities,
   due to shorter travel times (especially for trips taking less than
   three hours), reduced check-in, security and boarding formalities, and
   the convenient location of stations in the hearts of cities.
   Furthermore, the TGV is a very safe mode of transport, with no recorded
   fatalities at high speed.

History

   The idea of the TGV was first proposed in the 1960s, after Japan had
   begun construction of the Shinkansen in 1959. At the time the French
   government favoured new technologies, exploring the production of
   hovercraft and maglev trains such as Aérotrain. Simultaneously, SNCF
   began researching high-speed trains that would operate on conventional
   track.

   It was originally planned that the TGV, then standing for très grande
   vitesse (very high speed) or turbine grande vitesse (high speed
   turbine), would be propelled by gas turbine-electric locomotives. Gas
   turbines were selected for their small size, good power-to-weight
   ratio, and ability to deliver a high power output over an extended
   period of time. The first prototype, TGV 001, was the only TGV
   constructed with this type of engine - following the sharp increase in
   the price of oil during the 1973 energy crisis, gas turbines were
   deemed impractical and the project turned to electricity from overhead
   lines. The electricity was to be generated by France's new nuclear
   power stations.

   However, TGV 001 was not a wasted prototype. Its gas-turbine powerplant
   was only one of many technologies required for high-speed rail travel.
   It also tested high-speed brakes, which were needed to dissipate the
   large amount of kinetic energy amassed by a train operating at high
   speed, high-speed aerodynamics and signalling. It was articulated,
   meaning that its two carriages shared a bogie between them which
   allowed them to move freely with respect to one another. It reached
   318 km/h (198 mph), which remains the world speed record for a
   non-electric train. Its interior and exterior were styled by
   British-born designer Jack Cooper, whose work formed the basis of all
   subsequent TGV design, including the distinctive nose shape of TGV
   power cars.

   Changing the specification of the TGV to incorporate electric traction
   required a significant design overhaul. The first electric prototype,
   nicknamed Zébulon, was completed in 1974, testing features such as
   innovative body-mounting of motors, pantographs, suspension and
   braking. Body mounting of motors allowed over 3 tonnes (2.95 tons) to
   be dropped from the weight of the power cars. The prototype travelled
   almost 1 000 000 km (621,000 miles) during testing.

   In 1976 the French government funded the TGV project, and construction
   of the LGV Sud-Est, the first high-speed line (ligne à grande vitesse),
   began shortly afterwards. The line was given the designation LN1, Ligne
   Nouvelle 1 (New Line 1).
   A TGV train at Futuroscope, near Poitiers.
   Enlarge
   A TGV train at Futuroscope, near Poitiers.

   After two pre-production trainsets had been rigorously tested and
   substantially modified, the first production version was delivered on
   25 April 1980. The TGV service opened to the public between Paris and
   Lyon on 27 September 1981. The initial target customers were
   businesspeople travelling between those two cities; as a mode of
   transport, the TGV was considerably faster than normal trains, cars, or
   airplanes. The trains soon became popular outside their initial target
   market; the public welcomed a fast and practical way to travel between
   cities.

   Since then, further LGVs have opened in France, including the LGV
   Atlantique (LN2) to Tours/ Le Mans (construction begun 1985, in
   operation 1989); the LGV Nord-Europe (LN3) to Calais and the Belgian
   border (construction begun 1989, in operation 1993); the LGV
   Rhône-Alpes (LN4), extending the LGV Sud-Est to Valence (construction
   begun 1990, in operation 1992); and the LGV Méditerranée (LN5) to
   Marseille (construction begun 1996, in operation 2001). The LGV Est
   from Paris to Strasbourg is under construction. High-speed lines based
   on LGV technology to connect with the French network have also been
   built in Belgium, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom.
   A TGV Duplex trainset (coupled to a Reseau trainset) leaving Paris Gare
   de Lyon.
   Enlarge
   A TGV Duplex trainset (coupled to a Reseau trainset) leaving Paris Gare
   de Lyon.

   The Eurostar service began operation in 1994, connecting continental
   Europe to London via the Channel Tunnel with a version of the TGV
   designed for use in the tunnel and in the United Kingdom. The line used
   the LGV Nord-Europe in France from the outset. The first phase of the
   British high-speed line, the Channel Tunnel Rail Link, was completed in
   2003. The project, built with SNCF engineering expertise, is due for
   completion in 2007, by which time London-Brussels will take only 2
   hours and London-Paris only 2h15.

   The TGV was the world's second commercial high-speed service after
   Japan's Shinkansen, which first connected Tokyo and Osaka on 1 October
   1964. The TGV currently holds the world speed record for conventional,
   non-maglev trains; in 1990 it reached 515.3 km/h (320.2 mph) under test
   conditions with a shortened train (two power cars and three passenger
   cars). It remains the world's fastest conventional scheduled train as
   of 2005. More recently, a typical journey's average start-to-stop speed
   was 263.3 km/h (163.6 mph).

   On 28 November 2003 the TGV carried its one-billionth passenger, second
   only to Shinkansen of Japan's 5 billion passengers, reached in 2000.
   The two-billion mark is expected to be reached in 2010.

Tracks

   The TGV runs on LGVs, allowing speeds of up to 320  km/h (200  mph) in
   normal operation on the newest lines. Originally, LGVs were defined as
   lines permitting speeds greater than 200 km/h (125 mph); this guideline
   was subsequently revised to permit speeds up to 250 km/h (155 mph). TGV
   trains also run on conventional track (lignes classiques), albeit at
   the normal maximum safe speed for those lines, up to a maximum of
   220 km/h (137 mph). This is an advantage that the TGV has over, for
   example, magnetic levitation trains, as TGVs can serve many more
   destinations and can use city-centre stations (as in Paris, Lyon, and
   Dijon). They now serve around 200 destinations in France and abroad.

Track design

   LGV construction is similar to that of normal railway lines, but with a
   few key differences. The radii of curves are larger so that trains can
   traverse them at higher speeds without increasing the centrifugal force
   felt by passengers. The radius of LGV curves has historically been
   greater than 4  km (2.5  miles); new lines have minimum radii of 7 km
   (4 mi) to allow for future increases in speed.

   If used only for high-speed traffic, lines can incorporate steeper
   grades. This facilitates the planning of LGV routes and reduces the
   cost of line construction. The considerable momentum of TGV trains at
   high speed means that they can climb steep slopes without greatly
   increasing their energy consumption. They can also coast on downward
   slopes, further increasing efficiency. The Paris-Sud-Est LGV features
   line grades of up to 3.5%. (On the German high-speed line between
   Cologne and Frankfurt they reach 4%.)

   Track alignment is more precise than on normal railway lines, and
   ballast is placed in a deeper than normal profile, resulting in
   increased load-bearing capacity and track stability. LGV track is
   anchored by more railway sleepers per kilometre than is usual, and all
   are made of concrete (either mono- or bi-blocs, the latter consisting
   of two separate blocks of concrete joined by a steel bar). Heavy rail
   (UIC 60) is used, and the rails themselves are more upright, 1/40 as
   opposed to 1/20 on normal lines. Use of continuous welded rails in
   place of shorter, jointed rails means that the ride is comfortable at
   high speeds, without the "clickety-clack" vibrations induced by rail
   joints.

   The diameter of tunnels must be greater than normally required by the
   size of the trains travelling through them, especially at the
   entrances; this is to limit the effects of air pressure changes, which
   can be more problematic at the speeds reached by TGVs.

Traffic limitations

   Trains that are not capable of high speed may not normally use LGVs,
   which are reserved primarily for TGVs. One reason for this limitation
   is that capacity is sharply reduced when trains of differing speeds are
   mixed. Passing freight and passenger trains also constitute a safety
   risk, as cargo on freight cars can be destabilised by the turbulent air
   that accompanies a high-speed TGV. Maintenance is carried out on LGVs
   during the night, when no TGVs are running.

   The steep gradients common on LGVs would limit the weight of slow
   freight trains. Slower trains would also mean that the maximum track
   cant (banking on curves) would be limited, so for the same maximum
   speed a mixed-traffic LGV would need to be built with curves of even
   larger radius. Such track would be much more expensive and difficult to
   build and maintain. Mixed-traffic LGVs remain uncommon, but certain
   stretches of less-used track are routinely mixed-traffic, such as the
   Tours branch of the LGV Atlantique, and the planned Nîmes/ Montpellier
   branch of the LGV Mediterranée. The British CTRL LGV from the Channel
   Tunnel to London has been built with passing-loops to support freight
   use, but has not been used in this capacity.

   In countries outside France, LGVs often end up carrying non-TGV
   intercity traffic, often as a requirement of the initial funding
   commitments. The Belgian LGV from Brussels to Liège already carries
   200km/h loco-hauled trains, with both the Dutch HSL Zuid and UK CTRL
   targeted to carry 200km/h domestic intercity service upon completion.
   The Eurotunnel between France and England is not a strict LGV, but does
   use TVM signalling to support carrying mixed Freight, Shuttle and
   Eurostar traffic at between 100km/h and 160km/h. Each high-speed
   Eurostar run can occupy the capacity, or "slot", of up to five
   equivalent (and slower) freight trains, perfectly illustrating the
   capacity problems of mixing traffic running at different speeds.

Power supply

   LGVs are all electrified at 25 kV 50 Hz AC. Catenary wires are kept at
   a higher tension than normal lines because the pantograph causes
   oscillations in the wires, and the wave must travel faster than the
   train to avoid producing standing waves that would cause the wires to
   break. This was a problem when rail speed record attempts were made in
   1990; power wire tension had to be increased further still to
   accommodate train speeds of over 500 km/h (310 mph). While trains are
   on LGVs, only the rear pantograph is raised, avoiding amplification of
   the oscillations created by the front pantograph. The front power car
   is supplied by a cable running along the roof of the train. Eurostar
   trains are, however, long enough that oscillations are damped
   sufficiently between the front and rear power cars that both
   pantographs can be safely raised, something that is required as there
   is no interconnecting high-voltage cable along the 400m length of the
   train. On lignes classiques slower maximum speeds prevent oscillation
   problems, and on DC lines both pantographs must be raised.

Separation

   LGVs are fenced along their entire length to prevent animals and people
   from wandering onto the track. Level crossings are not permitted and
   bridges over the line are equipped with sensors to detect objects that
   fall onto the track.

   All LGV junctions are grade-separated, i.e. tracks crossing each other
   always use flyovers or tunnels in order to avoid the need to cross in
   front of other trains.

Signalling

   Because TGV trains travel too fast for their drivers to see and react
   to traditional lineside signals, an automated system called TVM
   (Transmission Voie-Machine, or track to train transmission) is used for
   signalling on LGVs. Information is transmitted to trains via electrical
   pulses sent through the rails, providing speed, target speed, and
   stop/go indications directly to the driver via dashboard-mounted
   instruments. This high degree of automation does not remove the train
   from driver control, though there are safeguards that can safely bring
   the train to a stop in the event of driver error.
   The boundaries of signalling block sections are marked by distinctive
   boards.
   Enlarge
   The boundaries of signalling block sections are marked by distinctive
   boards.

   The line is divided into signal blocks of about 1500  m (1  mile), the
   boundaries of which are marked by blue boards with a yellow triangle.
   Dashboard instruments show the maximum permitted speed for the train's
   current block, as well as a target speed based on the profile of the
   line ahead. The maximum permitted speed is based on factors such as the
   proximity of trains ahead (with steadily decreasing speeds permitted in
   blocks closer to the rear of the next train), junction placement, speed
   restrictions, the top speed of the train and distance from the end of
   the LGV. As trains cannot usually stop within one signal block (which
   ranges in length from a few hundred metres to a few kilometres),
   drivers are alerted to slow down gradually several blocks before a
   required stop.

   Two versions of TVM signalling, TVM-430 and TVM-300, are in use on LGV.
   TVM-430, a newer system, was first installed on the LGV Nord to the
   Channel Tunnel and Belgium, and supplies trains with more information
   than TVM-300. Among other benefits, TVM-430 allows a train's on-board
   computer system to generate a continuous speed control curve in the
   event of an emergency brake activation, effectively forcing the driver
   to reduce speed safely without releasing the brake.

   The signalling system is normally permissive: the driver of a train is
   permitted to proceed into an occupied block section without first
   obtaining authorization. Speed in this situation is limited to 30 km/h
   (19 mph; proceed with caution) and if speed exceeds 35 km/h (22 mph)
   the emergency brake is applied and the train stops. If the board
   marking the entrance to the block section is accompanied by a sign
   marked Nf, the block section is not permissive, and the driver must
   obtain authorisation from the Poste d'Aiguillage et de Régulation (PAR
   - Signalling and Control Centre) before entering. Once a route is set,
   or the PAR has provided authorization, a white lamp above the board is
   lit to inform the driver. The driver acknowledges the authorization
   using a button on the train's control panel. This disables the
   emergency braking which would otherwise occur when passing over the
   ground loop adjacent to the non-permissive board.

   When trains enter or leave LGVs from lignes classiques, they pass over
   a ground loop that automatically switches the driver's dashboard
   indicators to the appropriate signalling system. For example, a train
   leaving the LGV for a ligne classique would have its TVM signalling
   system deactivated and its traditional KVB (Contrôle Vitesse par
   Balise, or beacon speed control) system enabled.

Stations

   One of the main advantages of TGV over other fast rail techologies such
   as magnetic levitation is that TGVs can take advantage of existing
   infrastructure. This makes connecting city centres (such as Paris- Gare
   de Lyon to Lyon-Perrache) by TGV a simple and inexpensive proposition;
   TGVs often use intra-city tracks and stations built with lower-speed
   trains in mind.

   The trainshed at Gare de Lyon.

                                 Avignon TGV station.

   However, LGV route designers have tended to build new stations in
   suburban areas or in the open countryside several kilometers away from
   cities. This allows TGVs to stop without incurring too great a time
   penalty, since more time is spent on high-speed track; in addition,
   many cities' stations are stub-ends, while LGV tracks frequently bypass
   cities. In some cases, stations have been built halfway between two
   communities. The station serving Montceau-les-Mines and Le Creusot is
   an example of this approach, and a more controversial example is Haute
   Picardie station, between Amiens and Saint-Quentin. The press and local
   authorities criticized Haute Picardie as being too far from either town
   to be convenient, and too far from connecting railway lines to be
   useful for travellers. The station was nicknamed la gare des
   betteraves, or 'beetroot station', as it is surrounded by beet fields.
   This nickname is now applied to similar stations located away from town
   and city centres, whether in the vicinity of beet fields or not.

   A number of major new railway stations have been built to support the
   TGV service, some of which are major architectural achievements in
   their own right. Avignon TGV station, opened in 2001, has been praised
   as one of the most remarkable stations on the network, with a
   spectacular 340 m (1,115 ft)-long glazed roof that has been compared to
   that of a cathedral.

Rolling stock

   A TGV train in Rennes, in Brittany.
   Enlarge
   A TGV train in Rennes, in Brittany.
   Eurostar and Thalys side-by-side in Paris Gare du Nord.
   Enlarge
   Eurostar and Thalys side-by-side in Paris Gare du Nord.

   TGV rolling stock differs from some other types in that trains consist
   of semi-permanently coupled multiple units. Bogies ( Jacobs bogies) are
   located between carriages, supporting the carriages on either side, so
   that each carriage shares its bogies with the two adjacent to it. Power
   cars at each end of the trains have their own bogies. Trains can be
   lengthened by coupling two entire train units to one another, using
   couplers that are otherwise hidden in the noses of the power cars.

   The articulated design is advantageous during a derailment, as the
   passenger carriages are more likely to stay upright and in line with
   the track. Normal trains, by contrast, may split at couplings and
   jack-knife.

   A disadvantage of this carriage design is that it is difficult to split
   sets of carriages. While TGV power cars can be removed from trains via
   standard uncoupling procedures, specialized depot equipment is needed
   to split carriages by lifting the entire train at once. Once uncoupled,
   one of the carriage ends is left without a bogie at the split, so a
   bogie frame is required to support it.

   SNCF operates a fleet of about 400 TGVs. Six types of TGV or TGV
   derivative currently operate on the French network; these are TGV
   Sud-Est (passenger and La Poste varieties), TGV Atlantique, TGV
   Réseau/Thalys PBA, Eurostar, TGV Duplex and Thalys PBKA. A seventh
   type, TGV POS (Paris-Ostfrankreich-Suddeutschland, or Paris-Eastern
   France-Southern Germany), is currently being tested.

   All TGVs are at least bi-current, which means that they can operate at
   25 kV, 50 Hz AC on newer lines (including LGVs) and at 1.5 kV DC on
   older lines (such as the 1.5 kV lignes classiques that are common
   around Paris). Trains crossing the border into Germany, Switzerland,
   Belgium, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom must accommodate
   foreign voltages. This has led to the construction of tri-current and
   quadri-current TGVs. All TGVs are equipped with two pairs of
   pantographs, two for AC use and two for DC use. When passing between
   areas of different supply voltage, marker boards remind the driver to
   turn off power to the traction motors, lower the pantograph(s), adjust
   a switch on the dashboard to select the appropriate system, and raise
   the pantograph(s). Pantographs and pantograph height control are
   selected automatically based on the voltage system chosen by the
   driver. Once the train detects the correct supply to its transformers,
   a dashboard indicator lights up and the driver can switch on power to
   the traction motors. The train coasts across the boundary between
   voltage sections.
   Equipment type Top speed Seating
   capacity Overall length Width Weight Power output
   (under 25 kV)
   TGV Sud-Est 270  km/h (168  mph) as built
   300 km/h (186 mph) rebuilt 345 200.2  m (657  ft) 2.81 m (9.2 ft) 385
   tonnes (424  tons) 6,450 kW
   TGV Atlantique 300 km/h (186 mph) 485 237.5 m (780 ft) 2.90 m (9.5 ft)
   444 tonnes (489 tons) 8,800 kW
   TGV Réseau 300 km/h (186 mph) 377 200 m (656 ft) 2.90 m (9.5 ft)
   383 tonnes (422 tons) 8,800 kW
   Eurostar Three Capitals 300 km/h (186 mph) 794 393.7 m (1,293 ft)
   2.81 m (9.2 ft) 752 tonnes (829 tons) 12,240 kW
   Eurostar North of London 300 km/h (186 mph) 596 318.9 m (1,033 ft)
   2.81 m (9.2 ft) 665 tonnes (733 tons) 12,240 kW
   TGV Duplex 320 km/h (199 mph) 512 200 m (656 ft) 2.90 m (9.5 ft)
   386 tonnes (425 tons) 8,800 kW
   Thalys PBKA 300 km/h (186 mph) 377 200 m (656 ft) 2.90 m (9.5 ft)
   385 tonnes (424 tons) 8,800 kW
   TGV POS 320 km/h (199 mph) 200 m (656 ft) 2.90 m (9.5 ft) 423 tonnes
   (466 tons) 9,600 kW

TGV Sud-Est

   A TGV Sud-Est set in the original orange livery, since superseded by
   silver and blue.
   Enlarge
   A TGV Sud-Est set in the original orange livery, since superseded by
   silver and blue.

   The Sud-Est fleet was built between 1978 and 1988 and operated the
   first TGV service, from Paris to Lyon in 1981. Currently there are 107
   passenger sets operating, of which nine are tri-current (including
   15 kV, 16 2/3 Hz AC for use in Switzerland) and the rest bi-current.
   There are also seven bi-current half-sets without seats that carry mail
   for La Poste between Paris and Lyon; these are in a distinctive yellow
   livery.

   Each set is made up of two power cars and eight carriages (capacity 345
   seats), including a powered bogie in each of the carriages adjacent to
   the power cars. They are 200 m (656 ft) long and 2.81 m (9.2 ft) wide.
   They weigh 385  tonnes (424 short tons; 379 long tons) with a power
   output of 6,450 kW under 25 kV.

   Originally the sets were built to run at 270 km/h (168 mph) but most
   were upgraded to 300 km/h (186 mph) during their mid-life refurbishment
   in preparation for the opening of the LGV Méditerranée. The few sets
   that still have a maximum speed of 270 km/h operate on those routes
   that include a comparatively short distance on LGV, such as those to
   Switzerland via Dijon. SNCF did not consider it financially worthwhile
   to upgrade their speed for a marginal reduction in journey time.

TGV Atlantique

   A TGV Atlantique on an enhanced ordinary track.
   Enlarge
   A TGV Atlantique on an enhanced ordinary track.

   The Atlantique fleet was built between 1988 and 1992. 105 bi-current
   sets were built for the opening of the LGV Atlantique and entry into
   service began in 1989. They are 237.5 m (780 ft) long and 2.9 m
   (9.5 ft) wide. They weigh 444 tonnes (489 tons), and are made up of two
   power cars and ten carriages with a capacity of 485 seats. They were
   built from the outset with a maximum speed of 300 km/h (186 mph) with
   8,800 kW total power under 25 kV.

   Modified unit 325 set the world speed record in 1990 on the new LGV
   before its opening. Various modifications, such as improved
   aerodynamics, larger wheels and improved braking were made to enable
   test run speeds of over 500 km/h (310 mph). The set was reduced to two
   power cars and three carriages to improve the power-to-weight ratio,
   weighing 250 tonnes (275 tons). Three carriages, including the bar
   carriage in the centre, is the minimum possible configuration because
   of the way the sets are articulated.

TGV Réseau

   A Réseau-class 2nd-generation TGV train at Marseille St-Charles
   station.
   Enlarge
   A Réseau-class 2nd-generation TGV train at Marseille St-Charles
   station.

   The first Réseau ("Network") sets entered service in 1993. Fifty
   bi-current sets were ordered in 1990, supplemented by an order for 40
   tri-current sets in 1992/1993. Ten of the tri-current sets carry the
   Thalys livery and are known as Thalys PBA (Paris-Brussels-Amsterdam)
   sets. As well as using standard French voltages, the tri-current sets
   can operate under the Low Countries' 1.5 kV and Italian 3 kV DC
   supplies.

   They are formed of two power cars (8,800 kW under 25 kV - as TGV
   Atlantique) and eight carriages, giving a capacity of 377 seats. They
   have a top speed of 300 km/h. They are 200 m (656 ft) long and are
   2.90 m (9.5 ft) wide. The bi-current sets weigh 383 tonnes (422 tons),
   and owing to axle-load restrictions in Belgium the tri-current sets
   have a series of modifications, such as the replacement of steel with
   aluminium and hollow axles, to reduce the weight to under 17 tonnes
   (18.7 tons) per axle.

   Owing to early complaints of uncomfortable pressure changes when
   entering tunnels at high speed on the LGV Atlantique, the Réseau sets
   are now pressure-sealed.

Eurostar

   Long Eurostar trains connect London with Paris and Brussels through the
   Channel Tunnel.
   Enlarge
   Long Eurostar trains connect London with Paris and Brussels through the
   Channel Tunnel.

   The Eurostar train is essentially a long TGV, modified for use in the
   United Kingdom and in the Channel Tunnel. Differences include the
   smaller cross-section, to fit within the constrictive British loading
   gauge; British-designed asynchronous traction motors; and extensive
   fireproofing in case of fire in the tunnel.

   In the UK, it is known under the TOPS classification system as class
   373. In the planning stages, it was also known as the TransManche Super
   Train (Cross-channel Super Train). The trains were built by GEC-Alsthom
   (now Alstom) in La Rochelle (France), Belfort (France) and Washwood
   Heath (England), entering service in 1993.

   Two types were built: the Three Capitals sets, consisting of two power
   cars and 18 carriages, including two with one powered bogie each, and
   the North of London sets, consisting of two power cars and 14
   carriages, again with two with one powered bogie each. Full sets of
   both types consist of two identical half-sets which are not articulated
   in the middle, so that in case of emergency in the Channel Tunnel one
   half can be uncoupled and leave the tunnel. Each half-set is numbered
   separately.

   Thirty-eight full sets, plus one spare power car, were ordered by the
   railway companies involved: 16 by SNCF, four by NMBS/SNCB, and 18 by
   British Rail, of which seven were North of London sets. Upon
   privatisation of British Rail by the UK Government, the BR sets were
   bought by London and Continental Railways, whose subsidiary Eurostar
   (U.K.) Ltd. is managed by a consortium of the National Express Group
   (40%), SNCF (35%), SNCB (15%) and British Airways (10%).

   The Three Capitals sets operate at a maximum speed of 300 km/h
   (186 mph), with the power cars supplying 12,240 kW of power. They are
   394 m (1,293 ft) long and have a capacity of 766 seats, weighing a
   total of 752 tonnes (829 short tons; 740 long tons). The North of
   London sets have a capacity of 558 seats. All of the trains are at
   least tri-current and are able to operate on 25 kV, 50 Hz AC (on LGVs,
   including the Channel Tunnel Rail Link, and on UK overhead electrified
   lines), 3 kV DC (on lignes classiques in Belgium) and 750 V DC (on the
   UK former Southern Region third rail network). The third-rail system
   will become superfluous in 2007 when the second phase of the Channel
   Tunnel Rail Link is completed between London and the Channel Tunnel, as
   it uses 25 kV, 50 Hz AC exclusively. Five of the Three Capitals sets
   owned by SNCF are quadri-current and are able to operate on French
   lignes classiques at 1500 V DC.

   Three of the Three Capitals sets owned by SNCF are in French domestic
   use and carry the silver and blue TGV livery. The North of London sets
   have never seen international use, but were intended to provide direct
   regional Eurostar services from continental Europe to UK cities north
   of London, using the West Coast Main Line and the East Coast Main Line.
   These never came to fruition because budget airlines in the UK offered
   lower fares. A few of the sets were leased to GNER for use on its White
   Rose service between London and Leeds, with two of them carrying GNER's
   dark blue livery. The lease ended in December 2005.

   The current Chief Executive of Eurostar, Richard Brown, has suggested
   that the trains could be replaced by double-decker trains similar to
   the TGV Duplex when they are withdrawn. A double-deck fleet could carry
   40 million passengers per year from England to Continental Europe,
   equivalent to adding an extra runway at a London airport.

   The Eurostar line is characterized by higher security measures than
   other TGV lines. Luggage is screened and passengers are required to
   board 20 minutes before departure. In addition, passengers have to pass
   customs and identity checks when entering or leaving the UK.

TGV Duplex

   The TGV Duplex power cars use a more streamlined nose than previous
   TGVs.
   Enlarge
   The TGV Duplex power cars use a more streamlined nose than previous
   TGVs.
   TGV Duplex trains feature bi-level carriages.
   Enlarge
   TGV Duplex trains feature bi-level carriages.

   The Duplex was built to increase TGV capacity without increasing train
   length or the number of trains. Each carriage has two levels, with
   access doors at the lower level taking advantage of low French
   platforms. A staircase provides access to the upper level, where the
   gangway between carriages is located. This layout provides a capacity
   of 512 seats per set. On busy routes such as Paris-Marseille they are
   operated in pairs, providing 1,024 seats in a single train. Each set
   also has a wheelchair-accessible compartment.

   After a lengthy development process starting in 1988 (during which they
   were known as the TGV-2N), they were built in two batches: 30 between
   1995 and 1998, then a further 34 between 2000 and 2004. They weigh
   386 tonnes (425 short tons; 379 long tons) and are 200 m (656 ft) long,
   made up of two power cars and eight bi-level carriages. Extensive use
   of aluminium means that they weigh not much more than the TGV Réseau
   sets they supplement. The bi-current power cars provide a total power
   of 8,800 kW, and they have a slightly increased speed over their
   predecessors of 320 km/h (199 mph).

Thalys PBKA

   A Thalys PBKA at Köln Hauptbahnhof
   Enlarge
   A Thalys PBKA at Köln Hauptbahnhof

   Unlike Thalys PBA sets, the PBKA (Paris-Brussels-Köln
   (Cologne)-Amsterdam) sets were built exclusively for the Thalys
   service. They are technologically similar to TGV Duplex sets, but do
   not feature bi-level carriages. All of the trains are quadri-current,
   operating under 25 kV, 50 Hz AC (LGVs), 15 kV 16⅔ Hz AC (Germany,
   Switzerland), 3 kV DC (Belgium) and 1,5 kV DC (the Netherlands and
   French lignes classiques). Their top speed in service is 300 km/h
   (186 mph) under 25 kV, with two power cars supplying 8,800 kW. When
   operating under 15 kV power output drops to 4,460 kW, resulting in a
   very poor power-to-weight-ratio on German high-speed lines. They have
   eight carriages and are 200 m (656 ft) long, weighing a total of
   385 tonnes (424 short tons; 379 long tons). They have a capacity of 377
   seats.

   Seventeen trains were ordered: nine by SNCB, six by SNCF and two by NS.
   Deutsche Bahn contributed to financing two of the SNCB sets.

TGV POS

   POS trains, standing for Paris-Ostfrankreich-Süddeutschland
   (Paris-Eastern France-Southern Germany) are under test for use on the
   LGV Est, currently under construction.

   The trains will consist of two power cars with eight TGV Réseau type
   carriages, with a total power output of 9,600 kW and a top speed of
   320 km/h (199 mph). Unlike TGV-A, TGV-R and TGV-D, it has asynchronous
   motors and, in case of failure, isolation of an individual motor in a
   powered bogie is possible. They will weigh 423 tonnes (466 short tons;
   416 long tons).

Network

   TGV lines (shown in blue and red) and connections to the rest of the
   European high speed rail network
   Enlarge
   TGV lines (shown in blue and red) and connections to the rest of the
   European high speed rail network

   France has around 1,200 km of LGV, built over the past 20 years, with
   four lines either proposed or under construction.

Existing lines

    1. LGV Sud-Est (Paris Gare de Lyon to Lyon-Perrache), the first LGV
       (opened 1981)
    2. LGV Atlantique (Paris Gare Montparnasse to Tours and Le Mans)
       (opened 1990)
    3. LGV Rhône-Alpes (Lyon to Valence) (opened 1992)
    4. LGV Nord (Paris Gare du Nord to Lille and Brussels and on towards
       London, Amsterdam ( HSL-Zuid) and Cologne) (opened 1993)
    5. LGV Interconnexion Est (LGV Sud-Est to LGV Nord Europe, east of
       Paris) (opened 1994)
    6. LGV Méditerranée (An extension of LGV Rhône-Alpes: Valence to
       Marseille Saint Charles) (opened 2001)
    7. Channel Tunnel Rail Link Phase 1 ( Channel Tunnel to north Kent)
       (opened 2003)

Lines under construction

    1. LGV Est (Paris Gare de l'Est- Strasbourg) (will open 10 June 2007)
    2. LGV Perpignan-Figueras (due to open 2009)
    3. Channel Tunnel Rail Link Phase 2 (North Kent to London) (opens
       2007)
    4. LGV Rhin-Rhône (Strasbourg-Lyon)

Planned lines

    1. Lyon Turin Ferroviaire (Lyon- Chambéry-Turin), which would connect
       the TGV to the Italian TAV network
    2. LGV Sud Europe Atlantique Tours- Bordeaux and LGV Bretagne-Pays de
       la Loire Le Mans- Rennes, extending the LGV Atlantique (also called
       LGV Sud-Ouest)
    3. Bordeaux- Toulouse- Narbonne
    4. Bordeaux-Spanish border- Vitoria and Irun
    5. LGV Poitiers- Limoges
    6. LGV Barreau Picard (Paris - Amiens - Calais), cutting off the
       corner of the LGV Nord-Europe via Lille.
    7. LGV Normandie (Paris- Rouen- Le Havre- Caen)
    8. TGV-ER - Regional line Lille - Aulnoye for high speed liaisons
       between Lille and Maubeuge

   Amsterdam and Cologne are already served by Thalys TGVs running on
   ordinary track, though these connections are being upgraded to
   high-speed rail. London is served by Eurostar trains running at high
   speeds via the partially-completed Channel Tunnel Rail Link and then at
   normal speeds along regular tracks through the London suburbs, although
   Eurostar will use a fully-segregated line once Section 2 of the link is
   complete in 2007.

TGV technology outside France

   TGV technology has been adopted in a number of other countries
   separately from the French network:
     * AVE (Alta Velocidad Española), the high-speed network in Spain
     * Korea Train Express (KTX), the high-speed network in South Korea
     * Acela Express, a high-speed tilting train built by TGV participant
       Bombardier for the United States, which uses TGV motor technology
       (though the rest of the train is unrelated).

Future TGVs

   SNCF and Alstom are investigating new technology which could be used
   for high-speed transport in France.

   The development of TGV trains is being pursued in the form of the AGV,
   standing for automotrice à grande vitesse (high speed multiple unit).
   The design does not include separate power cars: motors are instead
   located under each carriage. Investigations are being carried out with
   the aim of producing trains at the same cost as existing TGVs, with the
   same safety standards. AGVs of the same length as existing TGVs could
   have a capacity of up to 450 seats. The target speed of the train is
   350 km/h (217 mph).

   In the short term, plans are being considered to increase the capacity
   of TGVs by 10% by replacing the central two power cars of a double TGV
   with passenger carriages. These carriages would have motorised bogies
   underneath them, as would the first and last carriage of the train, to
   make up for the lost power.

   One area being explored is magnetic levitation. This is, however, on
   hold as the cost of implementing maglev technology is too high. An
   entirely new network would be required, as maglev trains require track
   designed specifically for their use, and unless significant demolition
   or tunnelling took place in city centres, the new system would only be
   able to reach the outside of towns and cities.

Safety

   In more than two decades of high-speed operation, the TGV has not
   recorded a single fatality due to accident while running at high speed.
   There have been several accidents, including three derailments at or
   above 270 km/h (168 mph), but in none of these did any carriages
   overturn. This is credited in part to the stiffness that the
   articulated design lends to the train. There have, however, been fatal
   accidents involving TGVs on lignes classiques, where the trains are
   exposed to the same dangers as normal trains, such as level crossings.

On LGVs

     * 14 December 1992: TGV 920 from Annecy to Paris, operated by set 56,
       derailed at 270 km/h (168 mph) at Mâcon-Loché TGV station
       (Saône-et-Loire). A previous emergency stop had caused a wheel
       flat; the bogie concerned derailed while crossing the points at the
       entrance to the station. No one on the train was injured, but 25
       passengers waiting on the platform for another TGV were slightly
       injured by ballast that was thrown up from the trackbed.
     * 21 December 1993: TGV 7150 from Valenciennes to Paris, operated by
       set 511, derailed at 300 km/h (186 mph) at the site of Haute
       Picardie TGV station, before it was built. Rain had caused a hole
       to open up under the track; the hole dated from the First World War
       but had not been detected during construction. The front power car
       and four carriages derailed, but remained aligned with the track.
       Of the 200 passengers, one was slightly injured.
     * 5 June 2000: Eurostar 9073 from Paris to London, operated by sets
       3101/2 owned by NMBS/SNCB, derailed at 250 km/h (155 mph) in the
       Nord-Pas de Calais region near Croisilles. The transmission
       assembly on the rear bogie of the front power car failed, with
       parts falling onto the track. Four bogies out of 24 derailed. Out
       of 501 passengers, seven were bruised and others treated for shock.

On lignes classiques

     * 31 December 1983: A bomb allegedly planted by the terrorist
       organisation of Carlos the Jackal exploded on board a TGV from
       Marseille to Paris; two people were killed.
     * 28 September 1988: TGV 736, operated by set 70 "Melun", collided
       with a lorry carrying an electric transformer weighing 100 tonnes
       (110 short tons; 98 long tons) that had become stuck on a level
       crossing in Voiron, Isère. The vehicle had not been permitted to
       cross by the French Direction départementale de l'équipement. The
       weight of the lorry caused a very violent collision; the train
       driver and a passenger died, and 25 passengers were slightly
       injured.
     * 4 January 1991: after a brake failure, TGV 360 ran away from
       Châtillon depot. The train was directed onto an unoccupied track
       and collided with the car loading ramp at Paris-Vaugirard station
       at 60 km/h (37 mph). No-one was injured. The leading power car and
       the first two carriages were severely damaged, and were rebuilt.
     * 25 September 1997: TGV 7119 from Paris to Dunkirk, operated by set
       502, collided at 130 km/h (81 mph) with a 70 tonne (77 short ton;
       69 long ton) asphalt paving machine on a level crossing at Bierne,
       near Dunquerque. The power car spun round and fell down an
       embankment; the front two carriages left the track and came to a
       stand in woods beside the track. Seven people were injured.
     * 31 October 2001: TGV 8515 from Paris to Irun derailed at 130 km/h
       (81 mph) near Dax in southwest France. All ten carriages derailed
       and the rear power unit fell over. The cause was a broken rail.
     * 30 January 2003: a TGV from Dunkirk to Paris collided at 106 km/h
       (66 mph) with a heavy goods vehicle stuck on the level crossing at
       Esquelbecq in northern France. The front power car was severely
       damaged, but only one bogie derailed. Only the driver was slightly
       injured.

   Following the number of accidents at level crossings, an effort has
   been made to remove all level crossings on lignes classiques used by
   TGVs. The ligne classique from Tours to Bordeaux at the end of the LGV
   Atlantique has no level crossings as a result.

Protests against the TGV

   The first environmental protests against the building of a high-speed
   line in France occurred in May 1990 during the planning stages of the
   LGV Méditerranée. Protesters blocked a railway viaduct to protest
   against the planned route of the line, arguing that a new line was
   unnecessary, and that trains could use existing lines to reach
   Marseille from Lyon.

   Lyon Turin Ferroviaire (Lyon- Chambéry-Turin), which would connect the
   TGV to the Italian TAV network, has been the subject of demonstrations
   in Italy. While most Italian political parties agree on the
   construction of this line, inhabitants of the towns where construction
   would take place are vehemently opposing it. The concerns of the
   protesters centre around storing dangerous materials mined from
   mountain, like asbestos and uranium, in the open air. This serious
   health danger could be avoided by using more appropriate but expensive
   techniques for handling radioactive materials. A six-month delay in the
   start of construction has been decided in order to study solutions, but
   a ten-year-old NIMBY national movement against the TAV is trying to
   exploit inhabitants' legitimate worries to criticize the development of
   high-speed rail in Italy as a whole.

   General complaints about the noise of TGVs passing near towns and
   villages have led the SNCF to build acoustic fencing along large
   sections of LGVs to reduce the disturbance to residents, but protests
   still take place where SNCF has not addressed the issue.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TGV"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
