   #copyright

Thailand

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Asian Countries;
Countries

   SOS Children works in Thailand. For more information see SOS Children
   in Thailand
   ราชอาณาจักรไทย
   Ratcha Anachak Thai
   Kingdom of Thailand

   Flag of Thailand Coat of arms of Thailand
   Flag             Coat of arms
   Anthem: Phleng Chat
   Royal anthem: Phleng Sansoen Phra Barami
   Location of Thailand
   Capital
   (and largest city) Bangkok
   13°44′N 100°30′E
   Official languages Thai
   Government Military junta under constitutional monarchy
    - King HM The King Bhumibol Adulyadej
    - Prime Minister Surayud Chulanont
    - President of the Council of National Security General Sonthi
   Boonyaratglin
   Independence from Khmer Empire
    - Sukhothai kingdom 1238–1368
    - Ayutthaya kingdom 1350–1767
    - Thonburi kingdom 1767 to April 7, 1782
    - Ratanakosin kingdom April 7, 1782 to date
   Area
    - Total 514,000 km² ( 49th)
   198,000 sq mi
    - Water (%) 0.4
   Population
    - July 2005 estimate 65,444,371^1 ( 19th)
    - 2000 census 60,916,441
    - Density 126/km² ( 80th^2)
   /sq mi
   GDP ( PPP) 2005 estimate
    - Total $560.7 billion ( 21st)
    - Per capita $8,300 ( 69th)
   HDI  (2004) 0.784 (medium) ( 74rd)
   Currency Baht (฿) ( THB)
   Time zone ( UTC+7)
    - Summer ( DST) ( UTC+7)
   Internet TLD .th
   Calling code +66
   ^1 Estimates for this country explicitly take into account the effects
   of excess mortality due to AIDS; this can result in lower life
   expectancy, higher infant mortality and death rates, lower population
   and growth rates, and changes in the distribution of population by age
   and sex than would otherwise be expected.
   ^2 Based on July 2005 figures.

   The Kingdom of Thailand is a country in Southeast Asia, bordering Laos
   and Cambodia to the east, the Gulf of Thailand and Malaysia to the
   south, and the Andaman Sea and Myanmar to the west. The country's
   official name was Siam ( Thai: สยาม; IPA: [saˈjaːm], RTGS: Sayam),
   until May 11, 1949. The word Thai (ไทย) means "freedom" in the Thai
   language and is also the name of the majority ethnic group.

History

   According to archeological evidence various indigenous cultures have
   existed in Thailand from the time of the Ban Chiang culture (4420
   BC-3400 BC) onwards, but due to its geographical location, Thai culture
   has always been greatly influenced by China and India. .

   The first Siamese/Thai state is traditionally considered the Buddhist
   kingdom Sukhothai founded in 1238, following the decline and fall of
   the Khmer Empire in the 13th - 15th century.

   A Century later, Sukhothai's power was overshadowed by the larger
   Siamese kingdom of Ayutthaya, established in the mid-14th century.
   After Ayutthaya sacked Angkor itself in 1431, much of the Khmer court
   and its Hindu customs were brought to Ayuthaya, and Khmer customs and
   rituals were adopted into the courtly culture of Siam.

   After Ayuthaya fell in 1767, Thonburi was the capital of Thailand for a
   brief period under King Taksin the Great, until a coup d'etat in 1782.
   The current (Ratthanakosin) era of Thai history began in 1782 following
   the establishment of Bangkok as capital of the Chakri dynasty under
   King Rama I the Great.

   Contact with various European powers began in the 16th century. Despite
   continued pressure, Thailand is the only Southeast Asian country never
   to have been taken over by a European power. There are two main reasons
   for this. First, Thailand had a series of very able rulers in the
   1800s. Secondly, it was able to utilise the rivalry and tension between
   the French and the British and thus remained as a buffer state between
   parts of Southeast Asia that were colonised by the two colonial powers.
   Yet Western influence, including the threat of force, led to many
   reforms in the 19th century and major concessions to British trading
   interests. This included the loss of the three southern provinces,
   which later became Malaysia's three northern states.

   A mostly bloodless revolution in 1932 led to a constitutional monarchy.
   Previously named Siam, the country changed its name from to Thailand in
   1939, back to Siam after World War II, and again to Thailand in 1949.
   During the war, it was loosely allied with Japan; after the war, it
   became an ally of the United States. Thailand then saw a series of
   military coups d'état, but progressed towards democracy since the
   1980s.

   In 1997, Thailand was hit with the Asian financial crisis and the Thai
   baht was soon worth 56 baht to the US Dollar compared to about 25 baht
   to the dollar before 1997. Since then the baht has regained some
   strength and currently trades around 36-38 baht to the dollar.

   The official calendar in Thailand is based on Eastern version of the
   Buddhist Era, which is 543 years ahead of the Gregorian (western)
   calendar. For example, the year AD 2006 is called 2549 BE in Thailand.

Government

   Until the coup on 19 September, 2006 (see below), Thailand was a
   constitutional monarchy. The King is extremely well respected and
   revered and it is illegal to insult the Royal Family. The Thai King
   recently celebrated 60 years on the throne and millions of Thai
   citizens commemorated the event and showed their reverence by donning
   yellow t-shirts and/or by wearing yellow wrist bands - the official
   royal colour. The government is now a military junta headed by Sonthi
   Boonyaratglin ( RTGS: Sonthi Bunyaratkalin). On 1 October 2006, the
   junta named Surayud Chulanont ( RTGS: Surayut Chulanon) as the prime
   minister of the interim government.

September 2006 coup d'état

   On September 19, 2006, the Royal Thai Army led by Army Commander
   General Sonthi Boonyaratglin seized control of key government buildings
   and television stations in Bangkok. At the time, Prime Minister Thaksin
   Shinawatra ( RTGS: Thaksin Chinawat) was in New York for a meeting of
   the United Nations General Assembly. At least 50 soldiers entered the
   Government House building. Television stations were ordered to
   broadcast music written by King Bhumibol Adulyadej ( RTGS: Phumiphon
   Adunyadet) and displayed images of the royal family. Caretaker Prime
   Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, in an effort to counter-act the coup,
   declared from New York that Bangkok was in a "severe state of
   emergency", and vowed to return to the country as soon as possible. He
   also removed the Army Commander from his position, and ordered military
   forces not to "move illegally." . His broadcast was abruptly shut off.

   Later, the Thai armed forces and police force declared the creation of
   the Council for Democratic Reform of the Constitutional Monarchy, and
   announced that it had taken control of Bangkok. The military declared
   martial law, abrogated the Thai Constitution, and suspended Parliament.
   Meanwhile, Army forces took strategic positions around the capital,
   occupying key intersections. Additionally, all unauthorized military
   movements were banned, and all soldiers were ordered to report to their
   duty stations. Military forces wore yellow ribbons, both on their
   uniforms and weapons, to identify themselves and communicate loyalty to
   the King. The CDRM has since revised its English name to avoid the
   appearance that the coup was sanctioned by the King. It is now known as
   the Council for Democratic Reform (CDR).

   While reactions in Bangkok generally supported the results of the coup
   if not the methods, no one knew how people reacted outside of Bangkok
   because of the tight media restrictions, although it is generally
   accepted that people in rural areas oppose the coup. A complete ban on
   political activities and political gatherings of more than 5 people was
   ordered, under penalty of up to 6 months in prison. Several protestors
   were arrested. In addition the media was banned from expressing any
   opinion that is contrary to or critical of the new junta, shut down
   hundreds of community radio stations, and shut down at least one
   website.

   The EU, the USA, and many other nations initially condemned the coup as
   unnecessary and contrary to democracy, but have resisted calling for
   the immediate restoration of the elected government. Human Rights
   groups also expressed concerns regarding the right to free speech, and
   the right to protest and engage in political activities, all of which
   were curtailed by the military coup leaders.

   A new Prime Minister was sworn in on 1 October 2006, and Thailand's
   king swore in a post-coup cabinet, chosen by new Prime Minister Gen
   Surayud Chulanont on 9 October 2006.

   The coup had very little impact on every day life in the country.

Politics

   Democracy Monument and pupils in Bangkok.
   Enlarge
   Democracy Monument and pupils in Bangkok.

   The king has little direct power under the constitution but is the
   anointed protector of Buddhism in Thailand and a symbol of national
   identity and unity. The present monarch enjoys a great deal of popular
   respect and moral authority, which has on occasion been used to resolve
   political crises. It is illegal to mock or criticize the King and doing
   so can bring about charges of lèse majesté.

   The head of government is the Prime Minister, and is appointed by the
   king from among the members of the lower house of parliament, usually
   the leader of the party that can organise a majority coalition
   government. The Prime Minister usually appoints a Cabinet.

   The parliament is called the National Assembly (รัฐสภา, rathasapha) and
   is bicameral: it consists of a House of Representatives
   (สภาผู้แทนราษฎร, sapha phuthaen ratsadon) of 500 seats and a Senate
   (วุฒิสภา, wuthisapha) of 200 seats. Members of both houses are elected
   by popular vote. The House of Representatives is elected by the
   first-past-the-post system, where only one candidate with a simple
   majority will be elected in one constituency. The Senate is elected
   based on the province system, where one province can return more than
   one Senator depending on its population size. Members of House of
   Representatives serve four-year terms, while Senators serve six-year
   terms. The court system (ศาล, saan) has three layers, the highest
   judiciary body being the Supreme Court (ศาลฎีกา, sandika).

   Thailand is an active member of the regional Association of Southeast
   Asian Nations.

Administrative divisions

   Map of Thailand

   Thailand is divided into 76 provinces (จังหวัด, changwat), which are
   gathered into 5 groups of provinces by location. There are also 2
   special governed districts: the capital Bangkok (Krung Thep Maha Nakhon
   in Thai) and Pattaya, of which Bangkok is also at a provincial level,
   while Pattaya is part of Chon Buri Province. Some Thai people still
   count Bangkok as a province, making Thailand a 76-province country.

   Each province is divided into smaller districts. As of 2000 there are
   796 districts (อำเภอ, amphoe), 81 minor districts (กิ่งอำเภอ, king
   amphoe) and the 50 districts of Bangkok (เขต, khet). Some parts of the
   provinces bordering Bangkok are also referred to as Greater Bangkok
   (ปริมณฑล, pari monthon). These provinces include Nonthaburi, Pathum
   Thani, Samut Prakan, Nakhon Pathom, Samut Sakhon. The name of each
   province's capital city (เมือง, mueang) is the same as that of the
   province: for example, the capital of Chiang Mai province (changwat
   Chiang Mai) is Mueang Chiang Mai. The 75 provinces are as follows:

North

          Chiang Mai, Chiang Rai, Kamphaeng Phet, Lampang, Lamphun, Mae
          Hong Son, Nakhon Sawan, Nan, Phayao, Phetchabun, Phichit,
          Phitsanulok, Phrae, Sukhothai, Tak, Uthai Thani, Uttaradit

Northeast

          Amnat Charoen, Buri Ram, Chaiyaphum, Kalasin, Khon Kaen, Loei,
          Maha Sarakham, Mukdahan, Nakhon Phanom, Nakhon Ratchasima, Nong
          Bua Lamphu, Nong Khai, Roi Et, Sakon Nakhon, Sisaket, Surin,
          Ubon Ratchathani, Udon Thani, Yasothon.

East

          Chanthaburi, Chon Buri, Prachin Buri, Rayong, Sa Kaeo, Trat

Central

          Ang Thong, Phra Nakhon Si Ayutthaya, Chachoengsao, Chai Nat,
          Kanchanaburi, Lop Buri, Nakhon Nayok, Nakhon Pathom, Nonthaburi,
          Pathum Thani, Phetchaburi, Prachuap Khiri Khan, Ratchaburi,
          Samut Prakan, Samut Sakhon, Samut Songkhram, Saraburi, Sing
          Buri, Suphan Buri

South

          Chumphon, Krabi, Nakhon Si Thammarat, Narathiwat, Pattani, Phang
          Nga, Phatthalung, Phuket, Ranong, Satun, Songkhla, Surat Thani,
          Trang, Yala

Special Governed Districts

          Krung Thep Maha Nakhon (Bangkok), Mueang Pattaya ( Pattaya)

   A 77th province — Nakhon Suvarnabhumi — is about to be established in
   the near future. It will also become a special governed district.

   See also: List of cities in Thailand, List of cities in Thailand by
   population

Geography

   A waterfall in Sai Yok National Park.
   Enlarge
   A waterfall in Sai Yok National Park.

   At 513,000 km² (198,000 sq mi), Thailand is the world's 49th-largest
   country. It is comparable in size to Spain, and somewhat larger than
   the US state of California.

   Thailand is home to several distinct geographic regions, partly
   corresponding to the provincial groups. The north of the country is
   mountainous, with the highest point being Doi Inthanon at 2,576 metres
   (8,451  ft). The northeast consists of the Khorat Plateau, bordered to
   the east by the Mekong river. The centre of the country is dominated by
   the predominantly flat Chao Phraya river valley, which runs into the
   Gulf of Thailand. The south consists of the narrow Kra Isthmus that
   widens into the Malay Peninsula.

   The local climate is tropical and characterised by monsoons. There is a
   rainy, warm, and cloudy southwest monsoon from mid-May to September, as
   well as a dry, cool northeast monsoon from November to mid-March. The
   southern isthmus is always hot and humid. Major cities beside the
   capital Bangkok include Nakhon Ratchasima, Khon Kaen, Udon Thani,
   Nakhon Sawan, Chiang Mai, Surat Thani, Phuket and Hat Yai ( Songkhla
   Province).

   See also: List of islands of Thailand

Economy

   A market in Bangkok.
   Enlarge
   A market in Bangkok.

   After enjoying the world's highest growth rate from 1985 to 1995 -
   averaging almost 9% annually - increased pressure on Thailand's
   currency, the baht, in 1997 led to a crisis that uncovered financial
   sector weaknesses and forced the government to float the currency. Long
   pegged at 25 to the US dollar, the baht reached its lowest point of 56
   to the US dollar in January 1998 and the economy contracted by 10.2%
   that same year. The collapse prompted a wider Asian financial crisis.

   Thailand entered a recovery stage in 1998, expanding 4.2% and grew 4.4%
   in 2000, largely due to strong exports - which increased about 20% in
   2000. Growth was dampened by a softening of the global economy in 2001,
   but picked up in the subsequent years due to strong growth in China and
   the various domestic stimulation programs of Prime Minister Thaksin
   Shinawatra, popularly known as Thaksinomics. Growth in 2003 and 2004
   was over 6% annually.

   Thailand exports over $105 billion worth of products annually . Major
   exports include rice, textiles and footwear, fishery products, rubber,
   jewelry, automobiles, computers and electrical appliances. Thailand is
   the world’s no.1 exporter of rice, exporting 6.5 million tons of milled
   rice annually. Rice is the most important crop in the country. Thailand
   has the highest percent of arable land, 27.25%, of any nation in the
   Greater Mekong Subregion . About 55% of the arable land area is used
   for rice production .

   Substantial industries include electric appliances, components,
   computer parts and automobiles, while tourism contributes about 5% of
   the Thai economy's GDP. Long stay foreign residents also contribute
   heavily to GDP.

   The main natural resources of Thailand are tin, rubber, natural gas,
   tungsten, tantalum, timber, lead, fish, gypsum, lignite, fluorite, and
   arable land.

Demographics

   Thailand's population is dominated by various Tai-speaking peoples.
   Among these, the most numerous are the Central Thai, the Northeastern
   Thai or Isan or Lao, the Northern Thai, and the Southern Thai. The
   Central Thai have long dominated the nation politically, economically,
   and culturally, even though they make up only about one-third of
   Thailand's population and are slightly outnumbered by the Northeastern
   Thai. Due to education system and the forging of a national identity,
   many people are now able to speak Central Thai as well as their own
   local languages.

   The largest group of non-Tai people are the Chinese who have
   historically played a disproportionately significant role in the
   economy. Most have integrated completely into mainstream Thai society,
   and do not live in Bangkok's Chinatown on Yaowarat Road. Other ethnic
   groups include Malays in the south, Mon, Khmer and various hill tribes.
   After the end of the Vietnam War, many Vietnamese refugees settled in
   Thailand, mainly in the northeastern regions.

   According to the last census (2000) 94.6% of Thais are Buddhists of the
   Theravada tradition. Muslims are the second religious group in Thailand
   at 4.6%. Some provinces and towns south of Chumphon have dominant
   Muslim populations, including many ethnic Thai. Often Muslims live in
   separate communities from non-Muslims. The southern tip of Thailand are
   mostly ethnic Malays and they are mostly concentrated in the south,
   where they form a strong majority in four provinces. Christians, mainly
   Catholics, represent 0.75% of the population. A tiny but influential
   community of Sikhs and some Hindus also live in the country's cities.

   The Thai language is Thailand's national language, written in its own
   alphabet, but many ethnic and regional dialects exist as well as areas
   where people speak predominantly Isan or Mon-Khmer languages. Although
   English is widely taught in schools, proficiency is low.

Culture

   Theravada Buddhism is highly respected in Thailand.
   Enlarge
   Theravada Buddhism is highly respected in Thailand.

   Theravada Buddhism is central to modern Thai identity and belief.
   However, in areas in the southernmost parts of Thailand, Islam is
   prevalent. Several different ethnic groups, many of which are
   marginalized, populate Thailand. Some of these groups overlap into
   Myanmar, Laos, Cambodia, and Malaysia and have maintained a distinctly
   traditional way-of-life despite strong Thai cultural influence. Ethnic
   Chinese also form a significant part of Thai society, particularly in
   and around Bangkok. Their successful integration into Thai society has
   allowed for this group to hold positions of economic and political
   power, the most noteworthy of these being the Thai Prime Minister,
   Thaksin Shinawatra, who held power from 2001 until September 19, 2006
   when he was ousted by a military coup d'état.

   Respect of ancestors is a large part of Thai spiritual practice, as
   well as charity towards Buddhist monks. Thais have a very strong sense
   of graciousness and hospitality, but also a strong sense of social
   hierarchy. Honorifics are important in day-to-day Thai speech,
   especially titles of seniority.

   Seniority is a important concept in Thai culture. Thais respect the
   elderly so much that some natives wai or krab (bow) to the feet of
   their parents and grandparents. They honour the eldest first, and the
   elderly take precedence in all family decisions and any sort of
   ceremony.

   Muay Thai, or Thai boxing, is the national sport in Thailand and its
   native martial art. It reached popularity all over the world in the
   1990s. Although similar martial art styles exist in other southeast
   Asian countries, few enjoy the recognition that Muay Thai has received
   with its full-contact rules allowing strikes including elbows, throws
   and knees. Association football, however, has possibly overtaken Muay
   Thai's position as most widely viewed and liked sport in contemporary
   Thai society and it is not uncommon to see Thais cheering their
   favourite English Premier League teams on television and walking round
   in replica kits. Another widely enjoyed pastime, while not a sport per
   se, is kite flying.

   The standard greeting in Thailand is a prayer-like gesture called the
   wai (see namaste). Taboos include touching someone's head or pointing
   with the feet, as the head is considered the most sacred and the foot
   the dirtiest part of the body. Stepping over someone, or over food, is
   considered insulting. However, Thai culture as in many other Asian
   cultures, is succumbing to the influence of westernization and some of
   the traditional taboos are slowly fading away with time. Books and
   other documents are the most revered of secular objects - therefore one
   should not slide a book across a table or place it on the floor.

   Thai cuisine blends five fundamental tastes: sweet, spicy, sour, bitter
   and salty. Some common ingredients used in Thai cuisine include garlic,
   chillies, lime juice, lemon grass, and fish sauce. The staple food in
   Thailand is rice, which is included in almost every meal. Thais consume
   over 100 kg of milled rice per person per year . Clearly, rice is an
   important part of Thai culture. Over 5000 varieties of rice from
   Thailand are preserved in the rice gene bank of the International Rice
   Research Institute (IRRI), based in the Philippines. The King of
   Thailand is the official patron of IRRI.

   Thai culture has been greatly shaped in recent years by its vibrant and
   free press. There are numerous English, Thai and Chinese papers in
   circulation and Thailand is the largest newspaper market in South East
   Asia with an estimated circulation of at least 13 million copies daily
   in 2003.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thailand"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
