   #copyright

The Fens

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Great
Britain

   The Fens are an area of former wetlands in the counties of
   Cambridgeshire, Lincolnshire and Norfolk in eastern England. The region
   lies west and south of The Wash. It now covers approximately 1,300 km²
   (320,000 acres), but in 1911 the Encyclopaedia Britannica estimated its
   extent as being considerably over half a million acres (2,000 km²).
   Geologically, the fenlands are a silted-up bay of the North Sea that
   embraces the lower drainage basins of the rivers Witham, Welland, Nene
   and Great Ouse. A number of towns claim to be the 'heart' or 'capital'
   of the fens, including Spalding and Wisbech.

   Ecologically, a fen is a nutrient-rich freshwater environment in which
   dead but undecayed plant matter has accumulated to the point where most
   or all of the remaining vegetation is emergent.

   300 years ago, the Fens were similar to the Florida Everglades, a large
   area of low-lying land, though in a cooler climate. The Fens and fenmen
   have their own history and distinctive cultural characteristics. When
   need be, a few of the native fenmen moved about nimbly on stilts (the
   "stilt-walkers"). They opposed incursions by outsiders and defended
   their valuable traditional rights of commonage, turf cutting, fishing
   and fowling. The fenman's way of life was different from that of others
   so outsiders were sometimes suspicious of him. The aristocratic
   Hereward Leofricsson, later called Hereward the Wake, who was raised on
   the fen margin, opposed the loss of his inheritance to the Norman
   incomers in around the year 1070.

Formation

   At the end of the most recent glacial period, known in Britain as the
   Devensian, ten thousand years ago, Great Britain was joined to Europe,
   notably, by the ridge between Friesland and Norfolk. The topography of
   the bed of the North Sea indicates that the rivers of the southern part
   of eastern England would flow into the River Rhine, thence through the
   English Channel. From The Fens northward along the modern coast, the
   drainage flowed into the northern North Sea basin, which, in turn,
   drained towards the Viking Deep. As the land-ice melted, the rising sea
   level drowned the lower lands, ultimately establishing the World's
   modern coasts.

   Around five thousand years ago, previously inland woodland of the
   Fenland basin became salt-marsh, a saltwater environment, and fen, a
   freshwater environment. In general, people writing of the Fens have
   been vague about the nature of the different sorts of wetland once
   found there. However, it is clear that the English settlers who named
   the various features of the place from about the year 450 onwards,
   noticed eight kinds.
     * Wash, which at greater or shorter intervals had bodies of water
       flowing over it, as in tidal mud-flats or braided rivers.
     * Marsh, which was the higher part of a tidal wash on which
       salt-adapted plants grew. It is generally, now usually called
       salt-marsh. This probably arises from the fact that salt was
       produced in such places.
     * Tidal creeks. For naming purposes, the English settlers seem to
       have ignored them unless they were big enough to be regarded as
       havens. The creeks (in the British sense) reached from the sea,
       into the marsh, townland and in some places, the fen.
     * Townland, a broad bank of silt on which the settlers built their
       homes and grew their vegetables. This was the remains of the huge
       creek levees developed naturally, mainly during the Bronze Age.
     * Fen, a broad expanse of nutrient-rich shallow water in which plants
       had grown and died without fully decaying. The outcome was a flora
       of emergent plants growing in saturated peat.
     * Moor. This developed where the peat grew above the reach of the
       land-water which carried the nutrients to the fen. Its development
       was enabled where the fen was watered directly by rainfall. The
       slightly acidic rain washed the hydroxyl ions out of the peat,
       making it more suitable for acid-loving plants, notably Sphagnum
       species. This is exactly the same as bog but that name entered
       English from the Irish language. Moor has a Germanic root and came
       to be applied to this acid peatland as it occurs on hills.
     * Mere, an expanse of shallow, open water. It was more or less static
       but its shallow water was aerated by wind action.
     * Rivers.

   In general, of the three principal soil types found there today, the
   mineral-based silt, resulted from the energetic marine environment of
   the creeks, the clay was deposited in tidal mud-flats and salt-marsh
   while the peat grew in the fen and bog. The peat produces the black
   soils which are directly comparable with the American muck soils.

   This aerial photograph shows Boston at the bottom and the pale silt
   land along the margin of The Wash. The palest fields just inland from
   Boston are covered in plastic to warm the soil early in the season. The
   dark peat land of the fen and the moor of East Fen lies inland from the
   silt while the peat of West Fen lies further inland still, beyond the
   Devensian moraine at Stickney. The pale upland of the Wolds is at the
   top edge.

Management and history

   The Romans constructed the road, the Fen Causeway across the fens to
   join what would later become East Anglia and central England: Denver to
   Peterborough. They also linked Cambridge and Ely but generally, their
   road system avoided The Fens except for minor roads designed for
   extracting the products of the region. These were notably, salt and the
   products of cattle: meat and leather. Sheep were probably raised on the
   higher ground of the townlands and fen islands, then as in the early
   nineteenth century.

   In the past thousand years, the marsh has been found along the coast of
   The Wash, the remaining tidal waters. Moving inland, next there is a
   broad bank of silt deposited until the Bronze Age, on which the early
   post-Roman settlements were made. Inland again is the former fen
   proper. (Compare the sequence of salt-marsh, spit and fen formerly
   found at Back Bay, Boston, Mass.) From these settlements, the silt
   strip is known as The Townland. How far seaward the Roman settlement
   extended is unclear owing to the deposits laid down above them during
   later floods. It is clear that there was some prosperity on the
   Townland, particularly where rivers permitted access to the upland
   beyond the fen. Such places were Wisbech, Spalding and Swineshead, this
   last, replaced a thousand years ago by Boston. All the Townland
   parishes were laid out, elongated as strips, to provide access to the
   products of fen, townland, marsh and sea. On the Fen-edge, parishes are
   similarly elongated to provide access to both upland and fen. The
   townships are therefore often nearer to each other than they are to the
   distant farms in their own parishes.

   For about two hundred years after the English began to settle the
   Townland and the upland of East Anglia and Lincolnshire, there remained
   in the Fens themselves, a relict Celtic peoples The people were known
   as the Gyrwe, which name is likely to come from their word for
   "drovers" (compare Welsh gyrwyr).Gradualy the English Germanics and the
   Celts of the Fens mixed in with each other just like they did across
   the rest of England (apart from Cornwall and Cumbria) although it took
   over two hundred years. The cattle trade persisted well into the modern
   historical period as the means of livelihood in Crowland.

   The earliest monastic settlements, distributed just inside The Fens
   appear to have arisen from the wish of English rulers to subvert the
   traditions of these people as a step towards controlling them.
   Beginning about the middle of the 7th century, the monks progressively
   built churches, monasteries and abbeys. They found themselves only
   moderately safe in the protection of the fens during the time of the
   Danish raids in the ninth and tenth centuries.

The royal forest

   For a period in most of the twelfth century and the early thirteenth
   century, the south Lincolnshire fens were afforested. The area was
   enclosed by a line from Spalding, along the Welland to Deeping, then
   along the Car Dyke to Dowsby and across the fens to the Welland. It was
   disafforested in the early thirteenth century, though there seems to be
   little agreement as to the exact dates or the opening and closure of
   the period. It seems likely that the disafforestation was connected
   with the Magna Carta or one of its early thirteenth century
   re-statements, though it may have been as late as 1240. The Forest will
   have affected the economies of the townships around it and it appears
   that the present Bourne Eau was constructed at the time of the
   disafforestation, as the town seems to have joined in the general
   prosperity by about 1280.

Draining the Fens

   Though some marks of Roman hydraulics survive, and the medieval works
   should not be overlooked, the land started to be drained in earnest
   during the 1630s by the various Adventurers who had contracted with
   King Charles I to do so. The leader of one of these syndicates was the
   Earl of Bedford who employed Cornelius Vermuyden as their engineer. The
   scheme was imposed despite huge opposition from locals who were losing
   their livelihoods in favour of already great landowners. Two cuts were
   made in the Cambridgeshire Fens to join the River Great Ouse to the sea
   at King's Lynn - the Old Bedford River and the New Bedford River, also
   known as the Hundred Foot Drain.

   Both cuts were named after the Fourth Earl of Bedford who, along with
   some "Gentlemen Adventurers" ( venture capitalists), funded the
   construction, which was directed by engineers from the Low Countries,
   and were rewarded with large grants of the resulting farmland.
   Following this initial drainage, the Fens were still extremely
   susceptible to flooding, and so windmills were used to pump water away
   from affected areas.

   However, their success was short-lived. Once drained of water, the peat
   shrank, and the fields lowered further. The more effectively they were
   drained the worse the problem became, and soon the fields were lower
   than the surrounding rivers. By the end of the 17th century, the land
   was under water once again.

   Though the three Bedford levels were, together, the biggest scheme,
   they were not the only ones. Lord Lindsey and his partner, Sir William
   Killigrew had the Lindsey level (see Twenty) inhabited by farmers by
   1638 but the onset of the Civil War permitted the destruction of the
   works which remained to the fenmen's liking until the Black Sluice Act
   of 1765.

   The major part of the draining of the Fens, as seen today, was effected
   in the late 18th and early 19th century, again involving fierce local
   rioting and sabotage of the works. The final success came in the 1820s
   when windmills were replaced with powerful coal-powered steam engines,
   such as Stretham Old Engine, which were themselves replaced with
   diesel-powered pumps and following World War II, the small electrical
   stations that are still used today.

   The dead vegetation of the peat remained un-decayed because it was
   deprived of air (the peat was anaerobic). When it was drained, the
   oxygen of the air reached it and the peat has been slowly oxidizing.
   This and the shrinkage on its initial drying as well as removal of the
   soil by the wind, has meant that much of the Fens lies below high tide
   level. The highest parts of the drained fen now being only a few metres
   above mean sea level, only sizable embankments of the rivers, and
   general flood defences, stop the land from being inundated.
   Nonetheless, these works are now much more effective than they were.
   The question of rising sea level under the influence of global warming
   remains.

Restoring the Fens

   In 2003, a project was initiated to return parts of the Fens to their
   original pre-agricultural state. Traditionally the periodic flooding by
   the North Sea, which renewed the character of the fenlands, was
   characterized as "ravaged by serious inundations of the sea, for
   example, in the years 1178, 1248 (or 1250), 1288, 1322, 1335, 1467,
   1571" (Encyclopaedia Britannica 1911). In the modern approach, a little
   farmland is to be allowed to flood again and turned into nature
   reserves. By introducing fresh water, organizers of the Great Fen
   Project hope to encourage species such as the snipe, lapwing and
   bittern. Endangered species such as the fen violet will be seeded.

Fen settlements

   Many historic cities, towns and villages have grown up in the fens,
   sited chiefly on the few areas of raised ground. These include
     * Ely ("Isle of Eels"), a cathedral city. Ely Cathedral, on a rise of
       ground surrounded by fenlands, is known as the "Ship of the Fens".
     * Chatteris, a market town.
     * March, a market town and administrative centre of the Fenland
       District.
     * Spalding, a market town, administrative centre of South Holland,
       and famed for its annual Flower Parade.
     * Whittlesey, a market town
     * Wisbech ("capital of the fens"), a market town.
     * Peterborough, a cathedral city, is the largest of the many
       settlements along the fen edge. It is sometimes called the "Gateway
       to the Fens".

   Ancient sites include
     * Flag Fen, a bronze age settlement

Setting in fiction

     * The novels The Nine Tailors by Dorothy Sayers, Hereward the Wake by
       Charles Kingsley " The Moon Tunnel" by Jim Kelly and Waterland by
       Graham Swift are located here.

     * Peter F. Hamilton sets a number of his sci-fi novels in this area
       too, notably Mindstar Rising and A Quantum Murder.

     * Hal Foster set a portion of the childhood of Prince Valiant in the
       Fens.

     * Cauliflower Drove is an internet murder mystery set in the Fens.

     * In Northern Lights (novel), by Philip Pullman, the Fens are home to
       the water-dwelling Gyptians, who hide the protagonist, Lyra, in the
       Fens.

     * Barnabas Sackett, patriarch of an American pioneer lineage detailed
       in the Sackett novels by Louis L'Amour, was born and raised in the
       Fens, which are a prominent setting of the first book in the
       series, Sackett's Land.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Fens"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
