   #copyright

The X-Files

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Television

                        The X-Files
        X-Files opening titles from first 8 seasons
   The X-Files opening title screen
         Genre       Science fiction, drama
     Running time    45 min (per episode)
      Creator(s)     Chris Carter
       Starring      David Duchovny
                     Gillian Anderson
                     Robert Patrick
                     Annabeth Gish
                     Mitch Pileggi
   Country of origin Flag of United States  United States
   Original channel  FOX
     Original run    September 10, 1993–
                     May 19, 2002
    No. of episodes  201 (as originally aired)
                     Official website
                       IMDb profile
                      TV.com summary

   The X-Files is an American television series created by Chris Carter.
   The show first aired on FOX on September 10, 1993, and ended after a
   nine-year run on May 19, 2002. The X-Files was one of the network's
   first major hits, and its main characters and slogans ("The Truth Is
   Out There," "Trust No One," "Deny Everything," "I Want to Believe")
   became pop culture touchstones, simultaneously tapping into and
   inspiring a plethora of conspiracy theories, paranoia about the U.S.
   government, and belief in the existence of extraterrestrial life.

   In the series, David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson play two FBI agents,
   Fox Mulder and Dana Scully, who are tasked with investigating the
   titular "X-Files." These cases, marginalized by the FBI, often involve
   paranormal phenomena. Mulder plays the role of the "believer," having
   faith in the existence of aliens and the paranormal, while Scully plays
   the skeptic, initially assigned by her departmental superiors to debunk
   Mulder's unconventional work and contain its profound implications. As
   the show progressed both Mulder and Scully became embroiled in the same
   larger conflicts (termed "the mythology" or " mytharc" by the show's
   creators) and developed a close and ambiguous friendship — which some
   fans, known as " shippers," saw as more than platonic. The X-Files also
   featured many "monster of the week" episodes ranging in tone from
   horror to comedy, in which Mulder and Scully investigated unique,
   stand-alone cases that did not usually have long-term implications.

   The show's popularity peaked in the mid-to-late '90s, even inspiring a
   hit movie in 1998. But in the last two seasons Anderson became the star
   as Duchovny appeared rarely, and new central characters were
   introduced: FBI Agents John Doggett ( Robert Patrick) and Monica Reyes
   ( Annabeth Gish). At the time of its final episode, The X-Files was the
   longest running sci-fi show in American television history, a title
   since lost to Stargate SG-1. The show was declared by TV Guide to be
   the 37th Best TV show of all-time, and the second greatest cult TV show
   of all time, trailing only Star Trek.

Cast of characters

Main cast

   Actor/Actress Character Years On Show
   David Duchovny Special Agent Fox William Mulder 1993 – 2000 - Duchovny
   was a recurring character in Season 8 2000- 2001 and only appeared in
   'William' and 'The Truth' in Season 9 2001- 2002.
   Gillian Anderson Special Agent Dana Katherine Scully M.D. 1993 – 2002
   Mitch Pileggi Assistant Director Walter S. Skinner 1994 – 2002 —
   Pileggi was credited as 'Also Starring' before being added to the main
   credits in the final season
   Robert Patrick Special Agent John Doggett 2000 – 2002
   Annabeth Gish Special Agent Monica Reyes 2001 – 2002 — Gish was
   credited as 'Also Starring' in season 8, before being added to the main
   credits in the final season

Recurring guest cast

   Actor/Actress Character Years On Show
   William B. Davis The Cigarette Smoking Man 1993 – 2000, 2002 — Davis
   was credited as 'Also Starring' from season 3 through to season 7, as
   well as the series finale.
   Nicholas Lea Alex Krycek 1994 – 2001, 2002 — Lea was credited as 'Also
   Starring' from season 5
   Chris Owens Jeffrey Spender 1998 – 1999, 2002 — Owens was credited as
   'Also Starring' He also guest starred as the Young Cigarette Smoking
   Man in 1996 and 1997, and played The Great Mutato in the 1997 episode
   'The Post-Modern Prometheus'
   Mimi Rogers Diana Fowley 1998 – 1999 — Rogers was credited as 'Special
   Guest Star'
   James Pickens, Jr. Assistant/Deputy Director Alvin Kersh 1998 – 2002 —
   Pickens was credited as 'Also Starring' during the final season.
   Cary Elwes Assistant Director Brad Follmer 2001 – 2002 — Elwes was
   credited as 'Also Starring'
   Jerry Hardin Deep Throat 1993 – 1996, 1999, 2000
   Steven Williams X 1994 – 1997, 2002
   Laurie Holden Marita Covarrubias 1996 – 2000, 2002
   Tom Braidwood Melvin Frohike 1994 – 2002
   Dean Haglund Richard Langly 1994 – 2002
   Bruce Harwood John Fitzgerald Byers 1994 – 2002
   Don S. Williams The First Elder 1995 – 1999
   John Neville The Well-Manicured Man 1995 – 1998
   Kirk B.R. Woller Agent Gene Crane 2000 – 2001
   Adam Baldwin Knowle Rohrer 2001 – 2002

Plot and mythology

   Fans commonly divide X-Files stories into two categories: "Mytharc" ("
   mythology") episodes, which concerned the ongoing tale of a
   governmental conspiracy regarding the extraterrestrial, and stand-alone
   episodes (sometimes called "Monster-of-the-Week" or "Freak-of-the-Week"
   episodes), which dealt with unusual creatures and situations relating
   to the paranormal, generally being unrelated to the series mythology.
   Several installments also explored the relationship between Mulder and
   Scully, while some episodes focused on popular supporting characters
   such as Walter Skinner or the Lone Gunmen.

   Below is a list of episodes that concern the mythology of The X-Files
   in broadcast order. Some fans have even gone so far as to write up the
   entire storyline of the show, including all important dates.
     * Season 1: Pilot, Deep Throat, Conduit, Fallen Angel, E.B.E., The
       Erlenmeyer Flask
     * Season 2: Little Green Men, Sleepless, Duane Barry, Ascension, One
       Breath, Red Museum, Colony, End Game, Anasazi
     * Season 3: The Blessing Way, Paper Clip, Nisei, 731, Piper Maru,
       Apocrypha, Avatar, Wetwired, Talitha Cumi
     * Season 4: Herrenvolk, Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man, Tunguska,
       Terma, Memento Mori, Tempus Fugit, Max, Zero Sum, Demons,
       Gethsemane
     * Season 5: Redux, Redux II, Christmas Carol, Emily, Patient X, The
       Red and the Black, The End (season 5 finale, continued by Fight the
       Future movie...)
     * X Files: Fight the Future
     * Season 6: The Beginning, S.R. 819, Two Fathers, One Son, Biogenesis
     * Season 7: The Sixth Extinction, The Sixth Extinction II: Amor Fati,
       Sein und Zeit, Closure, En Ami, Requiem
     * Season 8: Within, Without, Per Manum, This is Not Happening,
       Deadalive, Three Words, Vienen, Essence, Existence
     * Season 9: Nothing Important Happened Today, Nothing Important
       Happened Today II, Trust No 1, Provenance, Providence, William, The
       Truth

   Note: The X-Files: The Game fits into the mythology, taking place
   somewhere near the end of the third season. The episodes Renascence,
   Resonance, and Reckoning from the game The X-Files: Resist or Serve fit
   into the mythology, having an unknown placement somewhere in the
   seventh season.

Legacy

   The X-Files directly inspired numerous other TV series, including
   Strange World, Burning Zone, Special Unit 2, Mysterious Ways,
   Carnivàle, Dark Skies, The Visitor, Freaky Links, The 4400, Lost, Psi
   Factor: Chronicles of the Paranormal, Futurama and Supernatural.

   The influence can also be seen on other levels: television series such
   as Alias have developed a complex mythology that brings to mind the
   "mytharc" of The X-Files. In addition, many procedural dramas feature a
   Mulder-esque lead with a supervisor similar to Skinner or Kersh. Some
   of these procedurals, such as NCIS, also feature a quirky technogeek
   similar to the Lone Gunmen characters. Other shows have been influenced
   by the tone and mood of The X-Files, e.g., Buffy the Vampire Slayer,
   which drew from the mood and coloring of The X-Files, as well as from
   its occasional blend of horror and humor.

   In 1997, The X-Files was lampooned on an episode of The Simpsons
   entitled " The Springfield Files". The episode revolved around a
   strange occurrence in Springfield, with Mulder and Scully coming to
   investigate and working closely with Homer Simpson. Duchovny and
   Anderson voiced their respective characters in the episode.

Influences

Television

   Chris Carter listed television series Alfred Hitchcock Presents, The
   Twilight Zone, Night Gallery, Tales from the Darkside and especially
   Kolchak: The Night Stalker as his major influences for the show. Actor
   Darren McGavin who played Carl Kolchak in Kolchak: The Night Stalker
   appeared in two episodes of The X-Files as Agent Arthur Dales, a
   character described as the "father of the X-Files." Carter also
   mentioned that the relationship between Mulder and Scully (platonic but
   with some sexual tension) was influenced by the chemistry between John
   Steed ( Patrick Macnee) and Mrs. Emma Peel ( Diana Rigg) in the 1960s
   British spy TV program The Avengers. The early '90s cult hit Twin Peaks
   is also seen as a major influence on the show's dark atmosphere and its
   often surreal blend of drama and irony. David Duchovny had appeared as
   a cross-dressing DEA agent in Twin Peaks.

Film

   Several feature films have also influenced The X-Files. The producers
   have cited All the President's Men, Three Days of the Condor, Close
   Encounters of the Third Kind, Raiders of the Lost Ark, The Thing, The
   Boys from Brazil, The Silence of the Lambs, and JFK as influences on
   the series. Gangster movies such as the Godfather trilogy are also
   frequently referenced in the show's conspiracy plotlines, particularly
   concerning the Syndicate. A scene at the end of the episode Redux II
   (5.02), for instance, directly mirrors the famous baptism montage at
   the end of The Godfather.

Awards

   Over the course of its nine seasons, the show was nominated for 141
   awards, winning a total of 61 individual awards from 24 different
   agencies, including the Emmys, the Golden Globes, the Environmental
   Media Awards, and the Screen Actors Guild Awards. The X-Files also won
   a Peabody Award in 1996, during its third season.

   The show earned a total of 16 Emmys; two for acting, one for writing,
   and 13 for various technical categories. In September 1994, The X-Files
   won its first award, the Emmy for Outstanding Individual Achievement in
   Graphic Design and Title Sequences.

   Peter Boyle later won the Emmy for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama
   Series for his portrayal of the title character in the third-season
   episode " Clyde Bruckman's Final Repose". In the same year, Darin
   Morgan won the Emmy for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Writing
   for a Drama Series for the same episode. "Clyde Bruckman's Final
   Repose" was one of four highly-acclaimed episodes Morgan wrote during
   his short time on the show's writing staff. In 1997, Gillian Anderson
   won the Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series award for her
   portrayal of Agent Dana Scully.

   Throughout its run, The X-Files also won Emmy awards in a number of
   technical categories: Graphic Design and Title Sequences,
   Cinematography, Sound Editing and Mixing, Art Direction, Single Camera
   Picture Editing, Makeup, and Special Visual Effects.

History

Seasons 1 – 3

   Two of the most highly-regarded writer/producers were Glen Morgan and
   James Wong, whose contributions to the first two seasons, such as the
   first season episode "Beyond The Sea," were exceptionally popular and
   influential. They also returned for the first half of the fourth
   season. Prior to coming to The X-Files, they had worked extensively
   with David Nutter, Rob Bowman, and Kim Manners on a number of shows
   produced in Canada for Stephen J. Cannell. The duo also had an
   important role in hiring John Bartley, the cinematographer who gave the
   show its early dark atmospheric look, and who won an Emmy Award for his
   work on the show.

   In the first two seasons, Morgan and Wong introduced some popular
   secondary characters, such as The Lone Gunmen, the Scully family, and
   FBI Assistant Director Walter Skinner. Their first episode for the show
   was "Squeeze", featuring the elastic Eugene Victor Tooms. This episode
   became the template for the popular "Monster-of-the-Week" episodes that
   became a mainstay of the series over the next nine years.

   They also helped to establish the show's fledgling story arc, which was
   initially established as a government plot to cover up anything
   pertaining to the existence of extraterrestrial life, and Mulder's
   attempts to discover the fate of his sister, who was abducted some
   years previously. As the show went into its second and third seasons,
   it confirmed the existence of extraterrestrial life within the show and
   suggested that a shadowy sub-governmental group known as The Syndicate
   — one of the members being the Cigarette Smoking Man — were in
   co-operation with these aliens, in order to allow them to colonize
   Earth, which would be achieved via use of the so-called Black Oil.

Seasons 4 – 6

   Over the course of the series, the show built upon the storyline that
   grew in complexity and prominence as the show progressed. The
   Syndicate's co-operation with the colonisers was proven to be a ploy,
   as they were secretly attempting to develop a vaccine to the Black Oil,
   which was shown to be an agent which would allow for the transportation
   of alien beings, and which would be spread through bees come the time
   for colonization. However, another alien faction was proven to exist,
   and these rebels opposed the colonists, and hence the Syndicate for
   their co-operation with them. Consequently, the rebels destroyed the
   Syndicate. In addition to this, there were a few turns of events
   involving the ever-deepening bond between Mulder and Scully, including
   her contracting cancer, and the interaction between the two characters.
   Whether they "should" or "should not" consummate their relationship was
   a matter of immense debate among the fan community for several years,
   and is still subject to scrutiny, since even after abundant hints,
   Carter refuses to substantiate whether the two characters ever had
   sexual intercourse. Initially filmed in Vancouver, Canada, the show was
   later relocated to L.A. in 1998, at the start of the sixth season.

The X-Files: Fight the Future

   In 1998 the series produced a motion picture, The X-Files (also known
   as The X Files: Fight the Future). It was intended as a continuation of
   the season five finale " The End" (5x20), but was also meant to stand
   on its own. The season six opener " The Beginning" picked up where the
   movie left off.

Seasons 7 – 9

   The final three seasons were a time of closure for The X-Files. Many
   characters within the show were written out, including the Cigarette
   Smoking Man and Mulder's mother, and several plot threads were
   resolved, including the fate of Mulder's sister, a long running plot
   device within the show. Following a contract dispute with Fox, David
   Duchovny quit the show after the seventh season. . This contributed to
   uncertainties over the likelihood of an eighth season. To accommodate
   for this, Mulder was abducted at the end of the seventh season. With
   Duchovny's involvement reduced (and in anticipation of Anderson's
   possible absence in the future), the show's eighth season introduced
   two new X-Files agents, John Doggett and Monica Reyes (played by Robert
   Patrick and Annabeth Gish).

   It was Chris Carter's belief that the series could continue for another
   ten years with new leads. This was not to be the case, however, as over
   the course of the final two seasons, Doggett and Reyes did not provide
   the ratings boost Chris Carter had hoped.

   The show completed its ninth and final season with the two-hour episode
   "The Truth", which first aired on May 19, 2002, finishing third in its
   timeslot in the Nielsen ratings. The show ceased production at the end
   of the ninth season — on a cliffhanger, though Carter knew that this
   would be the final episode.

Future of the show

   Plans for another movie are announced periodically but have yet to come
   to fruition. While Carter, Duchovny and Anderson have all expressed
   their desire for involvement, there is still no script and no official
   shooting schedule. According to Bowman, director of the first film, and
   producer Frank Spotnitz, the plot for a second film would most likely
   be a stand-alone story, rather than focus on the alien conspiracy
   storylines.

   In January of 2005, Duchovny confirmed that a sequel was in the works
   and that it would be a "stand-alone horror film." In an article in
   Parade (magazine) published on August 6, 2006, David Duchovny said he
   still believed that there would be a sequel to the first X-Files movie,
   Fight the Future. "We're all signed on," he said of the movie. "I think
   it could work very well as a sequel, an authentic franchise that will
   hold up—much more so than Mission: Impossible." Back in early 2004,
   Duchovny stated his belief that the sequel would start shooting in 'the
   next year or so'.

   In a posting on her website, Gillian Anderson has also stated herself
   that she is very much willing to take part in the project: "And as far
   as the X-F movie? I have no f****** clue. I think there's still a law
   suit, as far as I know the script has not been written, and as much as
   we all want it to take place as soon as possible, AND YES THAT INCLUDES
   ME, AND ALWAYS HAS, SO STOP WITH THE NONSENSE! It is out of my hands.
   Completely. Write to Fox guys, tell them to make it happen!"

Taglines

   The phrase "The Truth is Out There" is usually shown on screen at the
   end of the opening credits sequence. However, over the course of the
   series, this phrase would occasionally be replaced with something else,
   especially for "mytharc" episodes.
     * Trust No One — "The Erlenmeyer Flask"
     * Deny Everything — "Ascension"
     * éí 'aaníígÓÓ 'áhoot'é — "Anasazi" ("The truth is far from here" in
       Navajo)
     * Apology is Policy — "731"
     * Everything Dies — "Herrenvolk"
     * Deceive Inveigle Obfuscate — "Teliko"
     * E pur si muove — "Terma" ("And still it moves" in Italian -
       attributed to Galileo)
     * Believe the Lie — "Gethsemane"
     * All Lies Lead to the Truth — "Redux"
     * Resist or Serve — "The Red and the Black"
     * The End — "The End"
     * Die Wahrheit ist irgendwo da draußen — "Triangle" ("The truth is
       out there somewhere" in German)
     * In the Big Inning — "The Unnatural" (a baseball-themed episode)
     * Amor Fati — "Sixth Extinction II: Amor Fati" ("Love of fate" in
       Latin)
     * Believe to Understand — "Closure"
     * Nothing Important Happened Today — "Nothing Important Happened
       Today II"
     * erehT tuO si hturT ehT — "4D" ("The Truth is Out There" backwards)
     * They're Watching — "Trust No 1"
     * Dio ti ama — "Improbable" ("God loves you" in Italian)

Merchandise

Music

   Mark Snow released music from the first three seasons of The X-Files on
   the album The Truth and the Light - Music from the X-Files. He also
   released the soundtrack of The X-Files movie. Snow composed the theme
   song and he released it with other songs from and inspired by the show
   on the 1996 soundtrack Songs in the Key of X.

DVD releases

Complete season sets


   Season Episodes Originally aired           DVD release date            DVD
                                                                         cover
                                        Region 1           Region 2
     1       24      1993 – 1994       May 9, 2000     November 6, 2000
     2       25      1994 – 1995    November 28, 2000   April 30, 2001
     3       24      1995 – 1996       May 8, 2001    November 26, 2001
     4       24      1996 – 1997    November 13, 2001   April 22, 2002
     5       20      1997 – 1998      May 14, 2002     October 14, 2002
     6       22      1998 – 1999    November 5, 2002    March 17, 2003
     7       22      1999 – 2000      May 13, 2003    September 22, 2003
     8       21      2000 – 2001    November 4, 2003    March 14, 2004
     9       19      2001 – 2002      May 11, 2004       June 7, 2004

Mythology sets

   These DVD sets contain the episodes related to the conspiracy
   mythology, and avoids the stand-alone episodes sometimes known as
   "monster-of-the-week." Note that this is a slightly shorter list of
   episodes than can be found in the Plot and Mythology section.

   The X-Files Mythology Vol. 1 - Abduction
     * UPC: 024543169307
     * Release Date: 2005- 06-07
     * Episodes: Pilot, Deep Throat, Fallen Angel, EBE, The Erlenmeyer
       Flask, Little Green Men, Duane Barry, Ascension, One Breath, Red
       Museum, Colony, End Game, Anasazi, The Blessing Way, Paper Clip

   The X-Files Mythology Vol. 2 - Black Oil
     * UPC: 024543190714
     * Release Date: 2005- 08-02
     * Episodes: Nisei, 731, Piper Maru, Apocrypha, Talitha Cumi,
       Herrenvolk, Tunguska, Terma, Memento Mori, Tempus Fugit, Max,
       Zero-Sum, Gethsemane, Redux, Redux II

   The X-Files Mythology Vol. 3 - Colonization
     * UPC: 024543191230
     * Release Date: 2005- 09-27
     * Episodes: Patient X, The Red and the Black, The End, The Beginning,
       S.R. 819, Two Fathers, One Son, Biogenesis, The Sixth Extinction,
       The Sixth Extinction II: Amor Fati, Sein und Zeit, Closure, En Ami,
       Requiem, Within, Without

   The X-Files Mythology, Vol. 4 - Super Soldiers
     * UPC: 024543208303
     * Release Date: 2005- 11-22
     * Episodes: Per Manum, This Is Not Happening, Deadalive, Three Words,
       Vienen, Essence, Existence, Nothing Important Happened Today,
       Nothing Important Happened Today II, Trust No 1, Provenance,
       Providence, William, The Truth (two hour finale)

VHS releases

   Before the DVD full season releases, The X-Files had its episodes
   released in VHS season sets in some parts of the world, as well as
   selected single episodes put together. There was also some other
   material released on VHS, such as The X Files - Forensic Evidence Box
   and the X Files Trivia Game.

"Wave" sets

   The original VHS release of The X-Files in North America consisted of
   selected episodes from each of the first four seasons, which were
   released on a staggered basis beginning in 1996.

   Each "wave" was three VHS tapes, each containing two episodes, for a
   total of six episodes per wave and two waves per season (for example,
   the home video release of Wave 1 drew from the first half of the first
   season: Pilot/Deep Throat, Conduit/Ice and Fallen Angel/Eve). Each wave
   was also available in a boxed set. Ultimately 12 episodes
   (approximately half the total number aired) were selected by Chris
   Carter to represent each season, including nearly all "mythology arc"
   episodes and also standout "monsters of the week". Carter would briefly
   introduce each episode on the tape with an explanation of why it was
   chosen and anecdotes from the set. These same clips were later included
   on The X-Files full season DVDs. Wave 8 covering the last part of the
   fourth season was the last to be released. VHS "wave" tapes were not
   released for the fifth and later seasons, so there are no Carter
   "interviews" for selected episodes included on those DVDs.

Video games

   The X-Files has inspired two video games. In 1998, The X-Files: The
   Game was released for the PC and Macintosh and a year later for the
   PlayStation. This game is set somewhere within the timeline of the
   second or third season and follows an Agent Craig Willmore in his
   search for the missing Mulder and Scully.

   In 2000, Fox Interactive released The X-Files: Unrestricted Access for
   the PC and Mac which allowed users access to all the case files.

   Then, in 2004, The X-Files: Resist or Serve was released for the
   PlayStation 2. This game is an original story set somewhere in season
   seven and allows the player control of both Mulder and Scully. Both
   games feature acting and voice work from several members of the series'
   cast.

Relationship to other Ten Thirteen Productions shows

   Chris Carter, creator of The X-Files, founded Ten Thirteen Productions,
   which produced his other science fiction shows.

Millennium

     * In the season 1 " Millennium" episode "Lamentation", Frank Black
       visits the FBI Academy in Quantico. In the background of one shot,
       two agents resembling Mulder and Scully are seen walking down a
       staircase. In reality, David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson's photo
       doubles were intentionally included in the episode as an
       inside-joke.
     * In the season 2 "Millennium" episode "Jose Chung's Doomsday
       Defense" the fictional novelist Jose Chung appears, who was first
       seen in the season 3 "The X-Files" episode called "Jose Chung's
       From Outer Space".
     * Millennium's second season episode "Somehow, Satan Got Behind Me"
       has a scene of two FBI-agents filming a fake alien autopsy. These
       agents strongly resemble Mulder and Scully.
     * In Millennium's second season's final episode "The Time is Now"
       Peter Watts finds a Morley cigarette stub. Morley is a fictional
       cigarette brand also smoked by "The X-Files" character Cigarette
       Smoking Man.
     * When "Millennium" character Emma Hollis walks through a Vancouver
       apartment building in the third season's episode "Human Essence",
       one can hear coming from a resident's television some dialogue and
       Scully's voice accompanied by the soundtrack from the episode "Kill
       Switch" from The X-Files's fifth season.
     * Actor David Fredericks plays J. Edgar Hoover in the Season 3
       "Millennium" episode "Matryoshka", reprising his role from "The
       X-Files" episodes "Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man" and
       "Travelers".
     * Lance Henriksen and Brittany Tiplady make their final appearances
       as "Millennium" characters Frank & Jordan Black in the Season 7
       "X-Files" episode "Millennium".

Harsh Realm

     * In the season 7 X-Files episode "Sein Und Zeit", one of the
       characters is watching Harsh Realm on his TV. He remarks, "I don't
       know what this is but it's fantastic."

The Lone Gunmen

   The key relationship of this show to The X-Files is its starring role
   of John Fitzgerald Byers, Richard "Ringo" Langley and Melvin Frohike;
   the " Lone Gunmen" of the eponymous show. Due to it being set within
   the same "universe" as The X-Files, the show also occasionally featured
   characters from The X-Files, such as Walter Skinner in TLG's "The Lying
   Game" episode; Fox Mulder and Morris Fletcher in The Lone Gunmen
   episode "All About Yves," the show's finale.

   With the cancellation of The Lone Gunmen series before a resolution to
   this cliffhanger could be produced, The X-Files episode "Jump the
   Shark" — a reference to the television term — served as an epitaph to
   the show. It featured the Lone Gunmen, Jimmy Bond, Yves Adele Harlow,
   Kimmy the Geek, plus Walter Skinner and Morris Fletcher, two "X-Files"
   characters also featured on The Lone Gunmen.

Broadcast history

   The first season of The X-Files premiered on September 10, 1993 on FOX.
   For the first few years of its run, its ratings steadily increased,
   reaching its zenith in terms of ratings by its fifth season.. Season
   4's "Leonard Betts" which aired on FOX after the Super Bowl in 1997,
   holds the record for the highest rated episode.

   Approximately a year later, it started showing in the United Kingdom
   upon the terrestrial channel BBC2, airing at 21:00. Since then, it has
   expanded into other countries across the world, either being dubbed or
   subtitled to accommodate for foreign language viewers. A short time
   after the United Kingdom started airing The X-Files, Channel 10
   acquired to the rights to broadcast it on Australian television, which
   it did until the finale in 2002.

Miscellanea

     * The controversial and violent episode "Home", which featured a
       story about a family that has been inbred to almost proto-human
       levels of development, was kept out of syndication for three years
       after its initial airing.
     * Creator Chris Carter's birthday is October 13, thus the frequent
       references to the number 1013 on the show and the reason Fox
       Mulder's birthday is also October 13. It is also the name of
       Carter's production company, Ten Thirteen Productions. The number
       1121, and especially the time 11:21 PM, also appears regularly on
       The X-Files, particularly in the early seasons. This is a reference
       by Chris Carter to his wife Dori's birthday, November 21.
     * Quentin Tarantino was offered the chance to direct an episode of
       The X-Files but was ultimately not allowed to because he was not a
       member of the DGA.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_X-Files"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
