   #copyright

The Oz books

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Novels

   The Oz books form a book series that begins with The Wonderful Wizard
   of Oz, and that relates the "history" of the Land of Oz. Oz was
   originally created by author L. Frank Baum, who went on to write
   fourteen Oz books. Although most of the Oz books are strictly
   adventures, Baum—as well as many later Oz authors—styled themselves as
   "Royal Historians" of Oz. Later authors wrote 26 other "official" books
   after Baum's death. Many other authors have put their own twists on Oz,
   notably Gregory Maguire's revisionist Wicked.

Background

   The first fourteen books by the original author, L. Frank Baum, another
   nineteen by Ruth Plumly Thompson, and another seven books by various
   other authors comprise the "Famous Forty", which is considered the
   classic original series (though many inconsistencies make it difficult
   to call it canonical). Most of the books in the "Famous Forty" were
   published by Reilly and Britton (later Reilly and Lee).

   Other books were printed later, by different publishing houses. As the
   earlier works have fallen out of copyright into the public domain
   (including all of L. Frank Baum's titles), numerous other books have
   been written in the series by many authors and publishers, some of whom
   continue to publish new works today.

   In fact, so many additional Oz books have been written, that merely
   attempting to document all such books is a weighty endeavor in and of
   itself (see: External links). Some small publishers have even
   specialised in publishing Oz pastiches, of which the most commercial
   are probably Books of Wonder, Hungry Tiger Press, and The International
   Wizard of Oz Club—and perhaps the graphic novels of Eric Shanower.
   There are also alternative series of Oz books, such as the sequels
   written in Russian by Alexander M. Volkov, or the books of Frank Baum's
   great-grandson, Roger S. Baum. Then there are the "revisionist" books
   of Gregory Maguire. The following list therefore contains Oz books
   written by the authors of the first "Famous Forty" (including those
   published in later years). Others, including Volkov and Maguire's are
   listed below.

List of "canonical" Oz books ("The Famous Forty")

By L. Frank Baum

   Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
   The original books by L. Frank Baum
   Cover Order Title Illustrator Year Publisher
   1 The Wonderful Wizard of Oz W. W. Denslow 1900 George M. Hill
   Dorothy gets swept into the Land of Oz by a cyclone. She meets a living
   Scarecrow, a man made entirely of tin, and a Cowardly Lion while trying
   to get to the Emerald City to see the great Wizard. Also reprinted by
   various publishers under the names The New Wizard of Oz and The Wizard
   of Oz with occasional minor changes in the text.
   2 The Marvelous Land of Oz John R. Neill 1904 Reilly & Britton
   A little boy, Tip, escapes from his evil guardian, the witch Mombi,
   with the help of a walking wooden figure with a jack-o'-lantern head
   named Jack Pumpkinhead (brought to life with the magic Powder of Life
   Tip stole from Mombi), as well as a living Sawhorse (created from the
   same powder.) Tip ends up on an adventure with the Scarecrow and Tin
   Woodsman. Also reprinted as The Land of Oz.
   3 Ozma of Oz John R. Neill 1907 Reilly & Britton
   While traveling to Australia with her Uncle Henry, little Dorothy is
   swept overboard with a hen named Billina. They land in Ev, a country
   across the desert from Oz, and, together with new-found mechanical
   friend, Tik-Tok, they must save Ev's royal family from the evil Nome
   King. With Princess Ozma's help, they finally return to Oz.
   4 Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz John R. Neill 1908 Reilly & Britton
   On her way back from Australia, Dorothy visits her cousin, Zeb, in
   California. They are soon swallowed up by an earthquake, along with
   Zeb's horse Jim and Dorothy's cat Eureka. The group soon meets up with
   the Wizard and all travel underground back to Oz.
   5 The Road to Oz John R. Neill 1909 Reilly & Britton
   Dorothy meets the Shaggy Man, and while trying to find the road to
   Butterfield, they get lost on an enchanted road. As they travel they
   meet the rainbow's daughter, Polychrome, and a little boy, Button
   Bright. They have all sorts of strange adventures on the way to Oz.
   6 The Emerald City of Oz John R. Neill 1910 Reilly & Britton
   Dorothy Gale and her Uncle Henry and Aunt Em come to live in Oz
   permanently. While they tour through the Quadling Country, the Nome
   King is tunneling beneath the desert to invade Oz.
   7 The Patchwork Girl of Oz John R. Neill 1913 Reilly & Britton
   A Munchkin boy named Ojo must find a cure to free his Unc Nunkie from a
   magical spell that has turned him into a statue. With the help of
   Scraps, a living Patchwork Girl, Ojo journeys through Oz in order to
   save his uncle.
   8 Tik-Tok of Oz John R. Neill 1914 Reilly & Britton
   Betsy Bobbin, a girl from Oklahoma is shipwrecked with her mule, Hank,
   in the Rose Kingdom. She meets the Shaggy Man there and the two try to
   rescue the Shaggy Man's brother from the Nome King. This book is partly
   based upon Baum's stage musical, The Tik-Tok Man of Oz, which was in
   turn based on Ozma of Oz.
   9 The Scarecrow of Oz John R. Neill 1915 Reilly & Britton
   Cap'n Bill and Trot journey to Oz and, with the help of the Scarecrow,
   overthrow the cruel King Krewl of Jinxland. Cap'n Bill and Trot had
   previously appeared in two other novels by Baum, The Sea Fairies and
   Sky Island. Based in part upon the 1914 silent film, His Majesty, the
   Scarecrow of Oz.
   10 Rinkitink in Oz John R. Neill 1916 Reilly & Britton
   Prince Inga of Pingaree and King Rinkitink and their companions have
   adventures that lead to the land of the Nomes and, eventually, Oz. This
   book only ends up in Oz at the end, because Baum originally wrote it as
   a non-Oz book, entitled King Rinkitink, and only rewrote it later.
   11 The Lost Princess of Oz John R. Neill 1917 Reilly & Britton
   Concerning the disappearance of Princess Ozma, the ruler of Oz. When
   she is discovered missing, four search parties are sent out, one for
   each of Oz's four countries. Most of the book covers Dorothy and the
   Wizard's efforts to find her. Meanwhile, Cayke the Cookie Cook
   discovers that her magic dishpan (on which she bakes her famous
   cookies) has been stolen. Along with the Frogman, they leave their
   mountain in the Winkie Country to find the pan.
   12 The Tin Woodman of Oz John R. Neill 1918 Reilly & Britton
   The Tin Woodman, Nick Chopper, is unexpectedly reunited with his
   Munchkin sweetheart Nimmie Amee from the days when he was flesh and
   blood. Along the way, Nick discovers a fellow tin man, Captain Fyter,
   as well as a Frankenstein-like creature made from their combined parts.
   13 The Magic of Oz John R. Neill 1919 Reilly & Lee
   Ruggedo, former Nome King, tries to conquer Oz again with the help of a
   Munchkin boy, Kiki Aru. In the meanwhile, it is also Ozma's birthday,
   and all of Oz's citizens are searching for the most unique present for
   the little princess. This was the last Oz book published while Baum was
   alive.
   14 Glinda of Oz John R. Neill 1920 Reilly & Lee
   Dorothy, Ozma and Glinda try to stop a war in the Gillikin Country.
   This was Baum's last Oz book, and was published posthumously. Most
   critics agree this is Baum's darkest Oz book, most likely due to his
   failing health.

By Ruth Plumly Thompson

   Thompson's style was markedly different from Baum's. Her tales harkened
   back to more traditional fairytales. She often included a small
   kingdom, a prince or princess who saves his or her kingdom and regains
   the throne or saves Oz from invasion. Thompson even respelled Baum's
   respelling " Nome" as the more traditional " Gnome". All in all
   Thompson wrote 19 Oz books, five more than Baum.
   By Ruth Plumly Thompson
   Cover Order Title Illustrator Year Publisher
   15 The Royal Book of Oz John R. Neill 1921 Reilly & Lee
   The Scarecrow, going on a quest to find his family tree, slides down a
   magic bean-pole and discovers he is actually the Emperor of the
   mysterious underground Silver Islands. When Dorothy discovers him
   missing, she sets out to find him, meeting the knight, Sir Hokus of
   Pokes along the way. Although Baum was credited as the author, it was
   written entirely by Thompson.
   16 Kabumpo in Oz John R. Neill 1922 Reilly & Lee
   During Prince Pompadore of Pumperdink's birthday celebration a magic
   scroll is found inside his birthday cake. It warns him that if the he
   doesn't wed a "proper princess" within seven days, his entire kingdom
   will disappear. The prince, along with the old, wise elephant Kabumpo,
   the Elegant Elephant, set off on an adventure to the Emerald City and
   along the way meet up with a living wooden doll, Peg Amy and Wag, a
   giant rabbit. Meanwhile Rugeddo the Gnome King (Thompson "corrected"
   Baum's "Nome") turns himself into a giant while tunneling under the
   Emerald City, and gets Ozma's palace stuck on his crown, and runs off
   with it.
   17 The Cowardly Lion of Oz John R. Neill 1923 Reilly & Lee
   The Cowardly Lion decides that the courage the Wizard gave him is all
   used up. He is told the best way to get courage is to eat a courageous
   man. He sets out on a journey to do this as fast as possible, since he
   does not like to harm anyone.
   18 Grampa in Oz John R. Neill 1924 Reilly & Lee
   Prince Tatters of Ragbag, and Grampa, a former soldier set out to
   search for King Fumbo's lost head and a fortune to save the kingdom.
   Meanwhile, in Perhaps City in the Maybe Mountains the Princess Pretty
   Good disappears after the prophet Abrog forsees her marrying a monster
   if she does not marry in four days.
   19 The Lost King of Oz John R. Neill 1925 Reilly & Lee
   Old Mombi (from The Land of Oz) is now a cook in the land of Kimbaloo,
   and one day comes across Pajuka, the former prime minister of Oz, who
   she enchanted into a goose years before. She sets out to find Pastoria,
   the king of Oz, who she enchanted years before. Meanwhile, Dorothy is
   accidentally transported to Hollywood. where she meets Humpy, a live
   stunt dummy, who she brings back to Oz.
   20 The Hungry Tiger of Oz John R. Neill 1926 Reilly & Lee
   The Hungry Tiger (first seen in Ozma of Oz) is transported to Rash, the
   Red Kingdom in Ev, where is made guard of the prison, where he
   discovers Betsy Bobbin, Carter Green, the Vegetable Man, and the
   Scarlet Prince Reddy of Rash as prisoners. They escape, and have many
   adventures on the way back to Oz.
   21 The Gnome King of Oz John R. Neill 1927 Reilly & Lee
   Peter, an American boy, finds his way to the Island of Ruggedo, the
   wicked Gnome King. The two escape to Oz, which the Gnome King plans to
   conquer. Meanwhile Scraps, the Patchwork Girl is kidnapped by the
   Quilties and made their queen.
   22 The Giant Horse of Oz John R. Neill 1928 Reilly & Lee
   Many years ago, before Dorothy came to Oz, the royal family of the
   Munchkins were kidnapped and imprisoned on the mysterious Ozure Islands
   by the witch Mombi. Quiberon, an evil monster created by Mombi, guards
   them, but now wants a mortal maiden. Prince Philadore of the Ozure
   Islands sets out to save them, and meets Tattypoo, the Good Witch of
   the North (Not seen since a cameo in The Road of Oz).
   23 Jack Pumpkinhead of Oz John R. Neill 1929 Reilly & Lee
   Remembering his previous visit to Oz, Peter (from The Gnome King of Oz)
   finds himself in Jack Pumpkinhead's yard. The two set off for the
   Emerald City, but take a wrong turn and end up in the Quadling Country,
   where they have many adventures.
   24 The Yellow Knight of Oz John R. Neill 1930 Reilly & Lee
   Sir Hokus of Pokes grows bored with life in the Emerald City, and he
   and the Comfortable Camel set out for some adventure. Meanwhile a boy
   named Speedy blasts his way to Oz in a homemade rocket ship, where he
   finds himself in the underground kingdom of Subterranea.
   25 Pirates in Oz John R. Neill 1931 Reilly & Lee
   Peter returns to Oz for a third time, this time with pirates on the
   Nonestic Ocean (which surrounds the continent Oz is on). Meanwhile, Old
   Ruggedo, the Gnome King is back. He had been hit with a Silence Stone
   at the end of The Gnome King of Oz, and decides to answer an
   advertisement for king of the Land of Menankypoo.
   26 The Purple Prince of Oz John R. Neill 1932 Reilly & Lee
   While visiting the neighboring kingdom of Pumperdink, Prince Randy of
   the Purple Mountains criticizes the king's grapes, claiming they are
   sour. Randy is sentenced to be "dipped", but Kabumpo, the Elegant
   Elephant makes him his attendant instead. Later, the royal family
   disappears and Randy and Kabumpo must save the day.
   27 Ojo in Oz John R. Neill 1933 Reilly & Lee
   Ojo (from The Patchwork Girl of Oz) is captured by gypsies and escapes
   with fellow captive Realbad, the leader of a group of bandits. Together
   they discover X-Pando, the flexible man, free Crystal City from the
   Blue Dragon, visit Unicorners where Unicorns come from, and visit
   Dicksey Land, as well as many other strange lands.
   28 Speedy in Oz John R. Neill 1934 Reilly & Lee
   Speedy (from The Yellow Knight of Oz) returns for another adventure.
   While inspecting a dinosaur skeleton, Speedy is blown by a geyser into
   the air. The skeleton comes magically to life and becomes Terrybubble,
   a live (although fleshless) dinosaur. Terrybubble and Speedy land on
   Umbrella island, a magic floating island, which has been captured by a
   giant.
   29 The Wishing Horse of Oz John R. Neill 1935 Reilly & Lee
   This Oz mystery starts in Skampavia where King Skamperoo wishes for a
   horse using enchanted emerald necklaces. When Chalk, the Wishing Horse
   of Oz falls from the sky, Skamperoo decides the emeralds must be from
   the Emerald City, and decides to conquer all of Oz.
   30 Captain Salt in Oz John R. Neill 1936 Reilly & Lee
   Captain Salt (from Pirates in Oz) sails the Nonestic Ocean and
   discovers Ozamaland, a legendary land of flying animals, as well as the
   famous White City of Om as well as many other places.
   31 Handy Mandy in Oz John R. Neill 1937 Reilly & Lee
   Mandy from Mt. Mern is a Mernite, a race of seven-handed people. One
   day, while trying to gather her goats the rock she is standing on is
   blown into the air and into Oz. She lands in Keretaria in the Munchkin
   Country and meets Nox the white Royal Ox. This is also the last
   appearance of Ruggedo, the Gnome King.
   32 The Silver Princess in Oz John R. Neill 1938 Reilly & Lee
   King Randy of Regalia sets off for adventure with his old friend, the
   Elegant Elephant Kabumpo set off to visit their friend Jinnicky the Red
   Jinn in Ev. Before long, they meet Planetty, the lovely Princess from
   Anuther Planet and her fire-breathing Thundercolt, Thun and set off on
   more adventures.
   33 Ozoplaning with the Wizard of Oz John R. Neill 1939 Reilly & Lee
   The Wizard decides to create ozoplanes for his friends which can fly
   into the stratosphere. The Wizard, Dorothy, the Cowardly Lion and the
   Scarecrow take one ozoplane, called the Ozpril, and go to the Red Top
   Mountains. The other group: Tin Woodman, Jellia Jamb and the Soldier
   with the Green Whiskers take the Oztober to the sky city of
   Stratovania. The phrase "The Wizard of Oz" was included in the title to
   coincide with the 1939 release of the film The Wizard of Oz.

By other writers

   When Thompson retired in 1939 longtime Oz illustrator John R. Neill
   took over the series and wrote three more of the "Famous Forty".
   Neill's vision of Oz is more manic than Thompson or Baum's. Houses
   often get up and do battle, and everything can be alive. His entries
   take Oz's colour scheme (blue for Munchkin Country, red for Quadling
   Country, etc.) to an extreme, extending it to sky and skin colors.

   Jack Snow was a Baum scholar, and even offered to take over the series
   at age twelve when Baum died. Snow's books lack any characters created
   by Thompson or Neill, although he did create his own.
   By John R. Neill
   Cover Order Title Illustrator Year Publisher
   34 The Wonder City of Oz John R. Neill 1940 Reilly & Lee
   Jenny Jump captures a leprechaun and forces him to make her into a
   fairy, but he only does half the job before escaping. Jenny then jumps
   to Oz using her half-fairy gifts. She soon sets up a fashionable Style
   Shop with a magic turnstyle which will give anyone high style and
   challenges Ozma to an ozlection to become ruler of the Land of Oz.
   35 The Scalawagons of Oz John R. Neill 1941 Reilly & Lee
   The Wizard creates Scalawagons, intelligent cars that can also fly. He
   makes Tik-Tok superintendent of the Scalawagons Factory, but the
   mechanical man runs down. Bell Snickle, a mysterious creature, takes
   advantage of Tik-Tok's condition by filling the scalawagons with
   "flabber-gas" and the Wizard nearly loses his scalawagons.
   36 Lucky Bucky in Oz John R. Neill 1942 Reilly & Lee
   Bucky is aboard a tugboat in New York Harbour when the boiler blows up.
   He is soon blown into the Nonestic Ocean where he meets Davy Jones, a
   wooden whale. The pair take an undersea route to the Emerald City, and
   have many adventures along the way.
   By Jack Snow
   37 The Magical Mimics in Oz Frank Kramer 1946 Reilly & Lee
   Ozma and Glinda go to meet with the Fairy Queen Lurline in the Forest
   of Burzee and leaves Dorothy in charge of Oz. During Ozma's absence,
   the evil Mimics escape their imprisonment on Mount Illuso and use their
   magic to take the form of others and attempt to conquer Oz.
   38 The Shaggy Man of Oz Frank Kramer 1949 Reilly & Lee
   It is discovered that the love magnet, which was owned by the Shaggy
   Man (from The Road to Oz) has broken, and only its creator, the evil
   Conjo can fix it. Meanwhile, Twink and Tom are pulled through their
   television to the Isle of Conjo in the Nonestic Ocean along with the
   wooden clown Twiffle. Soon the Shaggy Man arrives and saves them from
   Conjo.
   By Rachel Cosgrove
   39 The Hidden Valley of Oz Dirk Gringhuis 1951 Reilly & Lee
   Jam, a boy from Ohio builds a kite and attaches it to a crate and sets
   off to Oz with his two guinea pigs, Pinny and Gig, and a lab rat named
   Percy. Once in Oz, Jam realizes his pets can talk. He lands in the
   Hidden Valley, and becomes a prisoner, but they escape and set out on
   adventures with the Tin Woodman.
   By Eloise Jarvis McGraw and Lauren Lynn McGraw
   40 Merry-Go-Round in Oz Dick Martin 1963 Reilly & Lee
   Robin Brown from the USA rides a magic merry-go-round horse to Oz. Upon
   landing, Robin must help find the missing magic rings of Halidom.

Non-canonical Oz works by "Royal Historians"

   Each of the "Royal Historians" wrote Oz-related works not generally
   considered canonical. Some are short stories, some are reference works,
   still others are novels written sometimes years after the authors' main
   body of Oz books.
   Other Oz works by "Royal Historians"
   Cover Title Writer Illustrator Year Publisher
   Queer Visitors from the Marvelous Land of Oz L. Frank Baum Walt
   McDougal 1904–1905 --
   Newspaper comic/column chronicling the misadventures of the Scarecrow,
   the Tin Woodman, the Woggle-Bug, Jack Pumpkinhead, the Sawhorse, and
   the Gump in the United States. Originally used to promote The Marvelous
   Land of Oz. Often republished in book form as Visitors from Oz, The
   Visitors from Oz, or The Third Book of Oz. The edition by Hungry Tiger
   Press also includes "The Woggle-Bug Book" (see below) and is
   illustrated by Eric Shanower. Complete series can be read here.
   The Woggle-Bug Book L. Frank Baum Ike Morgan 1905 Reilly & Britton
   Further adventures of the Wogglebug in the USA after he gets separated
   from the others. The text is included in "The Visitors from Oz" from
   Hungry Tiger Press. The book can be read here.
   Little Wizard Stories of Oz L. Frank Baum John R. Neill 1913 Reilly &
   Britton
   Six short stories about the Oz characters, originally written to help
   re-launch the Oz series in 1913. Full text can be found here.
   Yankee in Oz Ruth Plumly Thompson Dick Martin 1972 International Wizard
   of Oz Club
   Tompy, a drummer boy from the United States and Yankee, an Air Force
   dog meet the Red Jinn of Ev and together defeat an evil giant who is
   threatening both America and Oz.
   The Enchanted Island of Oz Ruth Plumly Thompson Dick Martin 1976
   International Wizard of Oz Club
   David Perry and his talking camel Humpty Bumpty find themselves on
   Kapurta, an island stranded in the sky. David must supply the magic to
   move the island and visit the Emerald City in time for the Cowardly
   Lion's birthday party.
   The Runaway in Oz John R. Neill Eric Shanower 1995 Books of Wonder
   Written in 1943, to be the 37th Oz book, Neill died before he could
   illustrate the book, so publisher Reilly & Lee decided not to publish
   it due to shortages during World War II. The manuscript stayed with
   Neill's family until it was finally published in 1995. Eric Shanower
   edited it and provided illustrations.
   Who's Who in Oz Jack Snow Various 1954 Reilly & Lee
   Definitive guide to the Oz characters.
   The Forbidden Fountain of Oz By Eloise Jarvis McGraw and Lauren McGraw
   Wagner Dick Martin 1980 International Wizard of Oz Club
   Ozma takes a sip from the Forbidden Fountain and forgets who she is and
   disappears.
   The Rundelstone of Oz Eloise Jarvis McGraw Eric Shanower 2001 Hungry
   Tiger Press
   Pocotristi Sostenuto, a living puppet, must find the magical
   Rundelstone so he can rescue his fellow puppets from the evil
   Slyddwynn, the Whitherd of Whitheraway Castle.
   The Wicked Witch of Oz Rachel Cosgrove Eric Shanower 1993 International
   Wizard of Oz Club
   Singra, the Wicked Witch of the South awakens after a 100-year nap and
   decides to make up for all the wickedness she missed out on. Dorothy
   and friends must try and stop her before she destroys the Emerald City.

   Baum also wrote Oz-related stage plays: The Wonderful Wizard of Oz
   (1901) with music by Paul Tietjens and Nathaniel D. Mann, The Wizard of
   Oz (1902) (music by Tietjens et al; with jokes by Glen MacDonough), The
   Woggle-Bug (1905) with music by Frederick Chapin, The Rainbow's
   Daughter, or The Magnet of Love (February 1909) with music by Manuel
   Klein, revised in April 1909 as Ozma of Oz, and ultimately produced,
   with music by Louis F. Gottschalk as The Tik-Tok Man of Oz. Also in
   1909, he wrote a play called The Girl from Oz. The manuscript is held
   in the archives at Syracuse University, but apparently its relation to
   Oz is little more than nominal (it is also known as The Girl from
   Tomorrow and was later adapted for radio by Frank Joslyn Baum, as is
   also the case with the short story, "The Littlest Giant", a rather
   brutal tale designated in two lines to be in the Gillikin country of
   Oz. With Gottschalk writing the music, he wrote an unproduced stage
   version of The Patchwork Girl of Oz in November 1913, that was
   developed into the film scenario.

Alternate Oz

   Below are some books which deal with alternate views of Oz, and are
   usually considered apocryphal. Because there are literally hundreds of
   unofficial Oz books, the following is a list of those that are
   best-known, or most independently or commercially successful.
   Alternate Oz
   Title Writer Year Notes
   A Barnstormer in Oz Philip José Farmer 1982
   Was Geoff Ryman 1992
   Wicked: The Life and Times of the Wicked Witch of the West Gregory
   Maguire 1995 published by ReganBooks/HarperCollins
   Son of a Witch Gregory Maguire 2005 published by ReganBooks
   The Wizard of the Emerald City Alexander Volkov 1939, 1959 Volkov's
   original translation (with some alterations) of The Wizard of Oz.
   Urfin Djus and His Wooden Soldiers Alexander Volkov 1963 The first of
   Volkov's "sequels".
   Seven Kings of the Underground Alexander Volkov 1969
   The Yellow Fog Alexander Volkov 1972
   The Fire God of the Marrones Alexander Volkov 1988
   The Secret of the Forgotten Castle Alexander Volkov 1989
   Paradox in Oz Edward Einhorn (illustrated by Eric Shanower) 2000
   published by Hungry Tiger Press
   The Living House of Oz Edward Einhorn (illustrated by Eric Shanower)
   2005 published by Hungry Tiger Press
   The Number of the Beast Robert A. Heinlein 1980
   Wizard and Glass Stephen King 1997 The characters visit an unpopulated
   version of Emerald City, looking the same as it does in the 1939 film.
   The man sitting on the Wizard's throne turns out to be Marten
   Broadcloak, an alter-ego of one of the Dark Tower Series' main
   villains.
   Return to Oz Joan D. Vinge 1985 The book version of the movie Return to
   Oz (1985), which is based on the second and third books, The Land of Oz
   and Ozma of Oz.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Oz_books"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
