   #copyright

Thomas Aquinas

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Religious figures and
leaders

   Western Philosophers
   Medieval Philosophy
   Depiction of St. Thomas Aquinas from The Demidoff Altarpiece by Carlo
   Crivelli
   Name: Thomas Aquinas
   Birth: c.1225 (Castle of Roccasecca, near Aquino, Italy)
   Death: 7 March 1274 ( Fossanova Abbey, Lazio, Italy)
   School/tradition: Scholasticism, Founder of Thomism
   Main interests: Metaphysics (incl. Theology), Logic, Mind,
   Epistemology, Ethics, Politics
   Notable ideas: Five Proofs for God's Existence, Principle of double
   effect
   Influences: Aristotle, Boethius, Eriugena, Anselm, Ibn Rushd,
   Maimonides, St. Augustine
   Influenced: Giles of Rome, Godfrey of Fontaines, Jacques Maritain, G.
   E. M. Anscombe, John Locke, Dante

   Saint Thomas Aquinas [Thomas of Aquin, or Aquino] (c. 1225 – 7 March
   1274) was an Italian philosopher and theologian in the scholastic
   tradition, known as Doctor Angelicus, Doctor Universalis. He is the
   foremost classical proponent of natural theology, and the father of the
   Thomistic school of philosophy, which was long the primary
   philosophical approach of the Roman Catholic Church. One of the
   thirty-three Doctors of the Church, he is considered by many Catholics
   to be the Church's greatest theologian. Consequently, many institutions
   of learning have been named after him.

Biography

Early years of his life

   Thomas Aquinas was born in about 1225 at his father Count Landulf's
   castle of Roccasecca in the kingdom of Naples. Today, this castle is in
   the Province of Frosinone, in the Regione Lazio. Through his mother,
   Countess Theadora of Theate, Aquinas was related to the Hohenstaufen
   dynasty of Holy Roman emperors. Landulf's brother Sinibald was abbot of
   the original Benedictine monastery at Monte Cassino. The family
   intended for Aquinas to follow his uncle into that position. This would
   have been a normal career path for a younger son of southern Italian
   nobility.

   At five years of age, Aquinas began his early education at the
   monastery. When he was sixteen years old, he left the University of
   Naples, where he had studied for six years. Aquinas had come under the
   influence of the Dominicans, who wished to enlist the ablest young
   scholars of the age. The Dominicans and the Franciscans represented a
   revolutionary challenge to the well-established clerical systems of
   early medieval Europe. Aquinas's change of heart did not please his
   family. On the way to Rome, his brothers seized him and brought him
   back to his parents at the castle of San Giovanni. He was held a
   captive for a year or two so that he would relinquish his purpose.
   According to his earliest biographers, the family even brought a
   prostitute to tempt him, but he drove her away. Finally, Pope Innocent
   IV intervened, and Aquinas assumed the habit of St. Dominic in his
   seventeenth year.

   His superiors saw his great aptitude for theological study. In late
   1244, they sent him to the Dominican school in Cologne, where Albertus
   Magnus was lecturing on philosophy and theology. In 1245, he
   accompanied Albertus to the University of Paris, where they remained
   for three years. During this time, Aquinas threw himself into the
   controversy between the university and the Friar-Preachers about the
   liberty of teaching. Aquinas actively resisted the university's
   speeches and pamphlets. When the Pope was alerted of this dispute, the
   Dominicans selected Aquinas to defend his order. He did so with great
   success. He even overcame the arguments of Guillaume de St Amour, the
   champion of the university, and one of the most celebrated men of the
   day.

   Aquinas then graduated as bachelor of theology. In 1248, he returned to
   Cologne, where he was appointed second lecturer and magister
   studentium. This year marks the beginning of his literary activity and
   public life. For several years, Aquinas remained with Albertus Magnus.
   Aquinas's long association with this great philosopher-theologian was
   the most important influence in his development. In the end, he became
   a comprehensive scholar who permanently utilized Aristotle's method.

Career

   In 1252, Aquinas went to Paris for his master's degree. He had some
   difficulty because the professoriate of the university was attacking
   the mendicant orders, but ultimately, he received the degree. In 1256,
   Aquinas, along with his friend Bonaventura, was named doctor of
   theology, and he began to lecture on theology in Paris and Rome and
   other Italian towns. From this time onward, his life was one of
   incessant toil. He continually served in his order, frequently made
   long and tedious journeys, and constantly advised the reigning pontiff
   on affairs of state.

   In 1259, Aquinas was present at an important meeting of his order at
   Valenciennes. At the solicitation of Pope Urban IV, he moved to Rome no
   earlier than late 1261. In 1263, he attended the London meeting of the
   Dominican order. In 1268, he lectured in Rome and Bologna. Throughout
   these years, he remained engaged in the public business of the church.

   From 1269 to 1271, Aquinas was again active in Paris. He lectured to
   the students, managed the affairs of the church, and advised the king,
   Louis VIII, his kinsman, on affairs of state. In 1272, the provincial
   chapter at Florence empowered him to begin a new studium generale at a
   location of his choice. Later, the chief of his order and King Charles
   brought him back to the professor's chair at Naples.

   All this time, Aquinas preached every day, and he wrote homilies,
   disputations, and lectures. He also worked diligently on his great
   literary work, the Summa Theologiae. The church offered to make him
   archbishop of Naples and abbot of Monte Cassino, but he refused both
   rewards.
   St. Thomas Aquinas, by Fra Angelico
   Enlarge
   St. Thomas Aquinas, by Fra Angelico

   Aquinas had a mystical experience while celebrating Mass on 6 December
   1273. At this point, he set aside his Summa. When asked why he had
   stopped writing, Aquinas replied, "I cannot go on . . . All that I have
   written seems to me like so much straw compared to what I have seen and
   what has been revealed to me." Later, others reported that Aquinas
   heard a voice from a cross that told him he had written well. On one
   occasion, monks claimed to have found him levitating. The 20th century
   Roman Catholic writer/convert G. K. Chesterton describes these and
   other stories in his work on Aquinas, The Dumb Ox, a title that is
   based on early impressions that Aquinas was not proficient in speech.
   Albertus Magnus refuted these impressions: "You call him 'a dumb ox,'
   but I declare before you that he will yet bellow so loud in doctrine
   that his voice will resound through the whole world."

   Aquinas was dark-complexioned, with a large head and receding hairline,
   of large stature and perhaps naturally corpulent; although he wrote
   insightfully of the sin of gluttony, he was said to be a great eater,
   and two versions of a probably apocryphal story have it that a
   semicircle was cut either out of an altar (according to Charles Van
   Doren) or out of a refectory table for his convenience. His manners
   showed his breeding, for people described him as refined, affable, and
   lovable. In arguments, he maintained self-control and won over his
   opponents by his personality and great learning. His tastes were
   simple. He impressed his associates with his power of memory. When
   absorbed in thought, he often forgot his surroundings. However, he was
   able to express his thoughts systematically, clearly, and simply.
   Because of his keen grasp of his materials, Aquinas does not, like Duns
   Scotus, make the reader his companion in the search for truth. Rather,
   he teaches authoritatively. On the other hand, he felt dissatisfied by
   the insufficiency of his works as compared to the divine revelations
   which he had received.

Death and canonization

   In January 1274, Pope Gregory X directed Aquinas to attend the Second
   Council of Lyons. His task was to investigate and, if possible, to
   settle the differences between the Greek and Latin churches. Far from
   healthy, he undertook the journey. On the way, he stopped at the castle
   of a niece and there became seriously ill. Aquinas desired to end his
   days in a monastery. However, he was unable to reach a house of the
   Dominicans, so he was taken to the Cistercian monastery of Fossa Nuova.
   After a lingering illness of seven weeks, Aquinas died on 7 March 1274.

   Dante (Purg. xx. 69) asserts that he was poisoned by the order of
   Charles of Anjou. Villani (ix. 218) quotes this belief, and the Anonimo
   Fiorentino describes the crime and its motive. But the historian
   Muratori reproduced the account of one of Aquinas's friends, and this
   version of the story gives no hint of foul play.

   Aquinas made a remarkable impression on all who knew him. He received
   the title doctor angelicus (Angelic Doctor), which put him on a level
   with Saint Paul and Saint Augustine. In The Divine Comedy, Dante sees
   the glorified spirit of Aquinas in the Heaven of the Sun with the other
   great exemplars of religious wisdom. In 1319, the Roman Catholic Church
   began preliminary investigations to Aquinas's canonization. On 18 July
   1323, Pope John XXII pronounced Aquinas's sainthood at Avignon. In
   1567, Pope Pius V ranked the festival of St. Thomas Aquinas with those
   of the four great Latin fathers: Ambrose, Augustine, Jerome, and
   Gregory.

   Aquinas's Summa Theologiae was deemed so important that at the Council
   of Trent, it was placed upon the altar beside the Bible and the
   Decretals. Only Augustine has had an equal influence on the theological
   thought and language of the Western Church. In his Encyclical of 4
   August 1879, Pope Leo XIII stated that Aquinas's theology was a
   definitive exposition of Catholic doctrine. Thus, he directed the
   clergy to take the teachings of Aquinas as the basis of their
   theological positions. Also, Leo XIII decreed that all Catholic
   seminaries and universities must teach Aquinas's doctrines, and where
   Aquinas did not speak on a topic, the teachers were "urged to teach
   conclusions that were reconcilable with his thinking."

   In 1880, Aquinas was declared patron of all Roman Catholic educational
   establishments. In a monastery at Naples, near the cathedral of St.
   Januarius, a cell in which he supposedly lived is still shown to
   visitors. Aquinas's feast day is celebrated on 28 January. Since 1974
   his remains have rested in the Church of the Jacobins in Toulouse.

Philosophy

   Thomas Aquinas 17th century sculpture
   Enlarge
   Thomas Aquinas 17th century sculpture

                "Nihil est in intellectu quod non prius in sensu."
                (Nothing is in the intellect that was not first in the
                senses) – Aquinas's peripatetic axiom

   The philosophy of Aquinas has exerted enormous influence on subsequent
   Christian theology, especially that of the Roman Catholic Church,
   extending to Western philosophy in general, where he stands as a
   vehicle and modifier of Aristotelianism. Philosophically, his most
   important and enduring work is the Summa Theologiae, in which he
   expounds his systematic theology.

Epistemology

   Aquinas believed "that for the knowledge of any truth whatsoever man
   needs Divine help, that the intellect may be moved by God to its act."
   However, he believed that human beings have the natural capacity to
   know many things without special divine revelation, even though such
   revelation occurs from time to time, "especially in regard to [topics
   of] faith." Aquinas was also an Aristotelian and an empiricist. He
   substantially influenced these two streams of Western thought.

Revelation

   Aquinas believed in two types of revelation from God: general
   revelation and special revelation. General revelation occurs through
   observation of the created order. Such observations can logically lead
   to important conclusions, such as the existence of God. Aquinas is well
   known for his quinquae viae, or five rational proofs for the existence
   of God.

   Though one may deduce the existence of God and some of God's attributes
   through general revelation, certain specifics may be known only through
   special revelation. In Aquinas's view, special revelation is equivalent
   to the revelation of God in Jesus Christ. The major theological
   components of Christianity, such as the Trinity and the Incarnation,
   are revealed in the teachings of the Church and the Scriptures and may
   not otherwise be deduced.

   Special revelation and natural revelation are complementary rather than
   contradictory in nature.

Analogy

   An important element in Aquinas's philosophy is his theory of analogy.
   Aquinas noted three different forms of descriptive language: univocal,
   analogical, and equivocal. Univocality is the use of a descriptor in
   the same sense when applied to two objects. Equivocation is the
   complete change in meaning of the descriptor and is a logical fallacy.
   Analogy, Aquinas maintained, occurs when a descriptor changes some but
   not all of its meaning. Analogy is necessary when talking about God,
   for some of the aspects of the divine nature are hidden (Deus
   absconditus) and others revealed (Deus revelatus) to finite human
   minds. In Aquinas's mind, we can know about God through his creation
   (general revelation), but only analogically. We can speak of God's
   goodness only by understanding that goodness as applied to humans is
   similar to, but not identical with, the goodness of God.

Ethics

   Aquinas's ethics is based on the concept of "first principles of
   action." In his Summa Theologiae, he wrote:

          Virtue denotes a certain perfection of a power. Now a thing's
          perfection is considered chiefly in regard to its end. But the
          end of power is act. Wherefore power is said to be perfect,
          according as it is determinate to its act.

   Aquinas defined the four cardinal virtues as prudence, temperance,
   justice, and fortitude. The cardinal virtues are natural and revealed
   in nature, and they are binding on everyone. There are, however, three
   theological virtues: faith, hope, and charity. These are supernatural
   and are distinct from other virtues in their object, namely, God:

          Now the object of the theological virtues is God Himself, Who is
          the last end of all, as surpassing the knowledge of our reason.
          On the other hand, the object of the intellectual and moral
          virtues is something comprehensible to human reason. Wherefore
          the theological virtues are specifically distinct from the moral
          and intellectual virtues.

   Furthermore, Aquinas distinguished four kinds of law. These are the
   eternal, natural, human, and divine law. Eternal law is the decree of
   God which governs all creation. Natural law is the human
   "participation" in the eternal law and is discovered by reason. Natural
   law, of course, is based on "first principles":

          . . . this is the first precept of the law, that good is to be
          done and promoted, and evil is to be avoided. All other precepts
          of the natural law are based on this . . .

   The desire to live and to procreate are counted by Aquinas among those
   basic (natural) human values on which all human values are based. Human
   law is positive law: the natural law applied by governments to
   societies. Divine law is the specially revealed law in the scriptures.

   Aquinas also greatly influenced Roman Catholic understandings of mortal
   and venial sins.

   According to Peter Singer, Aquinas denied that human beings have any
   duty of charity to animals, and he argued that "the only reason for us
   to avoid cruelty to them is the risk that cruel habits might carry over
   into our treatment of human beings."

Theology

   Aquinas viewed theology, or the sacred doctrine, as a science, one
   whose raw material data consists of written scripture and the tradition
   of the church. These sources of data were produced by the
   self-revelation of God to individuals and groups of people throughout
   history. Faith and reason, while distinct but related, are the two
   primary tools for processing the data of theology. Aquinas believed
   that both were necessary, or, rather, that the confluence of both was
   necessary, for one to obtain true knowledge of God. The ultimate goals
   of theology, in Aquinas’s mind, are to grasp the truth about God and to
   experience salvation through that truth.

Nature of God

   Aquinas felt that the existence of God is neither self-evident nor
   beyond proof. In the Summa Theologiae, he considered in great detail
   five rational proofs for the existence of God. These are widely known
   as the quinquae viae, or the "Five Ways."

   Concerning the nature of God, Aquinas found that the best approach,
   commonly called the via negativa, is to consider what God is not. This
   led him to propose five positive statements about the divine qualities:
    1. God is simple, without composition of parts, such as body and soul,
       or matter and form.
    2. God is perfect, lacking nothing. That is, God is distinguished from
       other beings on account of God's complete actuality.
    3. God is infinite. That is, God is not finite in the ways that
       created beings are physically, intellectually, and emotionally
       limited. This infinity is to be distinguished from infinity of size
       and infinity of number.
    4. God is immutable, incapable of change on the levels of God's
       essence and character.
    5. God is one, without diversification within God's self. The unity of
       God is such that God's essence is the same as God's existence. In
       Aquinas's words, "in itself the proposition 'God exists' is
       necessarily true, for in it subject and predicate are the same."

   In this approach, he is following, among others, the Jewish philosopher
   Maimonides.

Nature of the Trinity

   Aquinas argued that God, while perfectly united, is also perfectly
   described by three interrelated persons. These three persons (Father,
   Son, and Holy Spirit) are constituted by their relations within the
   essence of God. The Father generates the Son (or the Word) by the
   relation of self-awareness. This eternal generation then produces an
   eternal Spirit "who enjoys the divine nature as the Love of God, the
   Love of the Father for the Word."

   This Trinity does not exist in separation from the world. On the
   contrary, the Trinity serves to communicate God's self and God's
   goodness to human beings. This takes place through the Incarnation of
   the Word in the person of Jesus Christ and through the indwelling of
   the Holy Spirit (indeed, the very essence of the Trinity itself) within
   those who have experienced salvation by God.

Nature of Jesus Christ

   In the Summa Theologiae, Aquinas begins his discussion of Jesus Christ
   by recounting the biblical story of Adam and Eve and by describing the
   negative effects of original sin. The purpose of Jesus Christ's
   Incarnation was to restore human nature by removing "the contamination
   of sin," which humans cannot do by themselves. "Divine Wisdom judged it
   fitting that God should become man, so that thus one and the same
   person would be able both to restore man and to offer satisfaction."

   Aquinas argued against several specific contemporary and historical
   theologians who held differing views about Jesus Christ. In response to
   Photinus, Aquinas stated that Jesus was truly divine and not simply a
   human being. Against Nestorius, who suggested that God merely inhabited
   the body of Jesus, Aquinas argued that the fullness of God was an
   integral part of Jesus' existence. However, countering Apollinaris's
   views, Aquinas held that Jesus had a truly human (rational) soul, as
   well. This produced a duality of natures in Jesus, contrary to the
   teachings of Arius. Aquinas argued against Eutyches that this duality
   persisted after the Incarnation. Aquinas stated that these two natures
   existed simultaneously yet distinguishably in one real human body,
   unlike the teachings of Manichaeus and Valentinus.

   In short, "Christ had a real body of the same nature of ours, a true
   rational soul, and, together with these, perfect deity." Thus, there is
   both unity (in his one hypostasis) and diversity (in his two natures,
   human and divine) in Jesus Christ.

Goal of human life

   In Aquinas's thought, the goal of human existence is union and eternal
   fellowship with God. Specifically, this goal is achieved through the
   beatific vision, an event in which a person experiences perfect,
   unending happiness by comprehending the very essence of God. This
   vision, which occurs after death, is a gift from God given to those who
   have experienced salvation and redemption through Jesus Christ while
   living on earth.

   This ultimate goal carries implications for one's present life on
   earth. Aquinas stated that an individual's will must be ordered toward
   right things, such as charity, peace, and holiness. This relationship
   between will and goal is antecedent in nature "because rectitude of the
   will consists in being duly ordered to the last end [that is, the
   beatific vision]." Those who truly seek to understand and see God will
   necessarily love what God loves. Such love requires morality and bears
   fruit in everyday human choices.

Modern criticism

   Some of Aquinas's ethical conclusions are at odds with the majority
   view in the contemporary West. For example, he held that heretics
   "deserve not only to be separated from the Church by excommunication,
   but also to be severed from the world by death." Aquinas believed that
   heresy was much more severe than, for instance, money forgery, which
   was punishable by death in his time. Therefore, heretics deserved at
   least as severe a punishment ( ST II:II 11:3). Aquinas also maintained
   woman's subjection to man "because in man the discretion of reason
   predominates"( ST I:92:1), which is one reason why he opposed the
   ordination of women ( ST Supp. 39:1). Aquinas did say, however, that
   women were fit for the exercise of temporal power. He also held that "a
   parent can lawfully strike his child, and a master his slave that
   instruction may be enforced by correction" ( ST II:II 65:2).

   On the other hand, many modern ethicists (notably Philippa Foot and
   Alasdair MacIntyre), both within and outside of the Catholic Church,
   have recently commented on the possible use of Aquinas's virtue ethics
   as a way of avoiding utilitarianism or Kantian deontology. Through the
   work of 20th century philosophers such as Roman Catholic convert
   Elizabeth Anscombe (especially in her book Intention), Aquinas's
   principle of double effect specifically and his theory of intentional
   activity generally have been influential.

   Modern readers might also find the method frequently used to reconcile
   Christian and Aristotelian doctrine rather strenuous. In some cases,
   the conflict is resolved by showing that a certain term actually has
   two meanings: the Christian doctrine referring to one meaning, the
   Aristotelian to the second. Thus, both doctrines can be said to be
   true. Indeed, noting distinctions is a necessary part of true
   philosophical inquiry. In most cases, Aquinas finds a reading of the
   Aristotelian text which might not always satisfy modern scholars of
   Aristotle but which is a plausible rendering of the Philosopher's
   meaning and is thoroughly Christian.

   It is remarkable that Aquinas's aesthetic theories, especially the
   concept of claritas, deeply influenced the literary practice of
   modernist writer James Joyce, who used to extol Aquinas as being second
   only to Aristotle amongst Western philosophers. The influence of
   Aquinas's aesthetics can be also found in the works of the Italian
   semiotician Umberto Eco, who wrote an essay on aesthetic ideas in
   Aquinas (published in 1956 and republished in 1988 in a revised
   edition).

   Many biographies of Aquinas have been written over the centuries, one
   of the most notable by G.K. Chesterton.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Aquinas"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
