   #copyright

Tom and Jerry (MGM)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Cartoons

   Tom and Jerry are an animated cat (Tom) and mouse (Jerry) team who
   formed the basis of a successful series of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
   theatrical short subjects created, written and directed by animators
   William Hanna and Joseph Barbera (later of Hanna-Barbera fame). One
   hundred and fourteen Tom and Jerry cartoons were produced by the
   Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer cartoon studio in Hollywood from 1940 until 1957,
   when the animation unit was closed down. These shorts are notable for
   having won seven Academy Awards for Best Short Subject (Cartoons),
   tying it with Walt Disney's Silly Symphonies as the most-awarded
   theatrical animated series.

   In 1960, MGM outsourced the production of Tom and Jerry to Rembrandt
   Films (led by Gene Deitch) in Eastern Europe. Three years later,
   production of Tom and Jerry shorts returned to Hollywood with Chuck
   Jones' Sib-Tower 12 Productions; this series lasted until 1967. Tom and
   Jerry later resurfaced in TV cartoons produced by Hanna-Barbera (1975 -
   1977; 1990 - 1993) and Filmation Studios (1980 - 1982).

Plot and format

   The plots of each short usually centre on Tom's frustrated attempts to
   catch Jerry, and the mayhem and destruction that ensues. Because they
   seem to get along in some cartoon shorts (at least in the first minute
   or so), it is unclear why Tom chases Jerry so much, but some reasons
   given may include normal feline/mouse enmity, duty according to his
   owner, revenge, or competition with another cat, among other reasons.

   Tom rarely succeeds in catching Jerry, mainly because of Jerry's
   craftiness and cunning abilities, but sometimes because of Tom's own
   stupidity. Tom usually beats Jerry when Jerry becomes the instigator or
   when he crosses some sort of line.

   The shorts are famous for some of the most violent gags ever devised in
   theatrical animation: Jerry slicing Tom in half, shutting his head in a
   window or a door, Tom using everything from axes, pistols, dynamite,
   clubs and poison to try to murder Jerry, Jerry stuffing Tom's tail in a
   waffle iron, plugging his tail into an electric socket, hitting him
   with a mace and so on. Despite all the violence, there is no blood or
   gore in any scenes. A recurring gag involves Jerry hitting Tom when
   he's preoccupied, with Tom initially oblivious to the pain--and only
   feeling the effects moments later.

   The cartoon is also noteworthy for its reliance on stereotypes, such as
   the blackening of characters following explosions and the use of heavy
   and enlarged shadows (e.g., "Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Mouse"). Resemblance to
   everyday objects and occurrences is arguably the main appeal of visual
   humor in the series. The characters themselves regularly transform into
   ridiculous but strongly associative shapes, most of the time
   involuntarily, in masked but gruesome ways.

   Music plays a very important part in the shorts, emphasizing the
   action, filling in for traditional sound effects, and lending emotion
   to the scenes. Musical director Scott Bradley created complex scores
   that combined elements of jazz, classical, and pop music; Bradley often
   reprised contemporary pop songs, as well as songs from MGM films,
   including The Wizard of Oz and Meet Me In St. Louis.

   Before 1953, all Tom and Jerry cartoons were produced in the standard
   Academy ratio and format; from 1953 to 1956, some of the output was
   dually produced in both Academy format and the widescreen CinemaScope
   process. From 1956 until the close of the MGM animation studio a year
   later, all Tom and Jerry cartoons were produced in CinemaScope; some
   even had their soundtracks recorded in stereo. The 1960s Gene Deitch
   and Chuck Jones shorts were all produced in Academy format, but with
   compositions that made them compatible to be matted to Academy
   widescreen format as well. All of the Hanna and Barbera cartoons were
   produced in three-strip Technicolor; the 1960s entries were done in
   Metrocolor.

Characters

Tom and Jerry

   Tom is a bluish-grey housecat, depending on the short (Tom's fur colour
   is close to that of the Russian Blue breed of cats), who lives a
   pampered life, while Jerry is a small brown mouse who always lives in
   close proximity to him. Tom is very quick-tempered and thin-skinned,
   while Jerry is independent and opportunistic. Despite being very
   energetic and determined, Tom is no match for Jerry's brains and wits.
   By the iris-out of each cartoon, Jerry usually emerges triumphant,
   while Tom is shown as the loser. However, other results may be reached;
   on rare occasions, Tom triumphs. Sometimes, usually ironically, they
   both lose or they both end up being friends. Both characters display
   sadistic tendencies, in that they are equally likely to take pleasure
   in tormenting each other. However, depending on the cartoon, whenever
   one character appears to be in mortal danger (in a dangerous situation
   or by an enemy), the other will develop a conscience and save him.
   Sometimes they bond over a mutual sentiment towards an unpleasant
   experience.

   Although many supporting and minor characters speak, Tom and Jerry
   rarely do so. Tom, most famously, sings while wooing female cats; for
   example, Tom sings Louis Jordan's "Is You Is or Is You Ain't My Baby"
   in the 1946 short Solid Serenade. Co-director William Hanna provided
   most of the squeaks, gasps, and other vocal effects for the pair,
   including the most famous sound effect from the series, Tom's
   leather-lunged scream (created by recording Hanna's scream and
   eliminating the beginning and ending of the recording, leaving only the
   strongest part of the scream on the soundtrack).

Recurring characters

   In his attempts to catch Jerry, Tom often has to deal with the
   intrusions of Butch, a scruffy black alley cat who also wants to catch
   and eat Jerry; Spike (sometimes billed as "Killer" or "Butch"), an
   angry, vicious guard bulldog who tries to attack the cat but is usually
   friendly towards Jerry, being his bodyguard and protector in a couple
   of shorts; Toodles Galore, Tom's girlfriend; and Mammy Two Shoes, a
   stereotyped African-American domestic housemaid (voiced by Lillian
   Randolph), whose face is rarely, if ever seen, and usually wallops the
   cat with a broom when he misbehaves. (She uses the word "is" with any
   pronoun.) Mammy would appear in many cartoons until 1952; later
   cartoons would instead show Tom and Jerry living with a 1950s
   Yuppie-style couple: a tall, lanky man with glasses, and a doting
   housewife with black hair. Soon after, Tom's only owner seemed to be a
   thin, strict woman, with a personality similar to Mammy-Two-Shoes but
   instead of her dislike of mice she adores them, and punishes Tom for
   chasing Jerry, instead of failing to capture him.

   In the late 1940s, Jerry adopted a little gray mouse foundling named
   Nibbles (also later known as Tuffy). Unlike Jerry, Nibbles could speak,
   but usually in a foreign language in keeping with the theme and setting
   of the short. During the 1950s, Spike is shown to have a son of his own
   named Tyke; an addition that led to both a slight softening of Spike's
   character and a short-lived spin-off theatrical series ( Spike and
   Tyke). Spike spoke occasionally, using a voice and expressions modeled
   after comedian Jimmy Durante. Another recurring character in the series
   was Quacker the duckling, who was later adapted into the Hanna-Barbera
   character Yakky Doodle.

History and evolution

Hanna-Barbera era (1940 – 1958)

   William Hanna and Joseph Barbera were both part of the Rudolf Ising
   unit at MGM's animation studio in the late 1930s. Barbera, a storyman
   and character designer, was paired with Hanna, an experienced director,
   to start directing films for the Ising unit; the first of which was a
   cat-and-mouse cartoon called Puss Gets the Boot. Completed in late
   1939, and released to theatres on February 10, 1940, Puss Gets The Boot
   centers on Jasper, a grey tabby cat trying to catch an unnamed rodent,
   but without breaking anything; the African-American housemaid Mammy has
   threatened to throw Jasper out ("O-U-W-T, out!") if he breaks one more
   thing in the house. Naturally, the mouse uses this to his advantage,
   and begins tossing wine glasses, ceramic plates, teapots, and any and
   everything fragile, so that Jasper will be thrown outside. Puss Gets
   The Boot was previewed and released without fanfare, and Hanna and
   Barbera went on to direct other (non-cat-and-mouse related) shorts.
   "After all," remarked many of the MGM staffers, "haven't there been
   enough cat-and-mouse cartoons already?"

   The pessimistic attitude towards the cat and mouse duo changed when the
   cartoon became a favorite with theatre owners and with the Academy of
   Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, which nominated the film for the
   Academy Award for Best Short Subject: Cartoons of 1941. It lost to
   another MGM cartoon, Rudolph Ising's The Milky Way.

   However, producer Fred Quimby, who ran the MGM animation studio,
   quickly pulled Hanna and Barbera off the other one-shot cartoons they
   were working on, and commissioned a series featuring the cat and mouse.
   Hanna and Barbera held an intra-studio contest to give the pair a new
   name; animator John Carr won with his suggestion of "Tom and Jerry".
   The Tom and Jerry series went into production with The Midnight Snack
   in 1941, and Hanna and Barbera rarely directed anything but the
   cat-and-mouse cartoons for the rest of their tenure at MGM.

   Tom's physical appearance evolved significantly over the years. During
   the early 1940s, Tom had an excess of detail--shaggy fur, numerous
   facial wrinkles, and multiple eyebrow markings--all of which were
   streamlined into a more workable form by the end of the 1940s- and
   looked like a realistic cat; in addition from his quadrupedal
   beginnings Tom became increasingly, and eventually almost exclusively,
   bipedal. Jerry stayed essentially the same for the duration of the
   series. By the mid-1940s, the series had developed a quicker, more
   energetic (and violent) tone, because of inspiration from the work of
   MGM Animation colleague Tex Avery, who joined the studio in 1942.

   Even though the theme of each short is virtually the same, Hanna and
   Barbera found endless variations on that theme. Barbera's storyboards
   and rough layouts and designs, combined with Hanna's timing, resulted
   in MGM's most popular and successful cartoon series. Thirteen entries
   in the Tom and Jerry series (including Puss Gets The Boot) were
   nominated for the Academy Award for Best Short Subject: Cartoons; seven
   of them went on to win the Academy Award, breaking the Disney studio's
   winning streak in that category. Tom and Jerry won more Academy Awards
   than any other character-based theatrical animated series.

   Tom and Jerry remained popular throughout their original theatrical
   run, even when the budgets began to tighten somewhat in the 1950s and
   the pace of the shorts slowed slightly. However, after television
   became popular in the 1950s, box office revenues decreased for
   theatrical films, and short subjects. At first, MGM combated this by
   going to all- CinemaScope production on the series. After MGM realized
   that their re-releases of the older shorts brought in just as much
   revenue as the new films, the studio executives decided, much to the
   surprise of the staff, to close the animation studio. The MGM animation
   department was shut down in 1957, and the final of the 114 Hanna and
   Barbera Tom and Jerry shorts, Tot Watchers, was released on August 1,
   1958. Hanna and Barbera established their own television animation
   studio, Hanna-Barbera Productions, in 1957, which went on to produce
   such popular shows as The Flintstones, The Jetsons, and Scooby-Doo.

Gene Deitch era (1960 – 1962)

   In 1960, MGM decided to produce new Tom and Jerry shorts, and had
   producer William L. Snyder arrange with Czech-based animation director
   Gene Deitch and his studio, Rembrandt Films, to make the films overseas
   in Prague, Czechoslovakia. The Deitch/Snyder team turned out 13 shorts,
   many of which have a surrealistic quality.

   Since the Deitch/Snyder team saw only a handful of the original Tom and
   Jerry shorts, the films that resulted were considered unusual and, in
   many ways, bizarre. The characters' gestures were often performed at
   high speed, often resulting in heavy motion blur. The soundtracks
   featured sparse music, spacey sound effects, dialogue that was mumbled
   rather than spoken, and heavy uses of reverb.

   These shorts are the only Tom and Jerry cartoons not to carry the "Made
   In Hollywood, U.S.A." phrase at the end. Due to Deitch's studio being
   behind the Iron Curtain, the production studio's location is omitted
   entirely.

Chuck Jones era (1963 – 1967)

   After the last of the Deitch cartoons were released, MGM turned to
   American director Chuck Jones, famous for his work on Looney Tunes and
   Merrie Melodies shorts starring Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, and the Road
   Runner and Coyote, among others. Jones had just ended his thirty-plus
   year tenure at Warner Bros. Cartoons and started his own animation
   studio, Sib Tower 12 Productions, with partner Les Goldman. Beginning
   in 1963, Jones and Goldman went on to produce 34 more Tom and Jerry
   shorts, all of which carried Jones' distinctive style (and a slight
   psychedelic influence), but with varying degrees of critical success.
   Fans that typically rooted for Tom critizied Jones' cartoons for making
   Tom never become a threat to Jerry.

   Jones had trouble adapting his style to Tom and Jerry's brand of humor,
   and a number of the cartoons favored poses, personality, and style over
   storyline. The characters underwent a slight change of appearance: Tom
   was given thicker, Boris Karloff-like eyebrows, a less complex look,
   and furrier cheeks, while Jerry was given larger eyes and ears, and a
   sweeter, Porky Pig-like expression. Jones co-directed the majority of
   the shorts with layout artist Maurice Noble; the remaining shorts were
   directed by Abe Levitow and Ben Washam, with Tom Ray directing two
   shorts built around footage from earlier Tom and Jerry cartoons
   directed by Hanna and Barbera. MGM ceased production of animated shorts
   in 1967, by which time Sib Tower 12 had become MGM Animation/Visual
   Arts, and Jones had already begun to move on to television specials and
   the feature film The Phantom Tollbooth.

Tom and Jerry hit television

   Beginning in 1965, the Hanna and Barbera Tom and Jerry films began to
   appear on television in heavily edited form: the Jones team was
   required to take the shorts that featured Mammy, rotoscope her out, and
   replace her with a thin white woman, although in local telecasts of the
   cartoons, and in the ones shown on Boomerang , Mammy can once again be
   seen. Lillian Randolph's original voice tracks were replaced with June
   Foray performing in an Irish accent. Much of the extreme violence in
   the cartoons were also edited out. Starting out on CBS' Saturday
   Morning schedule on September 25, 1965, Tom and Jerry moved to CBS
   Sundays two years later and remained there until September 17, 1972.

Tom & Jerry's new owners

   In 1986, MGM was purchased by Ted Turner. Turner sold the company a
   short while later, but retained MGM's pre-1986 film library, thus Tom
   and Jerry became the property of Turner Entertainment (where the rights
   stand today via Warner Bros.), and have in subsequent years appeared on
   Turner-run stations, such as TBS, TNT, Cartoon Network, Boomerang, and
   Turner Classic Movies.

Tom and Jerry outside the United States

   When shown on terrestrial television in the United Kingdom (from 1967
   to 2000, usually on the BBC) Tom and Jerry cartoons were not cut for
   violence and Mammy was retained. As well as having regular slots, Tom
   and Jerry served the BBC in another way. When faced with disruption to
   the schedules (such as those occurring when live broadcasts overrun),
   the BBC would invariably turn to Tom and Jerry to fill any gaps,
   confident that it would retain much of an audience that might otherwise
   channel hop. This proved particularly helpful in 1993, when Noel's
   House Party had to be cancelled due to an IRA bomb scare at BBC
   Television Centre - Tom and Jerry was shown instead, bridging the gap
   until the next programme. Recently, a mother has complained of the
   smoking scenes shown in the cartoons since Tom often attempts to
   impress love interests with the habit. It has been said that these
   scenes will be edited out.

   Due to its lack of dialog, Tom and Jerry was easily translated into
   various foreign languages. Tom and Jerry began broadcast in Japan in
   1964. A 2005 nationwide survey taken in Japan by TV Asahi, sampling age
   groups from teenagers to adults in their sixties, in 2005 ranked Tom
   and Jerry #85 in a list of the top 100 anime of all time, while their
   web poll taken after the airing of the list ranked it at #58 - the only
   non-Japanese animation on the list (it should be noted that in Japan,
   the word "anime" refers to all animation regardless of origin, not just
   Japanese animation). Tom and Jerry is also well-known in India, China,
   Indonesia, Iran, Thailand, Middle East and South Korea.

   Tom and Jerry have long been popular in Germany. However, the cartoons
   are overdubbed with rhyming German-language verse that describes what
   is happening onscreen and provides additional funny content. The
   different episodes are usually embedded in the episode Jerry's Diary
   (1949), in which Tom reads about past adventures.

   In Mexico, Colombia, Brazil, India and Pakistan, Cartoon Network still
   airs Tom and Jerry cartoons nearly everyday. In Russia, local channels
   also airs the show in its daytime program. Tom and Jerry was one of the
   few cartoons of western origin broadcast in Czechoslovakia ( 1988)
   before the fall of Communism in 1989.

Censorship

   Like a number of other animated cartoons in the 1940s, 1950s and 1960s,
   Tom and Jerry was not considered politically correct in later years.
   Some cartoons featured either Tom or Jerry in blackface following an
   explosion, which are subsequently cut when shown on television today,
   although the The Yankee Doodle Mouse blackface gag is still shown in
   other countries. Other ethnic stereotypes are also omitted,
   particularly the black maid, Mammy Two-Shoes, whose voice was redubbed
   by Turner in the mid-1990s in hopes of making the character sound less
   stereotypical. One cartoon in particular, His Mouse Friday, is often
   banned from television due to the cannibals being seen as racist
   stereotypes. If shown, the cannibals' dialogue is edited out, although
   their mouths can be seen moving.

   In 2006, UK channel Boomerang made plans to edit Tom and Jerry cartoons
   being aired in the UK where the characters were seen to be smoking in a
   manner that was "condoned, acceptable or glamorised." This followed a
   complaint from a viewer that the cartoons were not appropriate for
   younger viewers, and a subsequent investigation by UK media watchdog
   Ofcom. It has also taken the US approach by editing out blackface gags,
   though this seems to be random as not all scenes of this type are cut.

Trivia

     * The original Tom and jerry cartoons have been taken off many
       children's channels because they are said to be too violent

Later television and theatrical cartoons

   In 1975, Tom and Jerry were reunited with Hanna and Barbera, who
   produced new Tom and Jerry cartoons for Saturday mornings. These 48
   seven-minute short cartoons were paired with Grape Ape and Mumbly
   cartoons, to create The New Tom and Jerry/Grape Ape Show, The Tom and
   Jerry/Grape Ape/Mumbly Show, and The Tom and Jerry/Mumbly Show, all of
   which ran on ABC Saturday Morning from September 6, 1975 to September
   3, 1977. In these cartoons, Tom and Jerry (now with a red bow tie), who
   had been enemies during their formative years, became nonviolent pals
   who went on adventures together, as Hanna-Barbera had to meet the
   stringent rules against violence for children's TV.

   Filmation Studios (in association with MGM Television) also tried their
   hands at producing a Tom and Jerry TV series. Their version, The Tom
   and Jerry Comedy Show, debuted in 1980, and also featured new cartoons
   starring Droopy Dog, Spike, and Barney Bear, not seen since the
   original MGM shorts. The thirty Filmation Tom and Jerry cartoons were
   noticeably different from Hanna-Barbera's efforts, as they returned Tom
   and Jerry to the original chase formula, with a somewhat more
   "slapstick" humor format. This incarnation, much like the 1975 version,
   was not as well received by audiences as the originals, and lasted on
   CBS Saturday Morning from September 6, 1980 to September 4, 1982.

   One of the biggest trends for Saturday morning television in the 1980s
   and 1990s was the "babyfication" of older, classic cartoon stars, and
   on September 8, 1990, Tom and Jerry Kids Show, produced by
   Hanna-Barbera Productions in association with Turner Entertainment,
   debuted on FOX. It featured a youthful version of the famous
   cat-and-mouse duo chasing each other. As with the 1970s H-B series,
   Jerry wears his red bowtie, while Tom now wears a red cap. Spike and
   his son Tyke, and Droopy and his son Dripple, appeared in back-up
   segments for the show, which ran until October 2, 1993.

   In 2000, a new Tom & Jerry cartoon entitled The Mansion Cat premiered
   on Cartoon Network. It featured Joseph Barbera as producer and as the
   voice of Tom's owner, whose face is never seen. In this cartoon, Jerry,
   housed in a habitrail, is as much of a house pet as Tom is, and their
   owner has to remind Tom to not "blame everything on the mouse".

   A new Tom & Jerry short, entitled The Karateguard, which had been
   written by Joseph Barbera, directed by Barbera and Spike Brandt,
   storyboarded by Barbera and Iwao Takamoto and produced by Joseph
   Barbera, Spike Brandt and Tony Cervone premiered in Los Angeles cinemas
   on September 27, 2005. As part of the celebration of Tom & Jerry's
   sixty-fifth anniversary, this marked Joe Barbera's first return as a
   writer, director and story board artist on the series since his and
   Hanna's original cartoon shorts from 1940-58. Director/animator Spike
   Brandt was nominated for an Annie award for best character animation.
   On Friday, January 27, 2006, the short debuted on Cartoon Network.

   During the first half of 2005, a new series called Tom and Jerry Tales
   was produced at Warner Bros. Thirteen half-hour episodes (each
   consisting of three shorts) were produced, with only markets outside of
   the United States and United Kingdom signed up. The show then came to
   the UK in February 2006 on Boomerang, and is currently airing on Kids'
   WB! on The CW in the US. . Tales is the first Tom and Jerry TV series
   that utilizes the original style of the classic shorts, along with the
   violence.

Feature films

   In 1945, Jerry made an appearance in the live-action MGM musical
   feature film Anchors Aweigh, in which, through the use of special
   effects, he performs a dance routine with Gene Kelly. In this sequence,
   Gene Kelly is telling a class of school kids a fictional tale of how he
   earned his medal of honour. Jerry is the king of a magical world
   populated with cartoon animals, whom he has forbidden to dance as he
   himself does not know how. Gene Kelly's character then comes along and
   guides Jerry through an elaborate dance routine, resulting in Jerry
   awarding him with a medal. Jerry speaks and sings in this film; his
   voice is performed by Sara Berner. Tom has a cameo in the sequence as
   one of Jerry's servants.

   Both Tom and Jerry appear with Esther Williams in a dream sequence in
   another MGM musical, Dangerous When Wet (1953). In the film, Tom and
   Jerry are chasing each other underwater, when they run into Esther
   Williams, with whom they perform an extended synchronized swimming
   routine. Tom and Jerry have to save Esther from a lecherous octopus,
   who tries to lure and woo Esther into his (many) arms.

   1992 saw the overseas release of Tom and Jerry: The Movie, produced by
   Phil Roman. The film was released to United States theatres in 1993. A
   musical in the typical Disney-esque vein, Tom and Jerry: The Movie was
   criticized by reviewers and audiences alike for being predictable and
   for giving Tom and Jerry dialogue (and songs) through the entire film.
   As a result, it failed at the box office.

   In 2001, Warner Bros., which had by then merged with Turner and assumed
   its properties, released the direct-to-video movie Tom and Jerry: The
   Magic Ring, in which Tom covets a ring which grants mystical powers to
   the wearer, and has become accidentally stuck on Jerry's head. Also,
   William Hannah and Joseph Barbera co-executive produced "Tom & Jerry"
   for the final time. Four years later, Bill Kopp scripted and directed
   two more feature films for Warner Bros.: Tom and Jerry Blast Off to
   Mars and Tom and Jerry: The Fast and The Furry, the latter one based on
   a story by Joseph Barbera. Both were released on DVD in 2005, starting
   the celebration of Tom and Jerry's sixty-fifth anniversary. Tom and
   Jerry: The Fast and The Furry was released theatrically in select
   cities on June 3, 2006 by Kidtoon Films. In 2006, another
   direct-to-video film Tom and Jerry: Shiver Me Whiskers tells a story
   about Tom and Jerry having to work together to get treasure. This
   became the last "Tom & Jerry" cartoon to be co-executive produced by
   Joseph Barbera, who had been involved at this stage of every
   direct-to-video feature.

Other formats

   Tom and Jerry began appearing in comic books in 1942, as one of the
   features in Our Gang Comics. In 1949, with MGM's live-action Our Gang
   shorts long out of production, the series was renamed Tom and Jerry
   Comics. The pair continued to appear in various books for the rest of
   the 20th century.

   The pair have also appeared in a number of video games as well,
   spanning titles for systems from the Nintendo Entertainment System and
   Super NES to more recent entries for Playstation 2, Xbox, and Nintendo
   Gamecube.

Cultural influences

   Throughout the years, the term and title Tom & Jerry became practically
   synonymous with never-ending rivalry, probably more so than the 'cat
   and mouse fight' metaphor did.

   The Simpsons characters Itchy & Scratchy, of the self-named cartoon on
   the Krusty the Clown Show, are spoofs of Tom and Jerry. The extreme
   cartoon violence of the Tom and Jerry is parodied and intensified, as
   Itchy (the mouse) dispatches Scratchy in various gratuitous, gory
   fashions. In one episode, Itchy & Scratchy is replaced by a cartoon
   called Worker and Parasite, a parody of the Gene Deitch Tom and Jerry
   cartoons.

   Tom and Jerry are also parodied in the original Sally the Witch anime
   (1966), and The Fairly Oddparents film Channel Chasers (2004).

Tom and Jerry on DVD

   There have been several Tom and Jerry DVDs released in Region 1 (the
   United States and Canada), including a series of two-disc sets known as
   the Tom and Jerry Spotlight Collection. There have been negative
   responses to these sets, due to some of the cartoons included on each
   having cuts and/or redubbed Mammy Two-Shoes dialogue.

   In the United Kingdom, most of the Tom and Jerry shorts have been
   released in their chronological order (a few, such as Million Dollar
   Cat, were not included, for unknown reasons). However, these contain
   many edits, such as blackface jokes. Almost all of the shorts contain
   the re-dubbed Mammy Two-Shoes track. Despite these cuts, His Mouse
   Friday, the only Tom and Jerry cartoon to be completely taken off the
   airways, due to racism, is included, unedited with the exception of
   extreme zooming-in towards the end to avoid showing a particularly
   racist caricature.

Filmography

Notable cartoons

   The following cartoons won the Academy Award (Oscar) for Best Short
   Subject: Cartoons:
     * 1943: The Yankee Doodle Mouse
     * 1944: Mouse Trouble
     * 1945: Quiet Please!
     * 1946: The Cat Concerto
     * 1948: The Little Orphan
     * 1951: The Two Mouseketeers
     * 1952: Johann Mouse

   These cartoons were nominated for the Academy Award (Oscar) for Best
   Short Subject: Cartoons, but did not win:
     * 1940: Puss Gets the Boot
     * 1941: The Night Before Christmas
     * 1947: Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Mouse
     * 1949: Hatch Up Your Troubles
     * 1950: Jerry's Cousin
     * 1954: Touche, Pussy Cat!

   These cartoons were nominated for the Annie Award in the Individual
   Achievements Category: Character Animation, but did not win:
     * 1946: Springtime for Thomas
     * 1955: That's My Mommy
     * 1956: Muscle Beach Tom
     * 2005: The KarateGuard

Original TV series

     * The Tom and Jerry Show ( ABC, 1975–1977)
     * The Tom and Jerry Comedy Show ( CBS, 1980–1982)
     * Tom and Jerry Kids Show ( FOX, 1990–1993)
     * Tom and Jerry Tales ( WB/ CW, 2006–present

Feature films

     * Anchors Aweigh ( MGM, 1945)
     * Dangerous When Wet (MGM, 1953)
     * Tom and Jerry: The Movie ( Miramax, 1993)

Direct-to-video features

     * Tom and Jerry: The Magic Ring ( Warner Home Video, 2001)
     * Tom and Jerry: Blast Off to Mars (Warner Home Video, 2005)
     * Tom and Jerry: The Fast and the Furry (Warner Home Video, 2005)
     * Tom and Jerry: Shiver Me Whiskers (Warner Home Video, 2006)

Video games

     * Tom and Jerry for Nintendo Entertainment System
     * Tom and Jerry: The Movie for the Sega Master System and Sega Game
       Gear
     * Tom and Jerry for Super Nintendo & Sega Genesis
     * Tom and Jerry: Mouse Attacks for Game Boy Colour
     * Tom and Jerry: Infurnal Escape for the Game Boy Advance
     * Tom and Jerry: The Magic Ring for the Game Boy Advance
     * Tom and Jerry: War of the Whiskers for the PlayStation 2, Xbox, and
       Nintendo GameCube
     * Tom and Jerry: House Trap for the PlayStation
     * Tom and Jerry: Fists of Furry for Nintendo 64 and PC
     * Tom and Jerry Tales for Nintendo DS
     * Tom and Jerry Cheese Chase for Mobile phone
     * Tom and Jerry Food Fight for Mobile phone
     * Tom & Jerry Cat-astrophe for PC

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tom_and_Jerry_%28MGM%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
