   #copyright

Toronto

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: North American Geography

   City of Toronto
   Skyline of City of Toronto

   Official flag of City of Toronto

                                   Coat of arms of City of Toronto
   Flag                            Coat of arms
   Motto: Diversity Our Strength
   Location of Toronto and its census metropolitan area in the province of
   Ontario
   Location of Toronto and its census metropolitan area in the province of
   Ontario
   Coordinates: 43°40′N 79°25′W
   Country Canada
   Province Ontario
   Established March 6, 1834
   Amalgamated January 1, 1998
   Mayor David Miller
   City Council Toronto City Council
   Representatives MPs, MPPs, and Senators
   Area
    - City 629.91 km²  (243.2  sq mi)
   Population
    - City (2001) 2,481,494 (2001 census)
    - Density 3,939/km² (10,203/sq mi)
    - Urban 4,366,508 (2001 census)
    - Metro 5,304,100 (2005 census)
   Time zone EST ( UTC-5)
    - Summer ( DST) EDT ( UTC-4)
   Website: www.toronto.ca

   The City of Toronto is the largest city in Canada and the provincial
   capital of Ontario, located on the northwestern shore of Lake Ontario.
   With 2.48 million residents it is the fifth-most populous municipality
   in North America after Mexico City, New York City, Los Angeles and
   Chicago. Toronto is at the heart of the Greater Toronto Area, and is
   part of a densely-populated region in south-central Ontario known as
   the Golden Horseshoe. Residents of Toronto are called Torontonians.

   As Canada's economic hub and a major world city, Toronto is
   highly-developed in the sectors of finance, telecommunications,
   transportation, media, software production and medical research. The
   city is home to the CN Tower and many national and transnational
   corporate head offices. With the help of immigration, Toronto has a
   very cosmopolitan population representing cultures and ethnicities from
   around the world. Because of its low crime, clean environment and
   generally high standard of living, the city is consistently rated one
   of the world's most livable cities by the Economist Intelligence Unit.

History

   The first European presence was established by French traders at Fort
   Rouillé in 1750, on the current Exhibition Grounds. The first influx of
   Europeans was the result of United Empire Loyalists fleeing to
   unsettled lands north of Lake Ontario during the American Revolutionary
   War. With its natural protected harbour, the settlement served as a
   British naval base.

   The town was named York by Lieutenant-Governor John Graves Simcoe in
   1793, when he selected it to replace Newark as the capital of Upper
   Canada. By 1800, the town was still smaller than Kingston, and
   consisted of probably not more than fifty families. In 1813, as part of
   the War of 1812, York was captured and major buildings were burned by
   American soldiers. The town's surrender was negotiated by John
   Strachan.
   Toronto's Yonge Street in 1903.
   Enlarge
   Toronto's Yonge Street in 1903.

   The city grew rapidly through the remainder of the 19th century, as a
   major destination for immigrants to Canada. On March 6, 1834, York
   reverted to its original Iroquois name of Toronto. By then a bustling
   steamboat entry port, the city's development was aided by the addition
   of gaslit street lights and sewers. Toronto's growth further
   accelerated after it was linked by rail to the Upper Great Lakes in
   1854. Industrialization in the 1870s ensured Toronto's place as a major
   economic centre in the new Canadian Confederation.

   By the 1920s, Toronto's population and economic importance in Canada
   was surpassed only by Montreal, and in 1934 the Toronto Stock Exchange
   had become the largest in the country. The city experienced an influx
   of immigrants following the Second World War and sustained immigration
   after 1970. By the 1980s, Toronto had emerged as Canada's most populous
   city and the generally-acknowledged economic hub. The city became home
   to a majority of corporate headquarters in Canada and the largest
   banking and exchange centre.
   The Toronto Docks at the foot of Yonge Street in 1910.
   Enlarge
   The Toronto Docks at the foot of Yonge Street in 1910.

   In 1954, the City of Toronto was federated into a regional government
   known as Metropolitan Toronto. The postwar boom had resulted in rapid
   suburban development, and it was believed that a coordinated land use
   strategy and shared services would provide greater efficiency for the
   region. The metropolitan government began to manage services that
   crossed municipal boundaries, including highways, water and public
   transit. In 1967, the seven smallest municipalities of the region were
   merged into their larger neighbours, resulting in a six-city
   configuration that included the City of Toronto and the surrounding
   municipalities of East York, Etobicoke, North York, Scarborough and
   York.

   In 1998, the metropolitan government was dissolved and the six
   municipalities were amalgamated into a single municipality, creating
   the current City of Toronto.

Origin of name

   Toronto is an Iroquois word meaning "place where trees stand in the
   water". It refers to the area north and south of what is now Lake
   Simcoe (then known as Lake Toronto), where the Huron Indians planted
   tree saplings to corral fish. The portage between Lake Ontario and Lake
   Huron along this route was called the Toronto Portage.

Geography and climate

   A simulated-colour image of Toronto taken by NASA's Landsat 7
   satellite.
   Enlarge
   A simulated-colour image of Toronto taken by NASA's Landsat 7
   satellite.
   Late spring scene in High Park, in Toronto's west end.
   Enlarge
   Late spring scene in High Park, in Toronto's west end.

Topography

   Toronto covers an area of 629.91 square kilometres (243.21 sq mi), with
   a maximum north-south distance of 21 kilometres (13 mi) and a maximum
   east-west distance of 43 kilometres (27 mi). It is bounded by Lake
   Ontario to the south, Etobicoke Creek and Highway 427 to the west,
   Steeles Avenue to the north and the Rouge River to the east.

   The city is further intersected by two other rivers and numerous
   tributaries: the Humber River in the west end and the Don River east of
   downtown. The many creeks and rivers create large tracts of
   densely-forested ravines, and provide ideal sites for parks and
   recreational trails. However, the ravines also interfere with the
   city's grid plan, and this results in major thoroughfares such as Finch
   Avenue, Leslie Street, Lawrence Avenue, St. Clair Avenue and Keele
   Street terminating on one side of ravines and continuing on the other
   side. Other thoroughfares such as the Bloor Street Viaduct are required
   to span above the ravines.

   During the last ice age, the present site of Toronto was beneath
   Glacial Lake Iroquois. Today, a series of escarpments mark the lake's
   former boundary, known as the Iroquois Shoreline. The escarpments are
   most prominent from Victoria Park Avenue to the mouth of Highland
   Creek, where they form the Scarborough Bluffs. Other noticeable
   sections include the area near St. Clair Avenue West between Bathurst
   Street and the Don River, and south of Davenport Road from Caledonia to
   Spadina Avenue.

Climate

   Toronto's climate is moderated by its southerly location within Canada
   and its proximity to Lake Ontario; its climate is among the mildest of
   any place in Canada east of the Rocky Mountain range. The city
   experiences four distinct seasons with considerable variance in daily
   temperature, particularly during the winter months.

   Toronto winters are usually accompanied by several cold snaps where
   maximum temperatures drop to the -10 °C (14 °F) to -15 °C (5 °F) range,
   often made to feel colder by windchill. Mild days also occur throughout
   winter, with temperatures around 5 – 9°C (40 – 50 °F). The average
   maximum temperature in January is -2.1 °C (28.2 °F), and the average
   minimum is -10.5 °C (13.1 °F). Summer in Toronto is characterized by
   long stretches of humid weather. The average July maximum temperature
   is 26.8 °C (80 °F), and the average minimum is 14.8 °C (58.6 °F).
   Daytime temperatures sometimes approach or exceed 35 °C (95 °F), but
   usually for very brief periods.

   Precipitation is fairly evenly distributed throughout the year, but
   summer is usually the wettest season. The average yearly precipitation
   is 793 millimetres (31.7 in), with an average annual snowfall of about
   115 centimetres (46 in).
   Weather averages for Toronto
   Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Year
   Avg high °F 30.0 31.6 40.3 52.3 65.3 74.3 79.5 77.5 69.3 56.8 45.3 35.2
   54.8
   Avg low °F 18.9 20.7 28.4 38.8 49.8 58.6 64.2 63.1 55.8 45.1 36.0 25.3
   42.1
   Avg high °C -1.1 -0.2 4.6 11.3 18.5 23.5 26.4 25.3 20.7 13.8 7.4 1.8
   12.7
   Avg low °C -7.3 -6.3 -2.0 3.8 9.9 14.8 17.9 17.3 13.2 7.3 2.2 -3.7 5.6
   Precipitation (in) 1.9 1.8 2.3 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.8 3.2 2.8 2.5 2.6 2.4 30.1
   Precipitation (cm) 6.1 5.1 6.6 7.0 7.3 7.2 6.8 8.0 8.3 6.5 7.6 7.1 83.6
   Source: Weatherbase Nov 2006

Cityscape

   The CN Tower is the world's tallest free-standing structure.
   Enlarge
   The CN Tower is the world's tallest free-standing structure.
   Skyscrapers in Toronto's Financial District.
   Enlarge
   Skyscrapers in Toronto's Financial District.
   Toronto's Financial District as seen from Roy Thomson Hall.
   Enlarge
   Toronto's Financial District as seen from Roy Thomson Hall.

   Downtown remains the most densely-populated section of Toronto. At the
   heart of Downtown lies the city's Financial District along Bay Street.
   The district contains the largest cluster of skyscrapers in Canada,
   including the First Canadian Place, Toronto Dominion Centre, Scotia
   Plaza, Royal Bank Plaza, Commerce Court and BCE Place. From that point,
   the Toronto skyline extends northward along Yonge Street. Downtown,
   Midtown and Uptown also contain many historically wealthy residential
   enclaves, such as Yorkville, Rosedale, The Annex, Forest Hill, Lawrence
   Park, Moore Park, and Casa Loma. These neighbourhoods generally feature
   upscale homes, luxury condominiums and high-end retail and services. At
   the same time, the Downtown vicinity includes neighbourhoods with a
   high proportion of recent immigrants living in social housing and
   rental highrises, such as St. Jamestown, Regent Park and Parkdale.

   The inner-city districts of York and East York are older, traditionally
   middle-class sections that became ethnically diverse in recent decades.
   Many neighbourhoods in the inner suburbs experienced accelerated
   gentrification as a result of increasing population and a housing boom
   that ran through the late 1990s and early 2000s. The first
   neighbourhoods affected were Leaside and North Toronto, gradually
   progressing into the western neighbourhoods in York. Much of the
   housing in these areas consist of post-World War I single-family homes,
   but many of them are in the process of being replaced or remodelled.

   The outer districts of Etobicoke, Scarborough and North York are
   generally suburban, although they largely retain the grid patterns of
   the streets laid before the post-war suburban development. Upscale
   neighborhoods include Bridle Path in North York, the area surrounding
   the Scarborough Bluffs in Guildwood, and most of central Etobicoke,
   such as Humber Valley Village, and The Kingsway. Other sections contain
   large apartment blocks of low-income families, mixed with typical
   detached housing found in suburbia. More recently, North York Centre
   and Scarborough City Centre have emerged as secondary business
   districts outside the downtown core. Highrise development in these
   areas have given North York and Scarborough distinguishable skylines of
   their own.

   Many Toronto neighborhoods have a simple symbolic layout of side
   streets lined with post-war semi's, and covered with tree's, and main
   streets with older home's, several stores and streetcars. Good examples
   are The Beaches, Riverdale and much of Midtown.

Demographics

   A street sign on College Street in Toronto's Little Italy.
   Enlarge
   A street sign on College Street in Toronto's Little Italy.

   The last complete census by Statistics Canada estimated there were
   2,481,494 people residing in Toronto in 2001. The city's population
   grew by 4 percent between 1996 and 2001, at an annualized rate of 0.8
   percent. Persons aged 14 years and under made up 17.5 percent of the
   population, and those aged 65 years and over made up 13.6 percent. The
   median age of the population was 36.9 years. As of July 1, 2006, the
   population is estimated at 2,629,030.

   With a long history as a major destination for immigrants to Canada,
   Toronto is one of the world's most multicultural cities. As of 2001,
   more than 40 percent of the city's residents belong to a visible
   minority group, and visible minorities are projected to comprise a
   majority in Toronto by 2017.. According to the United Nations
   Development Programme, Toronto has the second-highest percentage of
   foreign-born population among world cities, after Miami, Florida. While
   Miami's foreign-born population consists mostly of Cubans and other
   Latin Americans, no single nationality or culture dominates Toronto's
   immigrant population.

   This diversity is reflected in Toronto's ethnic neighbourhoods, some of
   which include several Chinatowns, Little Italy, Little Jamaica, Little
   India, the downtown Chinatown, Koreatown, Malta Village, Greektown,
   Portugal Village, Corso Italia, Augusta Avenue and Little Mogadishu.

   Christianity is the largest religious group in Toronto. The 2001 census
   reports that 31.4 percent of the city's population is Roman Catholic,
   followed by Protestants at 21.2 percent, Eastern Orthodox Christians at
   4.9 percent and other Christians at 3.9 percent. Islam is the second
   largest religion in the city, with Muslims accounting for 6.7 percent
   of the population, while Judaism comprise 4.2 percent, Hinduism
   comprise 4.8 percent, Sikhism comprise 0.9 percent, Buddhism comprise
   2.7 percent and other Eastern Religions comprise 0.2 percent. Another
   18.9 percent of the population profess no faith.

   While English is the predominant language spoken by Torontonians, a few
   other languages have considerable numbers of local speakers, including
   Italian, Chinese, Portuguese, Tamil, Persian, Spanish and Punjabi.
   After English, Italian is the second-most widely-spoken language used
   at work. As a result, the city's 9-1-1 emergency services are equipped
   to respond in multiple languages.

Government

   The Toronto City Hall viewed from Nathan Phillips Square.
   Enlarge
   The Toronto City Hall viewed from Nathan Phillips Square.
   The Ontario Legislative Building is the standing symbol of Toronto
   being the seat of government in Ontario
   Enlarge
   The Ontario Legislative Building is the standing symbol of Toronto
   being the seat of government in Ontario

   .

   Toronto is a single-tier municipality governed by a mayor-council
   system. The Toronto City Council is a unicameral body, comprised of a
   mayor elected by direct popular vote and 44 councillors respresenting
   geographical wards throughout the city. All members of the city
   council, including the mayor, serve three-year terms without term
   limits. (After the 2006 municipal election, members of the council will
   serve four-year terms.)

   The city council is divided into six standing committees with between 9
   and 12 members: policy and finance, administration, works, economic
   development and parks, community services, and planning and
   transportation. Additionally, the city has four community councils that
   make recommendations on local matters to the city council, but possess
   no final authority. Each city councillor serves as a member on a
   community council.

   Toronto has an operating budget of C$7.1 billion. The city receives
   funding from the Government of Ontario in addition to tax revenues,
   including $2.5 billion dollars for mandated purposes, $2.0 billion for
   special-purpose bodies such as the Toronto Public Library and Toronto
   Zoo, $1.7 billion of directly-controlled funds, and $900 million for
   capital financing and non-programs.

   Torontonians are represented at the federal and provincial governments
   by 22 Members of Parliament in the House of Commons and another 22
   Members of Provincial Parliament in the Legislative Assembly of
   Ontario.

Economy

   Royal Bank Plaza is the corporate headquarters of the Royal Bank of
   Canada.
   Enlarge
   Royal Bank Plaza is the corporate headquarters of the Royal Bank of
   Canada.

   Toronto is a major international centre for business and finance.
   Generally considered the financial capital of Canada, Toronto has a
   high concentration of banks and brokerage firms on Bay Street, the
   country's equivalent to Wall Street in New York. The Toronto Stock
   Exchange is the world's sixth-largest stock exchange by market
   capitalization. All of the Big Five banks of Canada are headquartered
   in Toronto.

   Toronto has a gross domestic product of US$225 billion. The gross
   metropolitan product of its metropolitan area is about US$305 billion,
   seventh-largest in the world after New York City, London, Tokyo, Paris,
   Los Angeles and Chicago.

   The city is a national centre for the media, publishing,
   telecomunications and information technology industries; it is home to
   Thomson Corporation, Bell Globemedia, Rogers Communications and
   Celestica. Other prominent Canadian corporations in Toronto include
   Four Seasons Hotels, the Hudson's Bay Company and Manulife Financial.
   Most multinational companies also establish their Canadian head offices
   in Toronto.

   Although much of the region's manufacturing activities take place
   outside the city limits, Toronto continues to be an important wholesale
   and distribution point for the industrial sector. The city's strategic
   position along the Quebec City-Windsor Corridor and its extensive road
   and rail connections help support the nearby production of motor
   vehicles, iron, steel, food, machinery, chemicals and paper. The
   completion of the St. Lawrence Seaway in 1959 gave ships access to the
   Great Lakes from the Atlantic Ocean.

Education

   The main building of Victoria College in the University of Toronto.
   Enlarge
   The main building of Victoria College in the University of Toronto.

   Toronto is home to a diverse range of public and private educational
   institutions. The Toronto District School Board operates more than 500
   public schools and is the largest school board in Canada. Additionally,
   the Toronto Catholic District School Board manages the city's
   publicly-funded Roman Catholic schools, while the Conseil scolaire de
   district catholique Centre-Sud manages public French-language schools.
   There are also numerous private university-preparatory schools, such as
   Upper Canada College, St. Michael's College School, Havergal College,
   Bishop Strachan School, Toronto French School, De La Salle College, and
   Crescent School.

   The University of Toronto, established in 1827, is the oldest
   university in the province of Ontario and a leading public research
   institution. The city is also home to Ryerson University, York
   University and the Ontario College of Art & Design.

   There are five diploma-granting community colleges in Toronto: Seneca
   College, Humber College, Centennial College, Sheridan College and
   George Brown College. The Royal Conservatory of Music, which includes
   The Glenn Gould School, is a major music school located in downtown.
   The Canadian Film Centre is a film, television and new media training
   institute founded by filmmaker Norman Jewison.

   The Toronto Public Library is the largest public library system in
   Canada, consisting of 99 branches with more than 11 million items in
   its collection.

Culture

   Roy Thomson Hall, home of the Toronto Symphony Orchestra.
   Enlarge
   Roy Thomson Hall, home of the Toronto Symphony Orchestra.
   The Hockey Hall of Fame, built in 1885, is located at the intersection
   of Front Street and Yonge Street in Downtown Toronto.
   Enlarge
   The Hockey Hall of Fame, built in 1885, is located at the intersection
   of Front Street and Yonge Street in Downtown Toronto.

   Toronto is a major scene for theatre and other performing arts, with
   more than fifty ballet and dance companies, six opera companies and two
   symphony orchestras. The city is home to the Canadian Opera Company and
   the Toronto Symphony Orchestra. Major performance venues include the
   Four Seasons Centre for the Performing Arts, Roy Thomson Hall, the
   Princess of Wales Theatre, the Royal Alexandra Theatre, Massey Hall,
   the Toronto Centre for the Arts, the Elgin Teatre, the Winter Garden
   Theatre and the Hummingbird Centre (formerly the "O'Keefe Centre").
   Ontario Place features the world's first permanent IMAX movie theatre,
   the Cinesphere, as well as the Molson Amphitheatre, an open-air venue
   for large-scale music concerts. Each summer, the Canadian Stage Company
   presents an outdoor Shakespeare production in Toronto’s High Park
   called "Dream in High Park". Canada's Walk of Fame acknowledges the
   achievements of successful Canadians, with of a series of stars on
   designated blocks of sidewalks along King Street and Simcoe Street.

   The Distillery District is a pedestrian village containing boutiques,
   art galleries, restaurants, artist studios and small breweries,
   including the well-known Mill Street Brewery. A new theatre in the
   district, the Young Centre for the Performing Arts, is the home of the
   Soulpepper Theatre Company and the drama productions of nearby George
   Brown College.

   The production of domestic and foreign film and television is a major
   local industry. Toronto often stands in on screen for large American
   cities like New York and Chicago. Many movie releases are screened in
   Toronto prior to wider release in North America. The Toronto
   International Film Festival is one of the most important annual events
   for the international film industry.

Sites of interest

   Toronto's best-known landmark is the CN Tower, which currently stands
   as the tallest free-standing land structure in the world at 553 metres
   (1,815 ft).

   The Royal Ontario Museum is a major museum for world culture and
   natural history. The Art Gallery of Ontario contains a large collection
   of Canadian, European, African and contemporary artwork. The Canadian
   National Exhibition is held annually at Exhibition Place. The Don
   Valley Brick Works has recently been restored as a park and heritage
   site.

   The Bloor- Yorkville neighbourhood is one of Toronto's most elegant
   shopping and dining areas. Other notable neightbourhoods and places
   include the Beaches, the Toronto Islands, Kensington Market, the
   Toronto Eaton Centre, and the Hockey Hall of Fame.

Sports

   Toronto is the only Canadian city with representation in major league
   ice hockey, baseball, and basketball through National Hockey League,
   Major League Baseball, and National Basketball Association teams. It
   also has teams in Canadian football, lacrosse and football (soccer)
   with teams in the Canadian Football League, National Lacrosse League
   and Major League Soccer. The city's major sports complexes include the
   Air Canada Centre and the Rogers Centre.

   In addition to team sports, both thoroughbred and standardbred
   horseracing are conducted at Woodbine Race Track in Rexdale.

   Historic sports clubs of Toronto include the Granite Club (est. 1836),
   the Royal Canadian Yacht Club (est. 1852), the Toronto Cricket Skating
   and Curling Club (est. pre-1827), the Argonaut Rowing Club (est. 1872),
   the Toronto Lawn Tennis Club (est. 1881), and the Badminton and Racquet
   Club (est. 1924).

   CAPTION: Sports teams of Toronto

   Club League Sport Venue Established Championships
   Toronto Argonauts CFL Football Rogers Centre 1873
   15
   Toronto Maple Leafs NHL Hockey Air Canada Centre 1917 13
   Toronto Maple Leafs IBL Baseball Christie Pits 1969 7
   Toronto Blue Jays MLB Baseball Rogers Centre 1977 2
   Toronto Raptors NBA Basketball Air Canada Centre 1995 0
   Toronto Lynx PDL Soccer Centennial Park Stadium 1997 0
   Toronto St. Michaels Majors OHL Ice Hockey St. Michael's College School
   Arena 1997 0
   Toronto Rock NLL Indoor Lacrosse Air Canada Centre 1998 5
   Toronto Marlies AHL Hockey Ricoh Coliseum 2005 0
   Toronto FC MLS Soccer BMO Field 2007 0

   Each weekend, a group of cyclists take on the Toronto Donut Ride, an
   informal group road ride that challenges riders through its length,
   speed, and terrain.

Infrastructure

Health and medicine

   Atrium of the Hospital for Sick Children. Designed by Eberhard Zeidler.
   Enlarge
   Atrium of the Hospital for Sick Children. Designed by Eberhard Zeidler.

   Toronto is home to the Hospital for Sick Children, Mount Sinai
   Hospital, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto General Hospital, Sunnybrook
   Health Sciences Centre, Princess Margaret Hospital among others and the
   University of Toronto Faculty of Medicine.

   Toronto's Discovery District is centre of research in biomedicine. It
   is located on a 2.5 square kilometre research park that is fully
   integrated into Toronto’s downtown core. It is also home to the Medical
   and Related Sciences Centre (MaRS), which was created in 2000 to
   capitalize on the research and innovation strength of the Province of
   Ontario, and to position Canada for leadership in the highly
   competitive global innovation economy. Another institute is the
   McLaughlin Centre for Molecular Medicine (MCMM).

Transportation

   The main entrance of the Beaux arts style Union Station built in 1927.
   Enlarge
   The main entrance of the Beaux arts style Union Station built in 1927.

   Toronto has one of the largest public transit systems in North America.
   Canada's busiest airport, Toronto Pearson International Airport (YYZ),
   is located along the city's western boundary with Mississauga. The city
   also has a smaller commercial airport, the politically contentious
   Toronto City Centre Airport (usually called the "Island Airport"),
   located on the Toronto Islands.
   Highway 401, in North York, approaching Leslie Street.
   Enlarge
   Highway 401, in North York, approaching Leslie Street.

   The Government of Ontario operates an extensive rail and bus transit
   system called GO Transit that links the neighbouring cities and suburbs
   with the City of Toronto. Thirty-eight trains on seven train lines run
   179 trips, and carry over 160,000 passengers a day. An additional 288
   buses feed the main rail lines. The Toronto Transit Commission (TTC)
   provides public transit within the City of Toronto. Its backbone is the
   city's subway system, which includes the "U"-shaped north-south
   Yonge-University-Spadina line, the east-west Bloor-Danforth line, the
   east-west Sheppard line through the northern part of the city, and the
   Scarborough RT line running through the eastern part of the city
   (Scarborough). The TTC also operates an extensive network of buses and
   streetcars.

   There are a number of freeways that serve Toronto and the Greater
   Toronto Area. Bisecting the city from west to east is Highway 401,
   which acts as a bypass of the Downtown core, and it is one of the
   busiest highways in North America. At its interchange with Highway 400,
   where it spans 22 lanes, it sees over 400,000 vehicles on an average
   day. Other freeways in Toronto include Highway 404/ Don Valley Parkway,
   Gardiner Expressway/ Queen Elizabeth Way, William R. Allen Road,
   Highway 427 and Highway 409.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toronto"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
