   #copyright

Tourism

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Business

          "Tourist" redirects here; for the album by Athlete, see Tourist
          (album)
          For the Roxette album, see Tourism (album)
          For the Saint Germain album, see Tourist (Saint Germain album)
          For the 1970's rock group, see The Tourists

   Tourists at Oahu island, Hawaii
   Enlarge
   Tourists at Oahu island, Hawaii

   Tourism is the act of travel for predominantly recreational or leisure
   purposes, and also refers to the provision of services in support of
   this act. According to the World Tourism Organization, tourists are
   people who "travel to and stay in places outside their usual
   environment for not more than one consecutive year for leisure,
   business and other purposes not related to the exercise of an activity
   remunerated from within the place visited". The distance between a
   place of origin and a tourism destination is immaterial to this
   definition. Tourism has become an extremely popular, global activity.
   In 2004, there were over 763 million international tourist arrivals.

   As a service industry, tourism has numerous tangible and intangible
   elements. Major tangible elements include transportation,
   accommodation, and other components of a hospitality industry. Major
   intangible elements relate to the purpose or motivation for becoming a
   tourist, such as rest, relaxation, the opportunity to meet new people
   and experience other cultures, or simply to do something different and
   have an adventure.

   Tourism is vital for many countries, due to the income generated by the
   consumption of goods and services by tourists, the taxes levied on
   businesses in the tourism industry, and the opportunity for employment
   and economic advancement by working in the industry. For these reasons
   NGOs and government agencies may sometimes promote a specific region as
   a tourist destination, and support the development of a tourism
   industry in that area. The contemporary phenomenon of mass tourism may
   sometimes result in overdevelopment, however alternative forms of
   tourism such as ecotourism seek to avoid such outcomes by pursuing
   tourism in a sustainable way.

   The terms tourism and travel are sometimes used interchangeably. In
   this context travel has a similar definition to tourism, but implies a
   more purposeful journey. The terms tourism and tourist are sometimes
   used pejoratively to imply a shallow interest in the cultures or
   locations visited by tourists.

Definition, classification and prerequisites

General Definition

   One of the earliest definitions of tourism was provided by the Austrian
   economist Hermann Von Schullard in 1910, who defined it as, "sum total
   of operators, mainly of an economic nature, which directly relate to
   the entry, stay and movement of foreigners inside and outside a certain
   country, city or a region."

   Hunziker and Krapf, in 1941, defined tourism as "the sum of the
   phenomena and relationships arising from the travel and stay of
   non-residents, in so far as they do not lead to permanent residence and
   are not connected with any earning activity."

   In 1976 Tourism Society of England defined it as "Tourism is the
   temporary, short-term movement of people to destination outside the
   places where they normally live and work and their activities during
   the stay at each destination. It includes movements for all purposes."

   In 1981 International Association of Scientific Experts in Tourism
   defined Tourism in terms of particular activities selected by choice
   and undertaken outside the home environment.

United Nations Definition

   United Nations classified 3 forms of tourism in 1994 in its
   Recommendations on Tourism Statistics as follows:
    1. Domestic tourism, involving residents of the given country
       traveling only within this country;
    2. Inbound tourism, involving non-residents traveling in the given
       country;
    3. Outbound tourism, involving residents traveling in another country.

   UN also derived different categories of tourism by combining the 3
   basic forms of tourism:
    1. Internal tourism, which comprises domestic tourism and inbound
       tourism;
    2. National tourism, which comprises domestic tourism and outbound
       tourism;
    3. International tourism, which consists of inbound tourism and
       outbound tourism.

Prerequisites of tourism

   Before people are able to experience tourism they usually need at
   least:
    1. disposable income, i.e. money to spend on non-essentials
    2. leisure time
    3. tourism infrastructure, such as transport and accommodation

   Individually, sufficient health is also a condition, and of course the
   inclination to travel. Furthermore, in some countries there are legal
   restrictions on travelling, especially abroad. Certain states with
   strong governmental control over the lives of citizens (notably
   established Communist states) may restrict foreign travel only to
   trustworthy citizens. The United States prohibits its citizens from
   traveling to some countries, for example, Cuba.

History

   Beaches make popular tourist resorts.
   Enlarge
   Beaches make popular tourist resorts.

   Wealthy people have always travelled to distant parts of the world to
   see great buildings or other works of art, to learn new languages, to
   experience new cultures, or to taste new cuisine. As long ago as the
   time of the Roman Republic places such as Baiae were popular coastal
   resorts for the rich.

   The terms tourist and tourism were first used as official terms in 1937
   by the League of Nations. Tourism was defined as people travelling
   abroad for periods of over 24 hours.

Health tourism & leisure travel

   View of Machu Picchu, Peru
   Enlarge
   View of Machu Picchu, Peru

   The history of European tourism can perhaps be said to originate with
   the medieval pilgrimage. Although undertaken primarily for religious
   reasons, the pilgrims in the Canterbury Tales quite clearly saw the
   experience as a kind of holiday (the term itself being derived from the
   'holy day' and its associated leisure activities). Pilgrimages created
   a variety of tourist aspects that still exist - bringing back
   souvenirs, obtaining credit with foreign banks (in medieval times
   utilising international networks established by Jews and Lombards), and
   making use of space available on existing forms of transport (such as
   the use of medieval English wine ships bound for Vigo by pilgrims to
   Santiago De Compostela). Pilgrimages are still important in modern
   tourism - such as to Lourdes or Knock in Ireland. But there are modern
   equivalents - Graceland and the grave of Jim Morrison in Père Lachaise
   Cemetery.

   During the seventeenth century, it became fashionable in England to
   undertake a Grand Tour. The sons of the nobility and gentry were sent
   upon an extended tour of Europe as an educational experience. The
   eighteenth century was the golden age of the Grand Tour, and many of
   the fashionable visitors were painted at Rome by Pompeo Batoni. A
   modern equivalent of the Grand Tour is the phenomenon of the
   backpacker, although cultural holidays, such as those offered by
   Swann-Hellenic, are also important.

   Health tourism has always existed, but it was not until the eighteenth
   century that it became important. In England, it was associated with
   spas, places with supposedly health-giving mineral waters, treating
   diseases from gout to liver disorders and bronchitis. Bath was the most
   fashionable resort, but Buxton, Harrogate, and Tunbridge Wells, amongst
   others, also flourished. Of course, people visited these places for the
   balls and other entertainments, just as much as 'the waters'.
   Continental Spas such as Karlsbad attracted many fashionable travellers
   by the nineteenth century.

   It could be argued that Britain was the home of the seaside holiday. In
   travelling to the coast, the population was following in the steps of
   Royalty. King George III made regular visits to Weymouth when in poor
   health. At the time, a number of doctors argued the benefits of bathing
   in sea water, and sea bathing as a widespread practice was popularised
   by the Prince Regent (later George IV), who frequented Brighton for
   this purpose.
   The Colca Canyon in Arequipa, Peru
   Enlarge
   The Colca Canyon in Arequipa, Peru

   Leisure travel was associated with the industrialization of United
   Kingdom – the first European country to promote leisure time to the
   increasing industrial population. Initially, this applied to the owners
   of the machinery of production, the economic oligarchy, the factory
   owners, and the traders. These comprised the new middle class. Cox &
   Kings were the first official travel company to be formed in 1758.
   Later, the working class could take advantage of leisure time.

   The British origin of this new industry is reflected in many place
   names. At Nice, one of the first and best-established holiday resorts
   on the French Riviera, the long esplanade along the seafront is known
   to this day as the Promenade des Anglais; in many other historic
   resorts in continental Europe, old well-established palace hotels have
   names like the Hotel Bristol, the Hotel Carlton or the Hotel Majestic -
   reflecting the dominance of English customers.

Winter tourism

   Winter sports were largely invented by the British leisured classes,
   initially at the Swiss village of Zermatt ( Valais), and St Moritz in
   1864. The first packaged winter sports holidays took place in 1902 at
   Adelboden, Switzerland. Winter sports were a natural answer for a
   leisured class looking for amusement during the coldest season.

   Organized sport was well established in Britain before it reached other
   countries. The vocabulary of sport bears witness to this: rugby,
   football, and boxing all originated in Britain, and even tennis,
   originally a French sport, was formalized and codified by the British,
   who hosted the first national championship in the nineteenth century,
   at Wimbledon.

Mass travel

   Mass travel could only develop with two crucial features:
    1. improvements in technology allowed the transport of large numbers
       of people in a short space of time to places of leisure interest,
       and
    2. greater numbers of people began to enjoy the benefits of leisure
       time.

   Tourists at the Trevi Fountain, Rome, Italy.
   Enlarge
   Tourists at the Trevi Fountain, Rome, Italy.
   Corcovado Hill in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil with Jesus Christ the Redeemer
   statue
   Enlarge
   Corcovado Hill in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil with Jesus Christ the Redeemer
   statue
   The Nueve de Julio Avenue, the world's widest street, in Buenos Aires,
   Argentina.
   Enlarge
   The Nueve de Julio Avenue, the world's widest street, in Buenos Aires,
   Argentina.

   The pioneer of modern mass tourism was Thomas Cook who, on 5 July 1841,
   organized the first package tour in history. He arranged for the rail
   company to charge one shilling per person for a group of 570 temperance
   campaigners from Leicester to a rally in Loughborough, eleven miles
   away. Cook was paid a share of the fares actually charged to the
   passengers, as the railway tickets, being legal contracts between
   company and passenger, could not have been issued at his own price.
   There had been railway excursions before, but this one included
   entrance to an entertainment held in private grounds, rail tickets and
   food for the train journey. Cook immediately saw the potential of a
   convenient 'off the peg' holiday product in which everything was
   included in one cost. He organised packages inclusive of accommodation
   for the Great Exhibition, and afterwards pioneered package holidays in
   both Britain (particularly in Scotland) and on the European continent
   (where Paris and the Alps were the most popular destinations).

   He was soon followed by others (the Polytechnic Touring Association,
   Dean and Dawson etc.), with the result that the tourist industry
   developed rapidly in late Victorian Britain. Initially it was supported
   by the growing middle classes, who had time off from their work, and
   who could afford the luxury of travel and possibly even staying for
   periods of time in boarding houses.

   The Bank Holidays Act 1871 introduced a statutory right for workers to
   take holidays, even if they were not paid at the time. By the last
   quarter of the nineteenth century, the tradition of the working class
   holiday had become firmly established in Britain. These were largely
   focussed upon the seaside resorts.

   The spread of the railway network in the nineteenth century resulted in
   the growth of Britain's seaside towns by bringing them within easy
   distance of Britain's urban centres. Blackpool was created by the
   construction of a line to Fleetwood, and some resorts were promoted by
   the railway companies themselves - Morecambe by the Midland Railway and
   Cleethorpes by the Great Central Railway. Other resorts included
   Scarborough in Yorkshire, servicing Leeds and Bradford;
   Weston-super-Mare in Somerset, catering for the inhabitants of Bristol;
   and Skegness, patronised by the residents of the industrial East
   Midlands. The cockneys of London flocked to Southend-on-Sea, mainly by
   Thames Steamer, and the South Coast resorts such as Broadstairs,
   Brighton, and Eastbourne were only a train ride away, with others
   further afield such as Bournemouth, Bognor Regis and Weymouth.

   For a century, domestic tourism was the norm, with foreign travel being
   reserved for the rich or the culturally curious. A number of inland
   destinations, such as the English Lake District, and Snowdonia appealed
   to those who liked the countryside and fine scenery. The holiday camp
   began to appear in the 1930s, but this phenomenon really expanded in
   the post-war period. Butlins and Pontins set this trend, but their
   popularity waned with the rise of overseas package tours and the
   increasing comforts to which visitors became accustomed at home.
   Towards the end of the 20th century this market has been revived by the
   upmarket inland resorts of Dutch company Centre Parcs.

   Cox & Co, the forebear of Cox & Kings were in existence from 1758
   largely entwined with the travel arrangements for the British Army
   serving around the Empire. While acting as 'agents' for various
   regiments, they organised the payment, provision, clothing and travel
   arrangements for members of the armed forces. In the 19th century their
   network of offices contained a banking and also travel department. The
   company became heavily involved with affairs in India and its Shipping
   Agency had offices in France and the Middle East.

   Other phenomena that helped develop the travel industry were paid
   holidays:
     * 1.5 million manual workers in Britain had paid holidays by 1925
     * 11 million by 1939 (30% of the population in families with paid
       holidays)

Outside Britain

   In the USA, the first great seaside resort, in the European style, was
   Atlantic City, New Jersey.

   In Continental Europe, early resorts included Ostend (for the people of
   Brussels), and Boulogne-sur-Mer ( Pas-de-Calais) and Deauville (
   Calvados) (for Parisians).

International mass tourism

   Increasing speed on railways meant that the tourist industry could
   develop internationally.

   To this may be added the development of sea travel. By 1901, the number
   of people crossing the English Channel from England to France or
   Belgium had passed 0.5 million per year. Shipping companies were
   anxious to fill cabin space that was under utilised. For example, P&O
   found that the majority of their passengers for India and the Far East
   joined the ship at Marseilles. Consequently, they marketed holidays
   based upon sea trips from London to Lisbon and Gibraltar. Other
   companies diverted their older ships to operate cruises in the summer
   months.
   Sidon Sea Castle, Sidon in Lebanon
   Enlarge
   Sidon Sea Castle, Sidon in Lebanon
   A view of the Torres del Paine National Park in Chile
   Enlarge
   A view of the Torres del Paine National Park in Chile

   However, the real age of international mass travel began with the
   growth of air travel after World War Two. In the immediate post-war
   period, there was a surplus of transport aircraft, such as the popular
   and reliable Douglas Dakota, and a number of ex military pilots ready
   to fly them. They were available for charter flights, and tour
   operators began to use them for European destinations, such as Paris
   and Ostend.

   Vladimir Raitz pioneered modern package tourism when on 20 May 1950 his
   recently founded company, Horizon, provided arrangements for a two-week
   holiday in Corsica. For an all inclusive price of £32.10s.-, holiday
   makers could sleep under canvas, sample local wines and eat a meal
   containing meat twice a day - this was especially attractive due to the
   continuing austerity measures in post-war United Kingdom. Within ten
   years, his company had started mass tourism to Palma (1952), Lourdes
   (1953), Costa Brava (1954), Sardinia (1954), Minorca (1955), Porto
   (1956), Costa Blanca (1957) and Costa del Sol (1959).

   However it was with cheap air travel in combination with the package
   tour that international mass tourism developed. The postwar
   introduction of an international system of airline regulation was
   another important factor. The bilateral agreements at the heart of the
   system fixed seat prices, and airlines could not fill blocks of empty
   seats on underused flights by discounting. But if they were purchased
   by a tour operator and hidden within the price of an inclusive holiday
   package, it would be difficult to prove that discounting had taken
   place - even though it was obvious that it had! This was the origin of
   the modern mass package tour.

   These developments coincided with a significant increase in the
   standard of living in Britain. At the end of the 1950s, Harold
   Macmillan could say "you've never had it so good."

   Another significant development also happened at the end of this
   decade. The devaluation of the Spanish peseta made Spain appear a
   particularly attractive destination. The cheapness of the cost of
   living attracted increasing numbers of visitors. Mass package tourism
   has at times been an exploitative process, in which tour operators in a
   country with a high standard of living make use of development
   opportunities and low operating costs in a country with a lower
   standard of living. However, as witness the development of many tourist
   areas in previously poor parts of the world, and the concomitant rise
   in standards of living, when there is equality of bargaining power,
   both parties can gain economic benefits from this arrangement.

   Spain and the Balearic Islands became major tourist destinations, and
   development probably peaked in the 1980s. At the same time, British
   tour operators developed the Algarve in Portugal. The continuing search
   for new, cheaper, destinations spread mass tourism to the Greek
   Islands, Italy, Tunisia, Morocco, parts of the coast of Turkey, and
   more recently Croatia.

   For the worker living in greater London, Venice today is almost as
   accessible as Brighton was 100 years ago. Consequently, the British
   seaside resort experienced a marked decline from the 1970s onwards.
   Some, such as New Brighton have disappeared. Others have reinvented
   themselves, and now cater to daytrippers and the weekend break market.

Recent developments

   Most visited countries in 2001
   Enlarge
   Most visited countries in 2001

   There has been a discernible upmarket trend in tourism over the last
   few decades, especially in Europe where international travel for short
   breaks is commonplace. Tourists have higher levels of disposable income
   and greater leisure time. They are also better educated and have more
   sophisticated tastes. There is now a demand for a better quality
   product in many quarters. This has resulted in the following trends:-
     * The old 'sun, sea, and sand' mass market has fragmented. People
       want more specialised versions of it, such as 'Club 18 -30',
       quieter resorts with select hotels, self-catering, etc.
     * People are taking second holidays in the form of short breaks/city
       breaks, ranging from British and European cities to country hotels.
     * There has been a growth in niche markets catering for special
       interests or activities, including growth of destination hotels.

   The developments in technology and transport infrastructure
   (particularly the advent of jumbo jets) have placed some types of
   holiday in the affordable mainstream:-
     * The development of a mass cruise holiday market.
     * The advent of affordable holidays to long-haul destinations such as
       Thailand or Kenya.
     * The phenomenon of the low budget airline, utilising a new
       generation of small regional airports.

   There have also been changes in lifestyle, which may call into question
   the current definitions of tourism. Some people (particularly the 45+
   and retired) may be adopting a tourism lifestyle, living as a tourist
   all the year round - eating out several times a week, going to the
   theatre, daytripping, and indulging in short breaks several times a
   year.

   Much of this results in impulse purchasing. This is facilitated by
   internet purchasing of tourism products. Some sites have now started to
   offer dynamic packaging, in which an inclusive price is quoted for a
   tailor- made package requested by the customer upon impulse.

   There have been a few setbacks in tourism, such as the September 11,
   2001 attacks and terrorist threats to tourist destinations such as Bali
   and European cities. Some of the tourist destinations, including the
   Costa del Sol, the Baleares and Cancún have lost popularity due to
   shifting tastes. In this context, the excessive building and
   environmental destruction often associated with traditional "sun and
   beach" tourism may contribute to a destination's saturation and
   subsequent decline. This appears to be the case with Spain's Costa
   Brava, a byword for this kind of tourism in the 1960s and 1970s. With
   only 11% of the Costa Brava now unblemished by low-quality development
   (Greenpeace Spain's figure), the destination now faces a crisis in its
   tourist industry.

   Sustainable tourism is becoming more popular as people start to realize
   the devastating effects tourism can have on communities.

   Receptive tourism is now growing at a very rapid rate in many
   developing countries, where it is often the most important economic
   activity in local GDP.

   In recent years, second holidays or vacations have become more popular
   as people's discretionary income increases. Typical combinations are a
   package to the typical mass tourist resort, with a winter skiing
   holiday or weekend break to a city or national park.

   On December 26, 2004 a tsunami, caused by the 2004 Indian Ocean
   earthquake hit Asian countries bordering the Indian Ocean, and also the
   Maldives. Tens of thousands of lives were lost, and many tourists died.
   This, together with the vast clean-up operation in place, has stopped
   or severely hampered tourism to the area.

Special forms of tourism

   For the past few decades other forms of tourism, also known as niche
   tourism, have been becoming more popular, particularly:
     * Adventure tourism: tourism involving travel in rugged regions, or
       adventurous sports such as mountaineering and hiking ( tramping).
     * Agritourism: farm based tourism, helping to support the local
       agricultural economy.
     * Ancestry tourism: (also known as genealogy tourism) is the travel
       with the aim of tracing one's ancestry, visiting the birth places
       of these ancestors and sometimes getting to know distant family.
     * Armchair tourism and virtual tourism: not travelling physically,
       but exploring the world through internet, books, TV, etc.
     * Audio tourism: includes audio walking tours and other audio guided
       forms of tourism including museum audio guides and audio travel
       books.
     * Bookstore Tourism is a grassroots effort to support independent
       bookstores by promoting them as a travel destination.
     * Cultural tourism: includes urban tourism, visiting historical or
       interesting cities, and experiencing their cultural heritages. This
       type of tourism may also include specialized cultural experiences,
       such as art museum tourism where the tourist visits many art
       museums during the tour, or opera tourism where the tourist sees
       many operas or concerts during the tour.
     * Dark tourism: is the travel to sites associated with death and
       suffering. The first tourist agency to specialise in this kind of
       tourism started with trips to Lakehurst, New Jersey, the scene of
       the Hindenburg airship disaster.
     * Disaster tourism: travelling to a disaster scene not primarily for
       helping, but because it is interesting to see. It can be a problem
       if it hinders rescue, relief and repair work.
     * Drug tourism: travel to a country to obtain or consume drugs,
       either legally or illegally.
     * Ecotourism: sustainable tourism which has minimal impact on the
       environment, such as safaris (Kenya), Rainforests (Belize) and
       hiking ( Lapland), or national parks.
     * Educational tourism: may involve travelling to an education
       institution, a wooded retreat or some other destination in order to
       take personal-interest classes, such as cooking classes with a
       famous chef or crafts classes.
     * Extreme tourism: tourism associated with high risk.
     * Free Independent Traveler: a sector of the market and philosophy of
       constructing a vacation by sourcing one's own components eg
       accomodation, transport.
     * Gambling tourism, e.g. to Atlantic City, Las Vegas, Palm Springs,
       California, Macau or Monte Carlo for the purpose of gambling at the
       casinos there.
     * Garden tourism visiting botanical gardens famous places in the
       history of gardening, such as Versailles and the Taj Mahal.
     * Heritage tourism: visiting historical (Rome, Athens, Cracow) or
       industrial sites, such as old canals, railways, battlegrounds, etc.
     * Health tourism: usually to escape from cities or relieve stress,
       perhaps for some 'fun in the sun', etc. Often to Sanatoriums or
       "health spas".
     * Hobby tourism: tourism alone or with groups to participate in hobby
       interests, to meet others with similar interests, or to experience
       something pertinent to the hobby. Examples might be garden tours,
       amateur radio DX-peditions, or square dance cruises.
     * Inclusive tourism: tourism marketed to those with functional limits
       or disabilities. Referred to as "Tourism for All" in some regions.
       Destinations often employ Universal Design and Universal
       Destination Development principles.
     * Medical tourism, e.g.:
          + for what is illegal in one's own country, such as abortion or
            euthanasia
          + for advanced care that is not available in one's own country
          + in the case that there are long waiting lists in one's own
            country
          + for use of free or cheap health care organisations
     * Pop-culture tourism: tourism by those that visit a particular
       location after reading about it or seeing it in a film.
     * Perpetual tourism: wealthy individuals always on vacation; some of
       them, for tax purposes, to avoid being resident in any country.
     * Pilgrimage Tourism: pilgrimages to ancient holy places (Rome and
       Santiago de Compostela for Catholics, Temples and stupas of Nepal
       for the Hindus and Buddhist, Mount Athos or Painted churches of
       northern Moldavia for the Orthodox), religious sites such as
       mosques, shrines, etc.
     * Sex tourism: travelling solely for the purpose of sexual activity,
       usually with prostitutes
     * Solo Travel: travelling alone
     * Sport travel: skiing, golf and scuba diving are popular ways to
       spend a vacation. This could also include travelling to a major
       international sporting event such as the FIFA World Cup or
       following a tour such as the Ashes or British and Irish Lions.
     * Space tourism: traveling in outer space or on spaceships.
     * Vacilando is a special kind of wanderer for whom the process of
       travelling is more important than the destination.
     * Wine tourism, the visiting of growing regions, vineyards, wineries,
       tasting rooms, wine festivals, and similar places or events for the
       purpose of consuming or purchasing wine.

Trends

   The World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) forecasts that international
   tourism will continue growing at the average annual rate of 4 %. By
   2020 Europe will remain the most popular destination, but its share
   will drop from 60 % in 1995 to 46 %. Long-haul will grow slightly
   faster than intraregional travel and by 2020 its share will increase
   from 18 % in 1995 to 24 %.

   With the advent of e-commerce, tourism products have become one of the
   most traded items on the internet. Tourism products and services have
   been made available through intermediaries, although tourism providers
   (hotels, airlines, etc.) can sell their services directly. This has put
   pressure on intermediaries from both on-line and traditional shops.

   Space tourism is expected to "take off" in the first quarter of the
   21st century, although compared with traditional destinations the
   number of tourists in orbit will remain low until technologies such as
   a space elevator make space travel cheap.

   Technological improvement is likely to make possible air-ship hotels,
   based either on solar-powered airplanes or large dirigibles. Underwater
   hotels, such as Hydropolis, expected to open in Dubai in 2006, will be
   built. On the ocean tourists will be welcomed by ever larger cruise
   ships and perhaps floating cities.

   Some futurists expect that movable hotel "pods" will be created that
   could be temporarily erected anywhere on the planet, where building a
   permanent resort would be unacceptable politically, economically or
   environmentally.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tourism"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
