   #copyright

Toy Story

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Films

   Toy Story
   Promotional poster for Toy Story.

   From left to right: Bo Peep, Woody, Mr.Potato Head, Troll, Hamm, Buzz
   Lightyear, Sarge, Slinky Dog, Rex.
   Directed by John Lasseter
   Produced by Bonnie Arnold, Ralph Guggenheim; executive producers: Edwin
   Catmull, Steve Jobs
   Written by Story by John Lasseter, Pete Docter, Andrew Stanton and Joe
   Ranft;
   Screenplay by Joss Whedon, Andrew Stanton, Joel Cohen and Alec Sokolow
   Starring Tom Hanks
   Tim Allen
   Don Rickles
   Jim Varney
   Wallace Shawn
   John Ratzenberger
   Music by Randy Newman
   Editing by Robert Gordon
   Lee Unkrich
   Distributed by Walt Disney Pictures
   Release date(s) November 22, 1995 (USA)
   Running time 81 minutes
   Country Flag of United States  United States
   Language English
   Budget $30 million
   Gross revenue Domestic: $191,773,049
   Worldwide: $358,100,000
   Followed by Toy Story 2 (1999)
   All Movie Guide profile
   IMDb profile

   Toy Story is an Academy-award-winning CGI animated feature film
   produced by Pixar Animation Studios and released by Walt Disney
   Pictures and Buena Vista Distribution in the United States on November
   22, 1995, and Australia on December 7, 1995, as well as in the United
   Kingdom on 22 March 1996. It was the first computer-animated film to be
   completed, and Pixar's first feature film. It grossed $191,773,049 in
   the United States and it took a grand total of $358,100,000 worldwide.
   The primary characters are toys in the room of the nine year-old boy
   Andy, and is mostly told from their point of view. Andy, his baby
   sister Molly and mother have smaller roles, as do the neighbour boy
   Sid, his dog Scud and sister Hannah.

Plot

   Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.

   The story begins with a boy named Andy playing with his toys, such as a
   Mr. Potato Head, a plastic dinosaur toy, and his favorite toy, Woody, a
   cowboy toy. He takes Woody into the living room and plays with him some
   more, with a short interruption talking to his mom about his birthday
   party later that day and the soon-coming move to a new house. After
   playing with Woody, Andy starts helping his mom by carrying his baby
   sister to her. While he is gone, all the toys come to life. The party
   makes all the toys extremely nervous, wondering if Andy will get a toy
   that will replace them. Woody sends the small green soldiers downstairs
   to spy on the party. At the end of the party, Andy's mom pulls out a
   surprise gift from behind her, which turns out to be a Buzz Lightyear
   toy in doll form. Buzz does not seem to be aware that he is a piece of
   plastic, believing himself to be on a mission to save the universe from
   Evil Emperor Zurg. The other toys take to him immediately, being
   impressed by his many features. Only Woody is unconvinced, showing
   jealousy towards Buzz, who might replace him as Andy's favorite toy.

   Eventually, when Andy is told he can take only one toy with him on a
   trip to Pizza Planet, Woody tries to shove Buzz behind Andy's dresser,
   but instead knocks him out the window. When the other toys learn of
   Woody's actions, they try to attack him, but he is rescued when Andy,
   unable to find Buzz, takes Woody on the trip. At a stop at a Dinoco gas
   station for gas, Woody finds that Buzz grabbed ahold of the family's
   minivan and is with them. The two begin to fight, knocking each other
   out of the minivan, and are left behind when it drives away. Woody
   convinces Buzz to hitch a lift on a Pizza Planet truck, in order to
   reunite with Andy. Woody finds Andy there, but Buzz, still believing he
   is a real space ranger, climbs into a toy crane game, thinking it is a
   spaceship. Woody goes in after him, but the two eventually are grabbed
   by Sid Phillips, who lives next door to Andy and is known to torture
   and destroy toys, simply to amuse himself.

   Left alone in Sid's room, Woody and Buzz come upon a group of
   mis-matched toys, the results of Sid's many "experiments". Woody and
   Buzz reacted in fear when they thought that the mis-matched toys were
   cannibals. Meanwhile at Andy's house, the toys were continuing to look
   for Buzz in the bushes. But when Andy and his mother came home, he
   noticed that Woody was gone. The other toys wonder what has become of
   the two. Some are worried for both Buzz and Woody, while others express
   the hope that Woody has met a bad end. The next day, at Sid's house,
   Woody and Buzz, having been mistreated by Sid, (Sid managed to burn
   Woody's forhead with a magnifying glass) try to escape, only to run
   into Sid's maniac dog, Scud. Eventually getting out of Sid's room, Buzz
   comes upon a television where he sees a commercial for the Buzz
   Lightyear line of toys. Watching it, he realizes that Woody was right.
   He was a toy this whole time, not a space ranger. In one last desperate
   attempt to prove he is not a toy, Buzz tries to fly out of a window by
   jumping off the guardrail of the stairs on the second floor, only to
   fall to the floor, losing an arm in the process. He is found by Sid's
   sister Hannah, who takes him away to put him in her tea party.

   Woody finally finds Buzz in Hannah's room, dressed as "Mrs. Nesbit" and
   attending a tea party. While Woody formulates a plan of escape, Buzz is
   too depressed to care. When Woody throws a string of Christmas tree
   lights across the way to the toys in Andy's room, Buzz refuses to back
   him up. The mixed-up toys then return and swarm over Buzz, to Woody's
   dismay. But it turns out they were only repairing him. Before Woody can
   make friends with them, however, Sid returns with his new acquisition:
   a firework rocket. He decides to blow up Buzz with it, but is stymied
   by rainfall.

   The next day, Sid takes Buzz out to blow him up, leaving Woody alone in
   the room. Of course, it was also when Andy and his family is going to
   move. Andy, still depressed to lose Woody and Buzz, just found the
   cardboard spaceship of Buzz, and a cowboy hat. Woody calls out to the
   mixed-up toys to tell them a plan to escape. After a daring escape
   through the house and past Scud, Woody and the other toys end up in the
   yard with Sid. They decide to break the rules and they allow Sid to see
   that they can move on their own. Woody even speaks to him, telling him
   to "play nice." This freaks Sid out and he runs screaming into the
   house, where his sister frightens him with a dolly.

   Now freed from Sid, Woody and Buzz attempt to catch Andy's moving van
   just as it is pulling away from the house. After saying farewell to the
   mixed-up toys, a harrowing chase follows, with Scud chasing them and
   Andy's toys not helping, since they still believe Woody intentionally
   got rid of Buzz. Luckily, they get rid of Scud and let the toys believe
   in Woody to see that he is helping Buzz. Eventually, with the help of
   R/C, Andy's remote control car, and strategic use of Sid's rocket,
   Woody and Buzz return to Andy, whose mother thinks they were in the car
   all along.

   The next Christmas, we see a scene similar to the birthday party, with
   the toys again worried about the new ones. Mr. Potato Head is pleased
   to learn that Andy's baby sister has gotten a Mrs. Potato Head. The
   answer comes in the form of Andy's final present, when a dog's bark is
   heard.

Development

   Toy Story began its life as an extension of Pixar's short Tin Toy,
   which featured Tinny, a mechanical drummer who tries to find his way in
   a baby's play room. The original plot called for Tinny to butt heads
   with a ventriloquist's dummy. Ultimately, Tinny was found to be too
   immobile for the storyline and he was developed as a "space toy", first
   named Lunar Larry, but eventually becoming Buzz Lightyear. Meanwhile,
   the original ventriloquist's dummy was designed to be sneaky, mean and
   borderline evil. When tests proved that the character was too
   unsympathetic, his character was gradually modified until he became the
   Woody of the film.

   Other changes the film underwent during development include:
     * Tim Allen and Tom Hanks both state that Pixar wanted this to tell
       the story of how new Hollywood was taking over old Hollywood and
       legends of the past were being forgotten while new young guns were
       becoming the names on everybody's lips. Allen states Pixar wanted
       Jim Carrey to play Buzz Lightyear (representing new Hollywood) and
       Paul Newman to play Woody (representing old Hollywood). Hanks
       states that Pixar wanted Johnny Depp to play Buzz Lightyear
       (representing new Hollywood) and Gregory Peck to play Woody
       (representing old Hollywood). Both state that they couldn't get
       either those pair because of the low budget they were given for the
       film.
     * Billy Crystal was originally offered the role of Buzz, but turned
       it down.
     * Bill Murray was considered for the role of Buzz but lost the
       producers number, Murray states he would have accepted the role and
       he deeply regrets losing the number, he believes that had he done
       the movie it would have been him inducted into the Disney Hall Of
       Fame not Allen.
     * The part of Woody's girlfriend was originally intended to be filled
       by a Barbie doll, but Mattel refused to consent to her use.
     * Disney required several re-workings of the film, even going so far
       as to threaten to shut the production down.
     * Scenes of Woody having nightmares over losing his position as
       "favorite toy" were cut for time, but later incorporated into Toy
       Story 2.

Voice cast

         Actor            Role
   Tom Hanks         Woody
   Tim Allen         Buzz Lightyear
   Don Rickles       Mr. Potato Head
   Wallace Shawn     Rex
   Jim Varney        Slinky Dog
   John Ratzenberger Hamm
   John Morris       Andy Davis
   Erik von Detten   Sid Philips
   Annie Potts       Bo Peep
   Sarah Freeman     Hannah Philips
   R. Lee Ermey      Sarge
   Laurie Metcalf    Mrs. Davis

Crew

   Crew Position
   Directed by John Lasseter
   Produced by Ralph Guggenheim
   Bonnie Arnold
   Original Story by John Lasseter
   Pete Docter
   Andrew Stanton
   Joe Ranft
   Screenplay by Joss Whedon
   Andrew Stanton
   Alec Sokolow &
   Joel Cohen
   Executive Producer Edwin Catmull
   Steve Jobs
   Songs Written and Performed by Randy Newman
   Music by Randy Newman
   Supervising Technical Director William Reeves
   Art Director Ralph Eggleston
   Film Editor Robert Gordon
   Lee Unkrich
   Supervising Animator Pete Docter
   Story Supervisor Joe Ranft
   Robert Lence
   Character Designer Bob Pauley (Designer/Illustrator)
   William Cone
   Jean Gillmore
   Dan Haskett
   Tom Holloway
   Steve Johnson
   Bud Luckey
   Andrew Stanton
   Modeling Supervisor
   Layout Supervisor
   Shading & Visual Effects Supervisor
   Lighting Supervisors
   Eben Fiske Ostby (Associate Technical Director)
   Craig Good
   Thomas Porter
   Sharon Calahan
   Galyn Susman
   Sound Designer Gary Rydstrom
   Production Manager Karen Robert Jackson

Awards

Academy Awards

   Won:
     * John Lasseter received an Academy Special Achievement Award in 1996
       "for the development and inspired application of techniques that
       have made possible the first feature-length computer-animated
       film."

   Nominated:
     * Best Music, Original Musical or Comedy Score, Randy Newman
     * Best Music, Original Song, Randy Newman for " You've Got a Friend
       in Me".
     * Best Writing, Screenplay Written for the Screen: Joel Cohen, Pete
       Docter, John Lasseter, Joe Ranft, Alec Sokolow, Andrew Stanton &
       Joss Whedon

Annie Awards

   Won:
     * Best Animated Feature
     * Best Individual Achievement: Animation, Pete Docter
     * Best Individual Achievement: Directing, John Lasseter
     * Best Individual Achievement: Music, Randy Newman
     * Best Individual Achievement: Producing, Bonnie Arnold & Ralph
       Guggenheim
     * Best Individual Achievement: Production Design, Ralph Eggleston
     * Best Individual Achievement: Technical Achievement
     * Best Individual Achievement: Writing, Joel Cohen, Alec Sokolow,
       Andrew Stanton and Joss Whedon.

Golden Globes

   Nominated:
     * Best Motion Picture - Comedy/Musical
     * Best Original Song - Motion Picture, Randy Newman for "You've Got a
       Friend in Me".

Saturn Awards

   Nominated:
     * Best Family Film
     * Best Writing: Joel Cohen, Alec Sokolow, Andrew Stanton & Joss
       Whedon

Other

   In 2005 the film was selected for preservation in the United States
   National Film Registry.

Home video releases

     * Toy Story was released on VHS and LaserDisc in October, 1996. It
       contained no bonus material.
     * In January, 2000, it was released in a "Special Edition" VHS with
       the bonus short, Tin Toy.
     * Its first DVD release was in October of 2000, in a two-pack with
       Toy Story 2. This release was later available individually.
     * Also in October, 2000, a 3-disc "Ultimate Toy Box" set was
       released, featuring Toy Story, Toy Story 2 and a third disc of
       bonus materials.
     * In September, 2005, a 2-disc "10th Anniversary Edition" was
       released featuring much of the bonus material from the "Ultimate
       Toy Box", plus new features.
     * At that same time, a bare-bones UMD of Toy Story was released for
       the Sony PlayStation Portable.

Soundtrack listing

    1. You've Got A Friend In Me
    2. Strange Things
    3. I Will Go Sailing No More
    4. Andy's Birthday (Instrumental)
    5. Soldier's Mission (Instrumental)
    6. Presents (Instrumental)
    7. Buzz (Instrumental)
    8. Sid (Instrumental)
    9. Woody And Buzz (Instrumental)
   10. Mutants (Instrumental)
   11. Woody's Gone (Instrumental)
   12. The Big One (Instrumental)
   13. Home Together (Instrumental)
   14. On The Move (Instrumental)
   15. Infinity And Beyond (Instrumental)
   16. You've Got A Friend In Me (Duet)

Video games

   There were several video games based on Toy Story, including:
     * Toy Story for the Sega Genesis, Super Nintendo Entertainment System
       and PC.
     * Toy Story for the Game Boy
     * Toy Story Racer for the Sony PlayStation (also contains elements
       from Toy Story 2)

   There were also some "activity" titles released by Disney for the PC
   and Mac:
     * Disney's Animated Storybook: Toy Story
     * Disney's Activity Centre: Toy Story

   All these titles are significant, because Pixar created original
   animations for all of them, including fully animated sequences for the
   PC titles.

Sequels

     * Toy Story 2 was released in 1999
     * Buzz Lightyear of Star Command: The Adventure Begins (2-D animated
       spin-off movie to Toy Story)
     * Buzz Lightyear of Star Command (2-D animated spin-off TV show)
     * Toy Story 3 is scheduled for release in 2010.

Toy Story in pop culture

     * Debian (a Linux distribution) releases are named after characters
       from this movie. (Sid, Buzz, Rex, Bo, Hamm, Slink, Potato, Woody,
       Sarge, Etch, Lenny).
     * In one scene of Finding Nemo, another Pixar film, a Buzz Lightyear
       toy can be seen on the floor of a dentist's office.
     * The line "You are a sad, strange little man," uttered by Buzz is
       referenced in The Santa Clause 2, where Tim Allen (the voice actor
       of Buzz Lightyear) says the same line.
     * In the Illbleed video game, one of the stages, Toy Hunter, heavily
       parodies Toy Story, among other movies and video games.
     * This movie has also coined the (oxymoronical) phrase, "To Infinity
       and Beyond!" (though the term "Beyond the Infinite" was prominently
       used in 2001: A Space Odyssey of 1968). The phrase has been used in
       particular by set theoreticians, especially those who study large
       cardinals.
     * This movie was referenced thrice on Tim Allen's sitcom Home
       Improvement. The first time, two trick-or-treaters come to the door
       of Tim's house, one dressed as Simba from The Lion King, and the
       other dressed as Buzz Lightyear. Randy answers the door, and gives
       the Simba more candy than the Buzz. Note that Jonathan Taylor
       Thomas, who plays Randy, voiced young Simba in The Lion King. The
       second time, Tim and his niece Gracie plays with a Buzz Lightyear
       doll. The last reference occurs in one of the outtakes during the
       credits, where Tim repeats Buzz's built-in phrases.
     * There are several Toy Story references in the 2006 Disney/Pixar
       film Cars.
          + Lightning McQueen's number, 95, is a reference to the year of
            Toy Story's release.
          + In the film, Lightning McQueen seeks the sponsorship of
            Dinoco, which is the name of the gas station that Woody and
            Buzz get lost at.
          + Lightning uses "Lightyear Buzzard" tires, a reference to Buzz
            Lightyear and a parody of Goodyear Eagle tires.
          + During the end credits of Pixar's 2006 film Cars, scenes from
            Toy Story are reenacted by toy car versions of Buzz and Woody.
     * The television show Boston Legal features two characters, Brad
       Chase and Jeffrey Coho who both like to dress up as Buzz Lightyear.
       In episode 58 they end up in a fist fight in their costumes.
     * The Pizza Planet truck makes an appearance in every other Pixar
       film.

Trivia

     * The Pixar logo with the hopping Luxo Jr. is absent before the film.
       He is present at the very end of the credits instead.
     * Sid's outfit is identical to that worn by Chris Cornell in the 1994
       Soundgarden video " Black Hole Sun". Both shirts resemble, if not
       are in fact, the skull logo used by Zero Skateboards. The black tee
       shirt with white upper skull also resembles the traditional outfit
       of The Punisher.
     * The "Hand" in the Box in Sid's room plays the same music that the
       toy did from Tin Toy (1988), the short movie that inspired Toy
       Story.
     * When Woody jumps through the window of the Pizza Planet truck,
       there is a sticker on it that appears to be Herbie's famous number
       53.
     * The toy shark, wearing Woody's hat, proclaims, "Look at me, I'm
       Woody! Howdy howdy howdy!" This references a cowboy-eating vulture
       in one of Gary Larson's " The Far Side" daily comic strips from the
       early 1980s: "Hey everyone, look at me, I'm a cowboy! Howdy! Howdy!
       Howdy!"
     * The toolbox that Buzz Lightyear (Tim Allen) pushes off the milk
       crate bears the name "Binford Tools," the name of the fictional
       company which sponsors Allen's character's show in Home Improvement
       (1991).
     * " Hakuna Matata" from The Lion King can be heard in Andy's mother's
       car on the way to their new home.
     * During the staff meeting at the beginning of the movie, some of the
       books on the shelf behind Woody are named after some of Pixar's
       short films, such as Tin Toy and Knick Knack.
     * In the movie's opening scene, Mr. Potato Head says "What are you
       looking at, you hockey puck?" This is one of Don Rickles's (the
       voice of Mr. Potato Head) trademark insults.
     * In Hannah's tea party, her teapot is the Utah Teapot, famous in the
       computer graphics community.
     * The moving truck company is called Eggman Movers. Eggman is a
       nickname of Pixar Art Designer Ralph Eggleston.
     * The license plate on the cars read random words instead of a state.
       For example on Andy's mom's minivan, the plate reads "Minivan" in
       place of a state and another car's reads "Auto".
     * There are numerous references to Star Wars. Pixar was originally
       formed from the Industrial Light & Magic Computer Graphics Group.
     * When Buzz gets knocked out the window, he emits the Wilhelm Scream.
     * In 2003, the Online Film Critics Society ranked the film as the
       greatest animated film of all time.
     * All of the cars in Toy Story are registered for November 1995, the
       film's month of release.
     * RC's tires read "Goodtire", most likely a parody of Goodyear Tires.
     * Sid's room contains an issue of "TM 31-210 IMPROVISED INTERROGATION
       HANDBOOK". However, the real title of TM 31-210 is Improvised
       Munition Handbook.
     * A poster on Sid's wall that says "Megadork" is perhaps a pun on the
       metal band "Megadeth"
     * The toy's owner, a young boy named Andy, may be a reference to
       Andy, the boy from Child's Play. In Child's Play, Andy's doll also
       comes alive, but in a much more sinister fashion.
     * When Sid is attacked by his abused toys, a doll behind him screams
       'redrum', an homage to Stephen King's novel, ' The Shining'.
     * The original VHS release of this movie contained over 15 minutes of
       trailers before the actual movie began.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toy_Story"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
