   #copyright

Tripoli

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography;
Geography of the Middle East

   Tripoli (طرابلس)
   Tripoli Castle and the Green Square
   Tripoli Castle and the Green Square

   Official seal of Tripoli
   Seal
   Location of Tripoli within Libya, on the continent of Africa.
   Location of Tripoli within Libya, on the continent of Africa.
   Country Libya
   Sha'biyah Tripoli Sha'biyah
   Head of the People's Committee Abdullatif Abdulrahman Aldaali
   Area
    - City 400 km²
   Elevation 81 m  (266 ft)
   Population
    - City (2004) 1,682,000
   Time zone EET ( UTC+2)
    - Summer ( DST) not observed ( UTC+2)
   Website: http://www.tripoli.info

   Tripoli (Arabic: طرابلس Tarābulus) is the capital city of Libya. It has
   a population of 1.68 million. The city is located in the northwest of
   the country on the edge of the desert, on a point of rocky land
   projecting into the Mediterranean Sea and forming a bay. Tripoli was
   founded in the 7th century BCE by the Phoenicians, who named it Oea. It
   is located at 32°54'8" North, 13°11'9" East (32.90222, 13.185833).

   Tripoli is the largest city, the principal sea port, and the largest
   commercial and manufacturing centre in Libya. It is also the site of
   Al-Fateh University. Due to the city's long history, there are many
   sites of archaeological significance in Tripoli. The climate is typical
   Mediterranean, with hot, dry summers, cool winters and some modest
   rainfall.

   The city was subjected to an air strike by the United States in 1986,
   in retaliation for what the US saw as Libya's proven support of
   terrorism. United Nations sanctions against Libya were lifted in 2003,
   which is expected to increase traffic through the Port of Tripoli and
   have a positive impact on the city's economy.

History

Foundation

   The city was founded in the 7th century BCE, by the Phoenicians.
   Tripoli then passed into the hands of the rulers of Cyrenaica (Barca),
   from whom it was wrested away by the Carthaginians. It next belonged to
   the Romans, who included it within their province of Africa, and gave
   it the name of Regio Syrtica. Around the beginning of the 3rd century
   CE, it became known as the Regio Tripolitana (region of the three
   cities, namely Oea, Sabrata and Leptis).It was probably raised to the
   rank of a separate province by Septimius Severus, who was a native of
   Leptis. Like the rest of North Africa, it was conquered by the Muslims
   early in the 8th century.

   In 1510, it was taken by Don Pedro Navarro, Count of Oliveto for Spain,
   and, in 1523, it was assigned to the Knights of St. John, who had
   lately been expelled by the Ottoman Turks from their stronghold in the
   island of Rhodes. The knights kept it with some trouble until 1551,
   when they were compelled to surrender.

   In 1714, the ruling pasha, Ahmed Karamanli, assumed the title of bey,
   and asserted a sort of semi-independence of the Sultan, and this order
   of things continued under the rule of his descendants, accompanied by
   the brazen piracy and blackmailing until 1835, when the Ottoman Empire
   ("the Porte") took advantage of an internal struggle.

   The Ottoman province (vilayet) of Tripoli (including the dependent
   sanjak of Cyrenaica) lay along the southern shore of the Mediterranean
   Sea between Tunisia in the west and Egypt in the east. Besides the city
   itself, the area included Cyrenaica (the Barca plateau), the chain of
   oases in the Aujila depression, Fezzan and the oases of Ghadames and
   Ghat, separated by sandy and stony wastelands.

The Barbary Wars

   Tripoli Harbour during the Tripolitan War
   Enlarge
   Tripoli Harbour during the Tripolitan War

   In the early part of the 19th century, the regency at Tripoli, owing to
   its piratical practices, was twice involved in war with the United
   States. In May 1801, the pasha demanded an increase in the tribute
   ($83,000) which the US government had been paying since 1796 for the
   protection of their commerce from piracy. The demand was refused, and a
   naval force was sent from the United States to blockade Tripoli. The
   First Barbary War dragged on for four years, the Americans in 1803
   losing the frigate, Philadelphia, the commander (Captain William
   Bainbridge) and the whole crew being made prisoners. The most colourful
   incident in the war was the expedition undertaken by William Eaton with
   the object of replacing the pasha with an elder brother living in
   exile, who had promised to accede to all the wishes of the United
   States. Eaton at the head of a motley crew of 500 US Marines, Greek,
   Arab and Turkish Mercenaries marched across the desert from Alexandria.
   Egypt, and with the aid of American ships, succeeded in capturing
   Derna. Soon afterwards, on June 3, 1805, peace was concluded. The pasha
   ended his demands and received $60,000 as ransom for the Philadelphia
   prisoners.

   In 1815, in consequence of further outrages, Captains Bainbridge and
   Stephen Decatur, at the head of an American squadron, again visited
   Tripoli and forced the pasha to comply with the demands of the United
   States. See Second Barbary War.

Later history

   In 1835, the Turks took advantage of a local civil war to reassert
   their direct authority. After that date, Tripoli was under the direct
   control of the Sublime Porte. Rebellions in 1842 and 1844 were
   unsuccessful. After the occupation of Tunisia by the French (1881), the
   Turks increased their garrison in Tripoli considerably.

   Italy had long claimed that Tripoli fell within its zone of influence
   and that Italy had the right to preserve order within the state. Under
   the pretext of protecting its own citizens living in Tripoli from the
   Turkish Government, it declared war against Turkey on September 29,
   1911, and announced its intention of annexing Tripoli. On October 1,
   1911, a naval battle was fought at Prevesa, European Turkey, and three
   Turkish vessels were destroyed. By the Treaty of Lausanne, Italian
   sovereignty was acknowledged by Turkey, although the Caliph was
   permitted to exercise religious authority.

   Tripoli was controlled by Italy until 1943. After that, it was occupied
   by British forces until independence in 1951.

Law and Government

   The city of Tripoli and its surrounding suburbs all lie within the
   Tripoli sha'biyah (municipality). In accordance with Libya's Jamahiriya
   political system, Tripoli comprises of Local People's Congresses where,
   in theory, the city's population discuss different matters and elect
   their own people's committee; At present there are 29 Local People's
   Congresses. In reality, the revolutionary committees severely limit the
   democratic process by closely supervising committee and congress
   elections at the branch and municipal levels of governments, Tripoli
   being no exception. The current head of the Tripoli People's Committee
   is Abdullatif Abdulrahman Aldaali (عبد اللطيف عبد الرحمن الدالي) & the
   undersecretary, Mohamed Abudebra (محمد أبودبرة).

   Tripoli is sometimes referred to as the de-facto capital of Libya. This
   is because none of the country's ministries are actually located in the
   capital. Even the National General People's Congress is held annualy in
   the city of Surt and not the capital. As part of a radical
   decentralisation programme undertaken in September 1988, all General
   People's Committee secretariats ( ministries), except those responsible
   for foreign liaison ( foreign affairs) and information, were located
   away from Tripoli. According to diplomatic sources, the former
   Secretariat for Economy and Trade was moved to Benghazi; the
   Secretariat for Health to Kufra; and the remainder, excepting one, to
   Surt, Col. Gaddafi's birthplace. In early 1993 it was announced that
   the Secretariat for Foreign Liaison and International Co-operation was
   to be moved to Ras Lanouf.

Geography

   A dust storm, making its way from the Sahara to Western Libya, passes
   over Tripoli.
   Enlarge
   A dust storm, making its way from the Sahara to Western Libya, passes
   over Tripoli.

   Tripoli lies at the western extremity of Libya close to the Tunisian
   border, on the continent of Africa. Over a thousand kilometeres
   separate Tripoli from Libya's second largest city, Benghazi. Along the
   shores of Tripolitania for more than 300 kilometers, coastal oases
   alternate with sandy areas and lagoons.

   The dominant climatic influences in Tripoli, a coastal lowland city,
   are Mediterranean. The city enjoys warm summers and mild winters with
   an average July temperature of between 22° and 29° C. In December
   temperatures have reached as low as 1° C, but the average remains at
   between 9° and 18° C. The average annual rainfall is less than 400mm,
   but can be very erratic.
   Al Saaha Alkhadhraa (The Green Square), located in the city centre is
   mostly landscaped with palm trees as is much of Tripoli.
   Enlarge
   Al Saaha Alkhadhraa (The Green Square), located in the city centre is
   mostly landscaped with palm trees as is much of Tripoli.

   For example, epic floods in 1945 left Tripoli under water for several
   days, but two years later an unprecedentedly severe drought caused the
   loss of thousands of head of cattle. Deficiency in rainfall is no doubt
   reflected in an absence of permanent rivers or streams in Tripoli as
   well as an absence throughout the entire country. The allocation of
   limited water is considered of sufficient importance to warrant the
   existence of the Secretariat of Dams and Water Resources, and damaging
   a source of water can be penalized by a heavy fine or imprisonment.

   The Great Manmade River, a network of pipelines that transport water
   from the desert to the coastal cities, supplies Tripoli with its water.
   The grand scheme was initiated by Gaddafi in 1982 and has had a
   positive impact on the city's inhabitants.

   Tripoli is dotted with public spaces, but few fit under the category of
   large city parks. The Green Square located near the waterfront is
   scattered with palm trees, the most abundant plant used for landscaping
   in the city. Tripoli zoo, located south of the city centre, is a large
   reserve of plants, trees and open green spaces and is the country's
   biggest zoo.

   Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Year
   Avg high °F (°C) 63
   (17) 66
   (18) 70
   (21) 78
   (25) 85
   (29) 92
   (33) 95
   (35) 95
   (35) 92
   (33) 84
   (28) 73
   (22) 65
   (18)

                                     80
                                    (26)

   Avg low temperature °F (°C) 44
   (6) 45
   (7) 49
   (9) 54
   (12) 61
   (16) 67
   (19) 69
   (20) 71
   (21) 69
   (20) 63
   (17) 53
   (11) 47
   (8)

                                     58
                                    (14)

   Rainfall in. (mm) 2.7
   (69) 1.6
   (41) 1.0
   (25) 0.5
   (13) 0.2
   (5) 0.1
   (3) ---
   (--) ---
   (--) 0.4
   (10) 1.5
   (38) 2.4
   (61) 3.2
   (81)

                                    13.7
                                    (348)

   Source: Weatherbase

Economy

   The central business district.
   Enlarge
   The central business district.

   Tripoli is Libya's economic hub. It is the leading centre of banking,
   finance and communication in the country as well as the leading
   commercial and manufacturing centre. Many of the country's largest
   corporations locate their headquarter's home offices in Tripoli as well
   as the majority of international companies.

   Major manufactured goods include processed food, textiles, construction
   materials, clothing and tobacco products. Since the lifting of
   sanctions against Libya in 1999 and again in 2003, Tripoli has seen a
   rise in foreign investment as well as an increase in tourism. Increased
   traffic has also been recorded in the city's port as well as Libya's
   main international airport, Tripoli International.

   The city is home to the Tripoli International Fair, an international,
   industrial, agricultural and commercial event located on Omar Muktar
   Street. One of the active members of the Global Association of the
   Exhibition Industry (UFI), located in the French capital Paris, the
   international fair is organised annualy and takes place from the 2nd to
   the 12th of April. Participation averages around 30 countries as well
   as more than 2000 companies and organisations.

   Since the rise in tourism and influx of foreign businesspeople, there
   has been an increased demand for hotels in the city. To cater for these
   increased demands, the Corinthia Bab Africa hotel located in the
   central business district was constructed in 2003 and is the largest
   hotel in Libya. Other large hotels include the Bab El Bahr hotel and
   the Kabir Hotel as well as others.

Sites of Interest

   A city opening up to tourism, Tripoli contains many sites of
   importance. The city's old town is one of the classical sites of the
   Mediterranean; the walled medina retains much of its old-world
   ambience. The Assaraya al-Hamra (the Red Castle), a vast palace complex
   with numerous courtyards, dominates the city skyline and is located on
   the outskirts of the medina. There are some classical statues and
   fountains from the Ottoman period scattered around the castle. The
   Gurgi and Karamanli mosques, with their intricate decorations and
   tilework, are examples of the artistic skills of local craftsmen.

   The basic street plan of the medina was laid down in the Roman period
   when the walls were constructed as protection against attacks from the
   interior of Tripolitania. In the 8th century a wall on the sea-facing
   side of the city was added.
   The Hotel Al Kabir (Grand Hotel).
   Enlarge
   The Hotel Al Kabir (Grand Hotel).

   Three gates provided access to the town: Bab Zanata in the west, Bab
   Hawara in the southeast and Bab Al-Bahr in the north wall. The old city
   walls are still standing and can be climbed for good views of the city.
   The Harbour Monument stands at the gates of the old city where there
   are also a number of restored houses, consulates and a synagogue. The
   medina is also known for its traditional ware; fine jewellery and
   clothes can be found in the local markets.

   The Jamahiriya Museum, a fine modern facility located in the Red
   Castle, is Libya's national museum. It houses many artefacts from the
   country's Roman and Greek periods, including treasures from the World
   Heritage sites at Leptis Magna and Sabratha, as well as such
   curiosities as the Volkswagen Beetle car driven by Gadaffi in the
   1960s. The only surviving Roman monument in the city, the Arch of
   Marcus Aurelius, marks the northern end of the medina. Tripoli has some
   other good museums and archives, including the National Archives, the
   Government Library, the Ethnographic Museum, the Archaeological Museum,
   the Epigraphy Museum and the Islamic Museum.

Colleges and Universities

   The largest university in Tripoli, Al Fateh Univeristy, is a public
   university providing free education to the city's inhabitants. Private
   universities and colleges have begun to crop up in the last few years.

   Universities in Tripoli include:
     * Al Fateh Univeristy - The largest and most important university in
       Tripoli
     * Tripoli University
     * Informatics Tripoli

Sports

   Football is the most popular sport in the Libyan capital. Tripoli is
   home to two of the most prominent football clubs in Libya, Al Ahly
   (Tripoli) and Al Ittihad.

   The main sports clubs based in Tripoli:
     * Al Ahly (Tripoli)
     * Al Ittihad
     * Al Madina
     * Al Shat
     * Al Wahda

Town twinning

     * Serbia Belgrade, Serbia
     * Brazil Belo Horizonte, Brazil (since 2003)
     * Spain Madrid, Spain
     * Bosnia and Herzegovina Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina (since
       1976)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tripoli"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
