   #copyright

Troop sleeper

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Railway transport

   A builder's photo of Pullman troop sleeper #9153.
   Enlarge
   A builder's photo of Pullman troop sleeper #9153.

   In United States railroad terminology, a troop sleeper was a railroad
   passenger car which had been constructed to serve as something of a
   mobile barracks (essentially, a sleeping car) for transporting troops
   over distances sufficient to require overnight accommodations. This
   method allowed part of the trip to be made overnight, reducing the
   amount of transit time required and increasing travel efficiency.

History

Background and development

   Between December, 1941 and June, 1945 U.S. railroads carried almost 44
   million armed services personnel. As there were not an adequate number
   of cars and coaches available to meet the massive need for troop
   transit created by World War II, in late 1943 the U.S. Office of
   Defense Transportation contracted with the Pullman Company to build
   2,400 troop sleepers, and with American Car and Foundry (ACF) to build
   440 troop kitchen cars.

   This new rolling stock was either converted from existing boxcars or
   built from scratch based on AAR standard 50'-6" single-sheathed steel
   boxcar designs, and were constructed entirely out of steel with
   heavily-reinforced ends. In some instances baggage cars were converted
   into temporary kitchen cars before ACF could complete its order. The
   cars were painted the standard Pullman Green and affixed with gold
   lettering. Along the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway's " Surf
   Line," trains consisting of 10-12 former Southern Pacific- Pacific
   Electric non-electrified interurban cars, owned by the U.S. Maritime
   Commission but bearing ATSF markings, were fitted with conventional
   knuckle couplers at each end of the trainset and pressed into service
   to handle the additional passenger loads.
   A 1943 builder's photo of ACF troop kitchen #K-100.
   Enlarge
   A 1943 builder's photo of ACF troop kitchen #K-100.

   Equipped with special Allied Full Cushion high-speed swing-motion
   trucks, Pullman troop sleepers were designed to be
   fully-interchangeable with all other passenger equipment. The units
   came equipped with end doors similar otthose found on standard railway
   cars, but had no vestibules. Loading and unloading of passengers was
   accomplished via wide doors positioned on each side at the centre of
   the cars with built-in trap doors and steps. Light and ventilation was
   provided by ten window units mounted on each side, each equipped with
   rolling black out shades and wire mesh screens.

   Troop sleepers, which were generally intended for use by enlisted
   personnel, were equipped with bunks stacked 3-high, and slept 29
   servicemen plus the Pullman porter. Every passenger was provided with a
   separate Pullman bed, complete with sheets and pillowcases that were
   changed daily. The berths were laid out in a cross-wise arrangement
   that placed the aisle along one side of the car, as opposed to down the
   centre. Though the upper berths were fixed, the middle and lower
   sections could be reconfigured into seating during the daytime. Weapon
   racks were provided for each group of berths. Four washstands (two
   mounted at each end of the car) delivered hot and cold running water.
   The cars also came outfitted with two enclosed toilets and a drinking
   water cooler.
   United States Army "Medical Department Kitchen Car" #8762 sits at the
   Lafayette, Indiana shops of the Monon Railroad on April 17, 1947.
   Enlarge
   United States Army "Medical Department Kitchen Car" #8762 sits at the
   Lafayette, Indiana shops of the Monon Railroad on April 17, 1947.

Troop kitchens

   Troop kitchens, rolling galleys, also joined the consists in order to
   provide meal service en route (the troops took their meals in their
   seats or bunks). As the cooking was performed by regular Army cooks,
   the cars were outfitted with two Army-standard coal ranges. The cars
   were also equipped with a pair of 200-gallon cold water tanks and a
   40-gallon hot water tank; supplies were stocked on open shelves with
   marine-type railings, a bread locker, a large refrigerator, and a
   series of built-in cabinets and drawers. The cars served approximately
   250 men each, and were typically placed inthe middle of the train in
   order that food could be served from both ends.

   Troop hospital cars, also based on the troop sleeper carbody,
   transported wounded servicemen and typically travelled in solid strings
   on special trains averaging fifteen cars each. Each had 38 berths for
   patients, 30 of which were arranged in the central section of the car
   in three tiers on each side. There was also a section with six berths
   which could be used for isolation cases as well as private compartments
   for special cases. Each unit was ice air-conditioned and came fitted
   with a shower room along with a modern kitchen with the latest
   equipment.

Afterlife and preservation

   Troop cars saw service though 1947, after which many were sold by the
   U.S. Army Transportation Corp. to the railroads and subsequently
   converted into mail cars, express service boxcars, or refrigerator
   cars, while others remained in sleeper configuration for use in
   maintenance of way (MOW) service as bunk cars for the maintenance
   workers. Subsequent conflicts have not created the need for such an
   arrangement, partially due to the much smaller level of manpower
   involved but primarily due to the wider use of aircraft for
   long-distance transportation of troops.

   Today, preserved troop sleepers can be seen in several rail museums
   across the United States.

   Pullman Company troop sleeper #8483 stands idle at Denver, Colorado on
   April 22, 1946.

   Railway Express Agency refrigerator car #6687, a converted World War II
   troop sleeper. Note the square panels along the sides that cover the
   former window openings.

   Texas and Pacific Railway #X2621, a former troop sleeper used in MOW
   service.

   Chesapeake and Ohio Railroad #914130, a troop sleeper that has been
   converted to a steam generator car.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Troop_sleeper"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
