   #copyright

Tropical Storm Henri (2003)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Storms

   CAPTION: Tropical Storm Henri

   Tropical storm ( SSHS)
   Tropical Storm Henri near peak intensity
   Tropical Storm Henri near peak intensity
     __________________________________________________________________

   Formed September 3, 2003
   Dissipated September 8, 2003
   Highest
   winds
   60  mph (95  km/h) (1-minute sustained)
   Lowest pressure 997  mbar
   Damage $19.6 million (2003 USD)
   $21.6 million (2005 USD)
   Fatalities None reported
   Areas
   affected Florida, Delaware, Pennsylvania
   Part of the
   2003 Atlantic hurricane season

   Tropical Storm Henri was a weak tropical storm that formed in the 2003
   Atlantic hurricane season. The eighth storm of the season, Henri was
   one of six tropical cyclones to hit the United States in the year.
   Henri formed from a tropical wave in the Gulf of Mexico in early
   September, and crossed over Florida as a tropical depression. Its
   remnants later moved into the Mid-Atlantic before dissipating
   completely.

   Henri caused little damage as a tropical cyclone. In Florida, it
   dropped heavy rainfall, though damage was limited to minor flooding
   damage. In Delaware and Pennsylvania, damage was greater, where heavy
   rainfall damaged hundreds of houses and businesses. The flooding was
   described as a 1 in 500 year event. Total damage along its path
   amounted to $19.6 million (2003 USD, $21.6 million 2006 USD), although
   no deaths were reported.

Storm history

   Storm path
   Enlarge
   Storm path

   On August 22, a tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa, and it
   moved westward across the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea without
   developing significantly until it entered the Gulf of Mexico on
   September 1. At that time, convection steadily organized around the
   wave's low-level centre of circulation as it moved northward, and the
   wave developed into Tropical Depression Twelve on September 3 while
   located about 300  miles (480  kilometers) west of Tampa, Florida.
   Embedded within a slow mid-latitude trough, the depression moved
   eastward and strengthened into Tropical Storm Henri on September 5.
   Remnants of Henri making landfall on North Carolina
   Enlarge
   Remnants of Henri making landfall on North Carolina

   Despite strong southwesterly vertical shear, Henri continued
   intensifying while moving eastward, and reached a peak strength of
   60 mph (95 km/h) later on September 5. Shortly thereafter, though, the
   shear greatly weakened the storm, and it was downgraded to a tropical
   depression. Henri was not able to recover its intensity, and made
   landfall near Clearwater, Florida on September 6 as a 35 mph (55 km/h)
   tropical depression, and quickly crossed the state as it accelerated to
   the northeast. Despite initial predictions of reintensification over
   open waters due to potentially lower shear, Henri succumbed to strong
   wind shear, and dissipated on September 8 off the coast of North
   Carolina.

   The broad and disorganized remnant low remained nearly stationary due
   to a ridge of high pressure to its north. Residual convection within
   the remnants of Henri remained disorganized, but forecasters kept watch
   for the potential for redevelopment. However, it moved inland near Cape
   Hatteras on September 12 before reorganizing. The remnants continued to
   the north, and the remnants of Henri finally dissipated on September
   17.

Preparations

   The National Hurricane Centre issued a Tropical Storm Warning from
   Englewood to Indian Pass, Florida while Henri was a tropical
   depression; however, warnings were discontinued by the time Henri made
   landfall. Flood warnings were issued across the state prior to the
   storm making landfall, with predictions of 5 to 10 inches (125–255 mm)
   of rainfall. As a result of the storm's approach, twelve shelters were
   placed on standby. Similarly, the Hurricane Shelter Information Hotline
   was placed on standby and ready to be activated within 10 minutes. Levy
   County officials declared a state of emergency. There, sand bags and
   sand were sent to Cedar Key, Yankeetown, and Inglis in anticipation for
   storm surge and flooding.

Impact

   Rainfall totals from Henri
   Enlarge
   Rainfall totals from Henri

   Henri dropped heavy rainfall along its path, with the worst of the
   flooding occurring in Delaware. The storm caused $19.6 million in
   damage (2003 USD), primarily in Delaware.

Florida, Bahamas, and Bermuda

   Prior to making landfall, the storm produced strong waves on the
   Florida west coast. Following a summer of tropical moisture in Florida,
   Henri brought more heavy rainfall to the saturated state, peaking at
   9.09 in (230 mm) in Hialeah in the southeast portion of the state. Two
   other areas experienced over 7 in (180 mm), though most areas received
   only light rainfall. In Hernando County, a stationary thunderstorm
   dropped over 5 in (125 mm) of rain in around an hour. It caused a rapid
   flooding of roads, though quickly retreated. Damage was minor, due to
   lack of many homes in the area. A feeder band in Charlotte County
   dropped 7 in (180 mm) of rain in three hours, flooding numerous streets
   and homes. Throughout Florida, damage was minimal, and there were no
   deaths. However, lightning from a feeder band injured a man in Lee
   County, while an indirect injury occurred from a car crash due to
   hydroplaning.

   In the Bahamas, where rainfall was needed, outer rainbands from Henri
   dropped around 1 inch (25 mm) of rain. There, winds gusted to 32  mph
   (51  km/h). Just days after Hurricane Fabian struck Bermuda, moisture
   from Henri brought thunderstorms and heavy rainfall and thunderstorms
   totaling to 2.44 inches (62 mm) at the airport. This hindered cleanup
   efforts, though caused no known damage.

Mid-Atlantic

   In North Carolina, Virginia, and Maryland, rainfall was generally
   light, with the exception of a few areas receiving over 3 inches
   (75 mm). Henri produced greater amounts of rains Delaware and
   Pennsylvania, with a peak of 9.02 in (229 mm) in Hockessin. In
   Downingtown, Pennsylvania, over eight inches of rain fell in around
   six hours, while Doppler Radar estimated that Kennett Square received
   over 10 inches (255 mm) in a five hour period. The heavy rainfall lead
   to record discharge rates along the Red Clay Creek, which also had a
   record crest peaking at just below 26 feet (8 m). Parts of the river
   saw a 500-year flood, which has a 0.2% chance of occurring in any given
   year. Numerous rivers in southeastern Pennsylvania also crested above
   their flood stage.

   In Delaware, the flooding damaged numerous houses, including 194 in the
   Glenville area. The rapid flooding trapped numerous people in their
   cars and homes, forcing at least one rescue by helicopter. Those people
   were evacuated to nearby schools. The severe flooding washed out most
   of a bridge in Hockessin and destroyed 6 railroad bridges in the
   Wilmington & Western Railroad, causing $5 million (2003 USD) in damage.
   The railroad bridge took 2½ years to be rebuilt. Greenbank Mill, a
   historic gristmill complex, saw $450,000 in damage. Damage in Delaware
   totaled to $16.1 million (2003 USD, $17.7 million 2006 USD).

   Flash flooding in Pennsylvania resulted in 2,600 emergency 911 calls
   and around 100 rescues for cars or houses. The flooding destroyed
   12 homes, and damaged 336, over half of them severely. Wet soil downed
   trees and power lines, causing power outages to 109,000  PECO Energy
   customers. High floodwaters damaged 22 bridges and closed
   2 indefinitely, while the flooding closed several roads, including a
   portion of U.S. Highway 1 in Chadds Ford. Damage in Pennsylvania
   totaled to $3.5 million (2003 USD, $3.8 million 2006 USD). The impacts
   were severely compounded the following week by Hurricane Isabel across
   the region.

Aftermath

   On September 23, just days after the storm moved through, President
   George W. Bush declared New Castle County, Delaware as a disaster area
   following the effects of Henri and later Hurricane Isabel. The
   declaration designated the affected citizens eligible for grants to pay
   for temporary housing, house repairs, and serious disaster-related
   expenses. The declaration also allowed for federal funding for 75% of
   the repair cost for replacing public facilities. By two months after
   the storm, 659 residents had applied for disaster aid through the
   Federal Emergency Management Agency, or FEMA, totaling to just over
   $1 million (2003 USD, $1.1 million 2006 USD). 141 small businesses
   applied for loans, totaling to around $2.5 million (2003 USD, $2.75
   million 2006 USD). In addition, FEMA received 183 applications for
   public assistance, which would be used for rebuilding public roads and
   buildings. Over twenty volunteer organizations met to establish a
   long-term committee to find resources for disaster recovery needs. One
   goal sought by the committee was to find a permanent housing solution
   for every one who was displaced from their houses from the storms.
   Volunteers also helped remove ruined appliances and furniture to local
   landfills, totaling to more than 300 tons. State and county governments
   in Delaware purchased 171 homes following the damage in the Glenville
   area. This is the highest number of houses purchased in Delaware due to
   storm damage. The house purchasing was done to mitigate the flood
   damage by restoring the area as a wetland.

   On September 26, President Bush also declared Chester County,
   Pennsylvania as a disaster area following the damage of Henri, Tropical
   Storm Isabel, and severe flooding unrelated to either tropical cyclone.
   By a month after the declaration, 342 homeowners and business owners
   applied for disaster aid, totaling to around $600,000 (2003 USD,
   $660,000 2006 USD).

   Because the damage was localized and overall minimal, the name Henri
   was not retired, and it is scheduled to be used next the 2009 season.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tropical_Storm_Henri_%282003%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
