   #copyright

Tropical Storm Danielle (1992)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Storms

   CAPTION: Tropical Storm Danielle

   Tropical storm ( SSHS)
   Tropical Storm Danielle off the coast of North Carolina
   Tropical Storm Danielle off the coast of North Carolina
     __________________________________________________________________

   Formed September 22, 1992
   Dissipated September 26, 1992
   Highest
   winds
   65 mph (105 km/h) (1-minute sustained)
   Lowest pressure 1001 mbar ( hPa)
   Damage Minimal
   Fatalities 2 direct
   Areas
   affected North Carolina, Mid-Atlantic, New Jersey
   Part of the
   1992 Atlantic hurricane season

   Tropical Storm Danielle was a weak tropical storm that made landfall on
   Virginia in the 1992 Atlantic hurricane season. The forth storm of the
   season, Danielle was one of two Atlantic storms in the year to make
   landfall on the United States, the other being Hurricane Andrew. It
   formed out of a stationary trough of low pressure on September 18 near
   the coast of North Carolina. The system quickly reached tropical storm
   status, and Danielle looped to the west due a change in steering
   currents. Tropical Storm Danielle reached a peak of 65 mph (105 km/h)
   winds before weakening and hitting the Delmarva Peninsula. The storm
   quickly dissipated over land.

   The storm dropped light rainfall throughout its path, and winds were
   minimal. The combination of Danielle and a high pressure system
   produced higher than normal tides and strong waves, causing beach
   erosion and light coastal damage. The waves killed 2 in New Jersey from
   a boat sinking, and also destroyed three houses in the Outer Banks of
   North Carolina. Overall damage from the storm was minimal.

Storm History

   Storm path
   Enlarge
   Storm path

   An surface trough of low pressure with an area of convection persisted
   off the southeast coast of the United States on September 18. On the
   same day, a weak tropical wave which moved off the coast of Africa on
   September 8 approached the area. A cold front merged with the
   stationary area of disturbed weather on September 20, and on September
   22 a circulation developed 200 miles (325 km) southeast of Cape
   Hatteras, North Carolina. Organization continued as outflow became
   better defined, and the system developed into Tropical Depression Six
   later that day.

   The depression rapidly organized, and attained tropical storm status
   with winds of 50 mph (80 km/h) just 6 hours after forming. In response
   to an approaching trough, Danielle initially moved to the northeast.
   However, the trough outran the system, and a developing high pressure
   system to its north resulted in Danielle executing a tight,
   anticyclonic loop on September 23 to the 24th. The storm strengthened
   as it turned to the northwest, and reached a peak of 65 mph (105 km/h)
   winds on September 25 while just off the northeastern coast of North
   Carolina. Danielle turned to the north-northwest, and made landfall on
   the Eastern Shore of Virginia late on the 25th. It rapidly weakened
   over land, and dissipated over eastern Pennsylvania on September 26.

Preparations

   Radar image of Danielle making landfall
   Enlarge
   Radar image of Danielle making landfall

   Early in its life, forecasters had difficulties regarding the future
   track and intensity of Danielle, including a northeastward motion
   instead of its loop. After Danielle executed its loop, forecasters
   consistently predicted a landfall along the northeastern North Carolina
   coastline. As a result, officials issued Tropical Storm Warnings for
   the coast of North Carolina on September 24, 36 hours before the storm
   passed to the east of the state. The continued northward motion caught
   forecasters offguard, and consequentially tropical storm warnings were
   not issued for the Delmarva Peninsula until just 12 hours before the
   storm made landfall. In addition, forecasters issued tropical storm
   warnings from Delaware through Watch Hill, Rhode Island, as a
   precaution.

   In North Carolina, ferry operations between Ocracoke and the mainland
   at Hyde County were closed, while officials cancelled schools in Dare
   County, North Carolina due to the approaching storm. Several families
   voluntarily evacuated St. George's Island in southern St. Mary's
   County, Maryland. In addition, officials in Delaware recommended
   evacuations for low-level areas and beaches. As a precaution, officials
   set up 2 shelters in Kent County.

Impact

North Carolina

   The pressure gradient between Tropical Storm Danielle and a ridge of
   high pressure to its north produced moderately strong winds across
   eastern North Carolina, peaking at 58 mph (93 km/h) at Alligator River
   Bridge. Several other locations reported over tropical storm force
   winds. The pressure gradient also produced higher than normal waves
   along the coastline, with a maximum of 20 feet (6 m) at Duck. Despite
   passing close to the coastline, Danielle dropped only light rainfall,
   totaling to 0.2 inches (5 mm) at Cape Hatteras. However, locations in
   the central portion of the state experienced over 1 inch (25 mm) of
   rainfall.

   Waves and high tides from the storm caused flooding along the Pamlico
   Sound side of Ocracoke and southern Hatteras Island. High tides also
   resulted in overwash in Pea Island, forcing the closure of State
   Highway 17 due to 12 inches of salt water. High tides from the storm
   also destroyed two houses in South Nags Head and one in Rodanthe, two
   of which were previously condemned after the 1991 Halloween Nor'easter.
   Three other houses in the Outer Banks were threatened by the storm.
   Elsewhere in the Outer Banks, damage was minimal, and was limited to
   pedestrian ramps and steps to the beachfront.

Mid-Atlantic

   In Virginia, Tropical Storm Danielle produced peak wind gusts of 61 mph
   (98 km/h) at Cape Henry, though sustained winds remained below tropical
   storm strength. Rainfall was light along the coast, totaling to around
   0.34 inches (8.6 mm). However, outer bands of the storm produced
   heavier rainfall in the centre portion of the state, peaking at 4.09
   inches at Charlottesville. The storm also produced higher than usual
   tides, peaking at 4.42 feet (1.3 m) at the mouth of the Elizabeth River
   in Sewells Point, as well as strong waves along the Virginia coastline.
   The waves caused significant overwash, leaving parts of Norfolk under 2
   feet (.6 m) of water. Several homes, businesses, and cars were flooded,
   as well. The waves also eroded beaches along the coast. Overall, damage
   was minimal, and there were no reports of deaths or injuries.
   Rainfall totals from Danielle
   Enlarge
   Rainfall totals from Danielle

   Upon making landfall Danielle produced an estimated storm tide of 2 to
   3 feet (.6 to .9 m) in Ocean City, Maryland. Wind gusts peaked at 53
   mph (85 km/h), also in Ocean City. The storm produced moderate rainfall
   of over 3 inches (76 mm) across the Eastern Shore of Maryland, while
   interior amounts experienced slightly lesser amounts of up to 2.79
   inches (71 mm) in Pasadena. Waves from the storm caused minor to
   moderate beach erosion along the coastline, and the combination of
   waves and high tides caused moderate street flooding. Near Salisbury,
   the storm produced a possible hook echo, though no tornadoes were
   reported. Danielle caused no deaths or injuries in the state.

   In Delaware, the storm dropped light precipitation, with a maximum
   amount of 3.75 inches (95 mm) in Smyrna. Wind gusts peaked at 66 mph
   (106 km/h) at Cape Henlopen. Danielle caused 2-3 foot (.6 to .9 m)
   higher than normal tides, along with strong waves. The combination of
   the two flooded some coastal houses and resulted in significant beach
   and dune erosion. The waves also sank four boats and washed away a dock
   near Slaughter Beach. Gusty winds caused power outages in New Castle
   County, while persistent rainfall caused sewer interruptions. Overall,
   with the exception of the severe beach erosion, damage was minimal.

Northeast United States

   Tropical Storm Danielle dropped light rainfall across much of New
   Jersey, with some areas in the southwestern portion of the state
   experiencing over 3 inches (76 mm). Strong waves from the storm washed
   out miles of beaches along the coastline. In Ocean City, the waves
   passed over the boardwalk and into houses. Further north, the waves
   crashed a 4 person, 35 foot (10 m) sailboat near Island Beach State
   Park. Two managed to swim safely to shore, though the other two
   occupants drowned.

   Danielle's outer bands dropped light rainfall from Connecticut through
   Maine, with isolated locations in Rhode Island and Massachusetts
   reporting over 3 inches (76 mm). Damage in New England is unknown.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tropical_Storm_Danielle_%281992%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
