   #copyright

Tropical Storm Chris (2006)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Storms

   CAPTION: Tropical Storm Chris

   Tropical storm ( SSHS)
   Tropical Storm Chris on August 2, 2006
   Tropical Storm Chris on August 2, 2006
     __________________________________________________________________

   Formed July 31, 2006
   Dissipated August 5, 2006
   Highest
   winds
   65  mph (100  km/h) (1-minute sustained)
   Lowest pressure 1001  mbar ( hPa)
   Damage Minimal
   Fatalities None reported
   Areas
   affected Leeward Islands, Puerto Rico, Turks & Caicos Islands,
   Hispaniola, Bahamas, eastern Cuba
   Part of the
   2006 Atlantic hurricane season

   Tropical Storm Chris was the third named storm of the 2006 Atlantic
   hurricane season. Forming on July 31 in the Atlantic Ocean east of the
   Leeward Islands, Chris moved generally to the west-northwest, skirting
   the northern fringes of the Caribbean islands. Chris was a relatively
   short-lived storm, reaching a peak intensity with winds at 65  mph
   (100  km/h) on August 2, while positioned north of St. Martin. The
   storm gradually weakened before finally dissipating on August 5, near
   eastern Cuba.

   Overall impact was minimal, amounting to moderate amounts of rainfall
   throughout its path. Also, the affected areas were well prepared for
   the storm.

Storm history

   Storm path
   Enlarge
   Storm path

   On July 27, a westward-moving tropical wave was first observed about
   550 miles (890 km) southwest of the Cape Verde Islands. Upper-level
   wind shear initially inhibited development, though the winds abated
   enough to allow convection to remain associated with the surface low
   pressure area. The wave steadily became more organized as upper level
   winds continued to become more favorable, though convection and shower
   activity remained minimal until late on July 31 when a circulation
   developed about 200 miles (320 km) east of the Leeward Islands.

   Due to persistent deep convection near the circulation, the National
   Hurricane Centre upgraded the system to Tropical Depression Three late
   on July 31 while located 160 miles (260 km) east-southeast of Antigua.
   Forecasters initially predicted wind shear from an upper level low
   would prevent strengthening and cause dissipation in three days.
   However, the depression continued to organize as deep convection
   developed near the circulation, and the system intensified into
   Tropical Storm Chris early on August 1. The convection gradually
   consolidated over the strengthening, and by late on the 1st Chris
   reached winds of 60 mph (95 km/h) while passing 50 miles (80 km) north
   of the northern Leeward Islands. The structure of Chris continued to
   improve and become more symmetrical, and an upper level eye feature
   developed early on August 2. Outflow improved in all quadrants, as
   well, and the storm reached a peak intensity of 65 mph (100 km/h)
   shortly thereafter while located 120 miles (195 km) east of St. Thomas.
   Despite initial predictions of Chris intensifying to a hurricane as a
   ridge of high pressure forced it west-northwestward, upper level shear
   dissipated the well-defined inner core of the storm, and Chris started
   to weaken.

   Early on August 3, strong wind sheer over Chris detached the deep
   convection from the low level circulation, while at the same time a
   building ridge to its north turned the storm towards the west. By
   mid-day on the 3rd the circulation was devoid of any convection within
   85 miles (135 km), while the deeper convection spread across Puerto
   Rico and Hispaniola. Late on August 3, deep convection developed over
   the centre of circulation again, though persistent vertical shear
   weakened Chris to a tropical depression on August 4. Due to lesser
   amounts of shear as predicted by computer models, forecasters indicated
   the possibility moderate strengthening in the Gulf of Mexico to a
   60 mph (95 km/h) storm. However, the National Hurricane Centre issued
   the last advisory on the system early on August 5, stating the system
   was degenerating into a broad area of low pressure while near the
   northeast coast of Cuba. Late on August 5, convection increased in the
   remnants of the storm, and forecasters indicated the potential for slow
   development over the Gulf of Mexico due to marginally favorable
   conditions. Redevelopment never occurred, and the remnants of Chris
   dissipated on August 6 over the southeastern Gulf of Mexico.

Preparations

   Chris as seen from aboard the International Space Station
   Enlarge
   Chris as seen from aboard the International Space Station

   When the National Hurricane Centre issued its first advisory on
   Tropical Depression Three, the governments of Antigua and Barbuda,
   Anguilla, Saint Kitts and Nevis, and the British Virgin Islands issued
   a Tropical Storm Warning for their respective territories. When the
   depression strengthened to Tropical Storm Chris, Tropical Storm
   Warnings were also issued for Saba, Sint Eustatius, Saint-Barthélemy,
   and Saint Martin. Three Royal Caribbean cruise ships re-routed their
   paths to avoid the storm. FEMA representatives coordinated with local
   emergency management officials in the United States Virgin Islands to
   determine if preparation necessities would be adequate, such as
   hospital usage, shelters, and sand bags. In St. Thomas, all jet flights
   were cancelled in and out of the island, though small airlines were
   permitted to fly during the storm. Ferry service from Saint Martin to
   Anguilla was cancelled for a short period of time. Saint Martin
   officials recommended citizens to secure all loose items, for coastal
   residents to prepare for high surf, and for construction sites to
   secure all loose equipment. A small craft advisory was also issued for
   coastal waters of Saint Martin due to strong waves from the storm.

   On August 1, officials in Puerto Rico issued a tropical storm warning
   for the island. The next day, approximately 600 tourists evacuated the
   islands of Vieques and Culebra. Citizens in Puerto Rico prepared for
   the storm by stocking up on supplies and visiting gas stations.

   On August 2, the government of the Bahamas issued a Hurricane Watch for
   the Turks and Caicos Islands, the Acklins and Crooked Islands, Ragged
   Island, Inagua, and Mayaguana. In response to the threat, officials
   urged citizens to stock up on hurricane supplies, while boat owners in
   Staniel Cay secured their boats in preparation for the storm.

   In response to the storm's projected path into the Gulf of Mexico,
   prices for crude oil rose on the New York Mercantile Exchange at branch
   offices in London. Natural gas prices rose considerably in New York
   Mercantile Exchange electronic trading on August 2. Anticipation of a
   threat to supply by a potential Hurricane Chris coupled with high
   demand during an ongoing heat wave were cited as factors in the price
   move. In New Orleans, officials including Mayor Ray Nagin prepared for
   a possible evacuation of the city if Chris entered the Gulf of Mexico
   as a hurricane. The evacuation plan included moving all residents out
   of the city as a worst-case scenario, intended to avoid a re-occurrence
   of Hurricane Katrina around 1 year prior. Florida Emergency Management
   requested 10 mobile recovery centers, and placed hospitals in the
   Florida Keys on standby for evacuation. Officials in Mississippi
   identified the need for 110 to assist in an evacuation process in case
   of a possible landfall. Both Louisiana and Texas emergency operation
   centers monitored the progress of the storm, though didn't execute any
   preparation action.

Impact

   Damage caused by Tropical Storm Chris was minor and generally confined
   to local flooding.

   St. Thomas received brief amounts of heavy rain, with totals of over
   3 inches (75 mm). Anguilla reported light rain and wind gusts of up to
   21 mph (34 km/h). In St. John the storm caused peak wind gusts of
   23 mph (37 km/h)and along with moderately heavy rainfall of nearly
   3 inches (75 mm), along with reports of lightning near the storm's
   centre. Though impact was minimal in Saint Martin, Governor Franklyn
   Richards recognized the storm preparations served as a wake up call for
   citizens who weren't ready for the hurricane season. In San Juan,
   Puerto Rico, the storm caused very little wind or rain. Convection
   dissociated from the centre of the storm produced 30 mph (48 km/h) wind
   gusts and over 1.3 inches (33 mm) of rain in Culebra. Rainfall from the
   storm caused the Fajardo River to overflow its banks. The overflown
   waters temporarily closed a highway in the northeastern portion of the
   island.

   Rainfall reached up to 2  inches (50  mm) across portions of
   Hispaniola, the Turks and Caicos, the Bahamas, and eastern Cuba, and
   reached 4 inches (100 mm) in some mountainous areas. In Santo Domingo
   in the Dominican Republic, heavy rainfall caused severe flooding.
   Several people were left temporarily homeless due to flooding entering
   their households. The flooding left many roads impassable near the
   capital city, and also resulted in landslides. The flooding also
   covered rice fields in the northeastern portion of the country. The
   National Office of Meteorology issued flood warnings for residents in
   low-lying areas and near rivers in the northeast and southeast portions
   of the country. Despite the flooding, overall damage was minor, and
   there are no casualties associated with Chris.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tropical_Storm_Chris_%282006%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
