   #copyright

Trout

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Insects, Reptiles and
Fish

   Rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss
   Enlarge
   Rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss
   Biwa trout, Oncorhynchus masou subsp
   Enlarge
   Biwa trout, Oncorhynchus masou subsp

   Trout is the common name given to a number of species of freshwater
   fish belonging to the salmon family, Salmonidae.

   All fish called trout are members of the subfamily Salmoninae. The name
   is commonly used for species in three of the seven genera in the
   sub-family: Salmo, which includes Atlantic species; Oncorhynchus, which
   includes Pacific species; and Salvelinus, which includes fish also
   sometimes called char or charr. Fish referred to as trout include:
     * Genus Salmo
          + Adriatic trout, Salmo obtusirostris
          + Brown trout, Salmo trutta
          + Flathead trout, Salmo platycephalus
          + Marmorata, Soca River trout or Soča trout - Salmo trutta
            marmoratus
          + Ohrid trout, Salmo letnica
          + Sevan trout, Salmo ischchan

     * Genus Oncorhynchus
          + Apache trout, Oncorhynchus apache
          + Seema, Oncorhynchus masou subsp
          + Cutthroat trout, Oncorhynchus clarki
          + Gila trout, Oncorhynchus gilae
          + Golden trout, Oncorhynchus aguabonita
          + Rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss

     * Genus Salvelinus (Char)
          + Aurora trout, Salvelinus fontinalis timagamiensis
          + Brook trout, Salvelinus fontinalis
          + Bull trout, Salvelinus confluentus
          + Dolly Varden trout, Salvelinus malma
          + Lake trout, Salvelinus namaycush
          + Silver trout, † Salvelinus fontinalis agassizi (extinct)

   Trout are usually found in cool, clear streams and lakes, although many
   of the species have anadromous strains, as well. They are distributed
   naturally throughout North America, northern Asia and Europe. Several
   species of trout were introduced to Australia and New Zealand by
   amateur fishing enthusiasts in the 19th century, effectively displacing
   several upland native fish species. The species introduced included
   brown trout from England and rainbow trout from California. The rainbow
   trout were a steelhead strain generally accepted as coming from Sonoma
   Creek. The rainbow trout of New Zealand still show that steelhead
   tendency to run up rivers in winter to spawn.

   Trout have fins entirely without spines, and all of them have a small
   adipose (fatty) fin along the back, near the tail. There are many
   species, and even more populations that are isolated from each other
   and morphologically different. However, many of these distinct
   populations show no significant genetic differences, and therefore what
   may appear to be a large number of species is considered a much smaller
   number of distinct species by most ichthyologists.

   The trout found in the eastern United States are a good example of
   this. The brook trout, the aurora trout and the (extinct) silver trout
   all have physical characteristics and colourations that distinguish
   them, yet genetic analysis shows that they are one species, Salvelinus
   fontinalis.

   Lake trout (Salvelinus namaycush), like brook trout, actually belong to
   the char genus. Lake trout inhabit many of the larger lakes in North
   America and live much longer than rainbow trout which have an average
   maximum life span of 7 years. Lake trout can live many decades and can
   grow to more than 30 kg (66 pounds).
   Rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss
   Enlarge
   Rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss

   Trout generally feed on soft bodied aquatic invertebrates, such as
   flies, mayflies, caddisflies, stoneflies, and dragonflies. In lakes,
   various species of zooplankton often form large parts of the diet. In
   general, the larger specimens of trout (longer than about 30 cm) prey
   almost exclusively on small fish, if they are available.

   As a group, trout are somewhat bony, but the flesh is generally
   considered to be tasty. Additionally, they provide a good fight when
   caught with a hook and line, and are sought after recreationally.
   Because of their popularity, trout are often raised on fish farms and
   planted into heavily fished waters in an effort to mask the effects of
   overfishing. While they can be caught with a normal rod and reel, fly
   fishing is a distinctive method developed primarily for trout and now
   extended to other species. Farmed trout and char are also sold
   commercially as food fish.

   Trout that live in different environments can have dramatically
   different colorations and patterns. Mostly, these colors and patterns
   form as camouflage, based on the surroundings, and will change as the
   fish moves to different habitats. Trout in, or newly returned from the
   sea, can look very silvery, while the same "genetic" fish living in a
   small stream or in an alpine lake could have pronounced markings and
   more vivid coloration. It is virtually impossible to define a
   particular colour pattern as belonging to a specific breed; however, in
   general, wild fish are claimed to have more vivid colors and patterns.
   Golden trout, Oncorhynchus aguabonita
   Golden trout, Oncorhynchus aguabonita

   The cutthroat trout has 14 recognized subspecies (depending on your
   sources), such as the Lahontan cutthroat trout, Oncorhynchus clarki
   henshawi, Bonneville cutthroat trout, Oncorhynchus clarki utah,
   Colorado River cutthroat trout, Yellowstone cutthroat trout.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trout"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
