   #copyright

Trumpet

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Musical Instruments

   CAPTION: Trumpet
   en: Trumpet, tr: Trompet, es: Trompeta, fr: Trompette, it: Tromba,
   de: Trompete, is: Trompet, ru: Труба, pt: Trompete, he: חצוצרה,
   gr: Τρομπέτα,

                                 Trumpet

                              Classification
     * Wind
     * Brass
     * Aerophone

                               Playing range
   in B flat: sounds a whole tone lower
                            Related instruments

   Flugelhorn, Cornet, Bugle,
   Natural trumpet, Bass trumpet, Post horn, Roman tuba, Bucina, Shofar,
   Conch, Lur, Didgeridoo, Piccolo trumpet

   The trumpet is the highest brass instrument in register, above the
   horn, trombone, baritone, euphonium and tuba. A musician who plays the
   trumpet is called a trumpet player or trumpeter. The most common
   trumpet by far is a transposing instrument pitched in B flat - the note
   read as middle C sounds as the B flat 2 semitones below - but there are
   many other trumpets in this family of instruments.

Construction

   The trumpet is made of brass tubing bent into a rough spiral. Although
   the bore is roughly cylindrical, it is more precisely a complex series
   of tapers, smaller at the mouthpiece receiver and larger just before
   the flare of the bell begins. Careful design of these tapers is
   critical to the intonation of the instrument. Sound is produced by
   blowing air through closed lips, producing a "buzzing" sound into the
   mouthpiece and starting a standing wave vibration in the air column
   inside the trumpet. The player can select the pitch from a range of
   overtones or harmonics by changing the lip aperture. There are three
   piston valves, each of which increases the length of tubing when
   engaged, thereby lowering the pitch. The first valve lowers the
   instrument's pitch by a whole step (2 semitones), the second valve by a
   half step (1 semitone), and the third valve by one-and-a-half steps (3
   semitones). When a fourth valve is present, as with some piccolo
   trumpets, it lowers the pitch a perfect fourth (5 semitones). Used
   alone and in combination these valves make the instrument fully
   chromatic, i.e., able to play all twelve pitches of Western music. The
   sound is projected outward by the bell.

   The mouthpiece has a circular rim which provides a comfortable
   environment for the lips' vibration. Directly behind the rim is the
   cup, which channels the air into a much smaller opening (the backbore
   or shank) which tapers out slightly to match the diameter of the
   trumpet's lead pipe. The dimensions of these parts of the mouthpiece
   affect the timbre or quality of sound, the ease of playability, and
   player comfort. Generally, the wider and deeper the cup, the darker the
   sound and timbre.

Types of trumpets

   The most common type is the B flat trumpet, but C, D, E flat, E, F, G
   and A trumpets are also available. The C trumpet is most commonly used
   in orchestral playing, where its slightly smaller size gives it a
   brighter, more lively sound than the B flat trumpet. Because music
   written for early trumpets required the use of a different trumpet for
   every key (they did not have valves and were therefore not chromatic),
   and also because a player may choose to play a particular passage on a
   different trumpet from the one indicated on the written music,
   orchestra trumpet players are generally adept at transposing music at
   sight. Being able to play music written for the B flat trumpet on the C
   trumpet, and vice-versa, is fairly common. Each trumpet's range extends
   from the written F sharp immediately below Middle C, up to about three
   octaves higher. Standard repertoire rarely calls for notes beyond this
   range, and the fingering tables of most method books peak at the C (
   high C) two octaves above middle C. Several trumpeters have achieved
   fame for their proficiency in the extreme high register, among them
   Bill Chase, Maynard Ferguson, Dizzy Gillespie, Malcolm McNab, James
   Morrison, and Arturo Sandoval, who helped make well-known the term
   double high C to describe the next octave above high C. It is also
   possible to produce pedal tones below the low F sharp, although this
   technique is more often encountered as a sound-production exercise
   rather than as a written trumpet part.
   Piccolo trumpet in B flat, with swappable leadpipes to tune the
   instrument to B flat (shorter) or A (longer)
   Piccolo trumpet in B flat, with swappable leadpipes to tune the
   instrument to B flat (shorter) or A (longer)

   The smallest trumpets are referred to as piccolo trumpets. The most
   common of these are built to play in both B flat and A, with separate
   leadpipes for each key. The tubing in the B flat piccolo trumpet is
   one-half the length of that in a standard B flat trumpet. Piccolo
   trumpets in G, F and even C are also manufactured, but are rarer. Many
   players use a smaller mouthpiece on the piccolo trumpet. Because of the
   smaller mouthpiece size, endurance is often limited and the sound
   production technique is different from that used on the B flat trumpet.
   Almost all piccolo trumpets have four valves instead of the usual
   three: the fourth valve lowers the pitch, usually by a fourth, to
   facilitate the playing of lower notes. Maurice Andre, Hakan
   Hardenberger, and Wynton Marsalis are some well-known piccolo trumpet
   players.

   Trumpets pitched in the key of G are also called sopranos, or soprano
   bugles, after their adaptation from military bugles. Traditionally used
   in drum and bugle corps, sopranos have featured both rotary valves and
   piston valves.

   The bass trumpet is usually played by a trombone player, being at the
   same pitch and using a similar mouthpiece. Bass trumpet is played with
   a trombone or euphonium mouthpiece, and music for it is written in
   treble clef.
   trumpet in C with rotary valves
   trumpet in C with rotary valves

   The slide trumpet is a B flat trumpet that has a slide instead of
   valves. It is similar to a soprano trombone. The first slide trumpets
   emerged during the Renaissance, predating the modern trombone, and are
   the first attempts to increase chromaticism on the instrument. Slide
   trumpets were the first trumpets allowed in the Christian church.

   The pocket trumpet is a compact B flat trumpet. The bell is usually
   smaller than a standard trumpet and the tubing is more tightly wound to
   reduce the instrument size without reducing the total tube length. Its
   design is not standardized, and the quality of various models varies
   greatly. It can have a tone quality and projection unique in the
   trumpet world: a warm sound and a voice-like articulation.
   Unfortunately, since many pocket trumpet models suffer from poor design
   as well as cheap and sloppy manufacturing, the intonation, tone colour
   and dynamic range of such instruments are severely hindered.
   Professional-standard instruments are, however, available. While they
   are not a substitute for the full-sized instrument, they can be useful
   in certain contexts.

   There are also rotary-valve, or German, trumpets, as well as alto and
   Baroque trumpets.

   The trumpet is often confused with its close relative, the cornet,
   which has a more conical tubing shape compared to the trumpet's more
   cylindrical tube. This, along with additional bends in the cornet's
   tubing, gives the cornet a slightly mellower tone, but the instruments
   are otherwise nearly identical. They have the same length of tubing
   and, therefore, the same pitch, so music written for cornet and trumpet
   is interchangeable. Another relative, the flugelhorn, has tubing that
   is even more conical than that of the cornet, and an even richer tone.
   It is sometimes augmented with a fourth valve to improve the intonation
   of some lower notes.

History

   The oldest trumpets date back to 1500 B.C.E. and earlier. The bronze
   and silver trumpets from Tutankhamun's grave in Egypt, bronze lurs from
   Scandinavia, and metal trumpets from China date back to this period.
   Trumpets from the Oxus civilization (3rd millennium B.C.E.) of Central
   Asia have decorated swellings in the middle, yet is made out of one
   sheet of metal, a technical wonder. The earliest trumpets were
   signaling instruments used for military or religious purposes, rather
   than music in the modern sense. "The sound of these instruments was
   described as terrible, that is, producing terror, and was compared to
   the braying of an ass." The modern bugle continues the signaling
   tradition, with different tunes corresponding to different
   instructions, but the advent of radio made its use more ceremonial.
   Reproduction Baroque trumpet by Michael Laird
   Reproduction Baroque trumpet by Michael Laird

   In medieval times, trumpet playing was a guarded craft, its instruction
   occurring only within highly selective guilds. The trumpet players were
   often among the most heavily guarded members of a troop, as they were
   relied upon to relay instructions to other sections of the army.
   Improvements to instrument design and metal making in the late Middle
   Ages and Renaissance led to an increased usefulness of the trumpet as a
   musical instrument. The development of the upper, " clarino" register,
   by specialist trumpeters, would lend itself well to the Baroque era,
   also known as the "Golden Age of the natural trumpet." The
   melody-dominated homophony of the classical and romantic periods,
   relegated the trumpet to a secondary role by most major composers. An
   exception is Haydn's Trumpet Concerto written for keyed trumpet in
   1796. The trumpet was slow to adopt the modern valves (invented around
   the mid 1830s), and its cousin, the cornet would take the spotlight as
   solo instrument for the next hundred years. Crooks and shanks
   (removable tubing of various lengths) as opposed to keys or valves,
   were standard, into the first part of the 20th century.

   The Arabic word for trumpet was naffir. The Spanish used the Arabic
   name al naffir and changed it into anafil, while the French gave the
   trumpet its own name, buisine, derived from the Latin word buccina.

   Today, the trumpet is used in nearly all forms of music, including
   classical, jazz, rock, blues, pop, ska, polka and funk. Among the great
   modern trumpet players are Maurice André, Louis Armstrong, Miles Davis,
   Dizzy Gillespie, Jon Faddis, Maynard Ferguson, Adolph "Bud" Herseth,
   Malcolm McNab, Wynton Marsalis, Sergei Nakariakov, Lee Morgan, James
   Morrison, Arturo Sandoval, Doc Severinsen, and Philip Smith. See List
   of 20th century brass instrumentalists for a more comprehensive list.

Fingering

   Trumpeter performing with the United States Air Force Band in Europe
   Trumpeter performing with the United States Air Force Band in Europe

   On any trumpet, cornet, or flugelhorn, pressing the valves indicated by
   the numbers below will produce the written notes shown - "OPEN" means
   all valves up, "1" means first valve, "1-2" means first and second
   valve simultaneously and so on. The concert pitch which sounds depends
   on the transposition of the instrument. Engaging the fourth valve, if
   present, drops any of these pitches by a perfect fourth as well. Within
   each overtone series, the different pitches are attained by changing
   the embouchure, or lip position and tightness, along with increasing
   air velocity. Standard fingerings above high C are the same as for the
   notes an octave below (C sharp is 1-2, D is 1, etc.).

   Note that the fundamental of each overtone series does not exist - the
   series begins with the first overtone. Notes in parentheses are the
   sixth overtone, representing a pitch with a frequency of seven times
   that of the fundamental; while this pitch is close to the note shown,
   it is slightly flat relative to equal temperament, and use of those
   fingerings is generally avoided.

   The fingering schemas arises from the length of each valve's tubing
   (air passing through longer lengths of tubing produces a lower pitch).
   Valve "1" increases the tubing length enough to lower the pitch by one
   whole step, valve "2" by one half step, and valve "3" by one and a half
   steps. This schema and the nature of the overtone series create the
   possibility of alternate fingerings for certain notes. For example,
   third-space "C" can be produced with no valves engaged (standard
   fingering) or with valves 2-3. Also, any note produced with 1-2 as its
   standard fingering can also be produced with valve 3 - each drops the
   pitch by 1-1/2 steps. Alternate fingerings may be used to improve
   facility in certain passages. Extending the third valve slide when
   using the fingerings 1-3 or 1-2-3 further lowers the pitch slightly to
   improve intonation.

Solos

   Trumpet mouthpiece assembly showing the rim, cup, and backbore
   Trumpet mouthpiece assembly showing the rim, cup, and backbore

   The chromatic trumpet was first made in the late 1700s, but there were
   several solos written for the natural trumpet that are now played on
   piccolo trumpet. Some important works of trumpet repertoire are:

   Chromatic Trumpet
     * Alexander Arutiunian
          + Concerto in A flat for Trumpet and Orchestra
     * Franz Josef Haydn
          + Concerto for Trumpet and Orchestra in E flat Major
     * Paul Hindemith
          + Sonata for Trumpet and Piano
     * Johann Nepomuk Hummel
          + Concerto for Trumpet and Orchestra in E Major (often
            transposed to E flat major)
     * Kent Kennan
          + Sonata for Trumpet and Piano

   Natural Trumpet/Piccolo Trumpet
     * Johann Sebastian Bach
          + Brandenburg Concerto #2 in F Major
     * Michael Haydn
          + Concerto for Trumpet in D Major
     * Leopold Mozart
          + Concerto for Trumpet in D Major
     * Georg Philipp Telemann
          + Concerto for Trumpet, Strings, and Continuo in D Major

Orchestral excerpts

   To join a symphony orchestra, the player must often first pass an
   audition. During this audition, the player is asked to play short parts
   (called excerpts) of well-known pieces. Frequently asked audition
   excerpts for trumpet include:
     * Bach, J.S.
          + Brandenburg Concerto No. 2 (Movements I and III)
          + Mass in B Minor (Credo)
          + Christmas Oratorio (No. 64 Nun Seid Ihr Wohl Gerochen)
          + Magnificat (Chorus: Magnificat)
     * Bartók
          + Concerto for Orchestra (Movements I, II, and V)
     * Beethoven
          + Leonore Overture No. 2
          + Leonore Overture No. 3
     * Georges Bizet
          + Carmen (Prelude to Act I)
     * Copland
          + An Outdoor Overture
          + "Hoe-Down" from Rodeo
     * Debussy
          + La Mer
          + Fêtes from Nocturnes (Muted Trio & Open Section 13-14)
     * George Gershwin
          + An American in Paris (excerpts and solos)
          + Concerto in F (Movement II)
     * Mahler
          + Symphony No. 1 (Movement I)
          + Symphony No. 2 (Movements I, II, III, V)
          + Symphony No. 3 (Off-stage Posthorn solo)
          + Symphony No. 5 (Movements I, III, V)
     * Modest Mussorgsky arr. Maurice Ravel
          + Pictures at an Exhibition (Promenade; Samuel Goldenberg und
            Schmuÿle)
     * Ravel
          + Piano Concerto in G (Movement I)
          + Boléro (Muted Theme and Ending)
     * Ottorino Respighi
          + Pines of Rome (Movements I, II & IV)
     * Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov
          + Scheherazade (Movment III&IV)
          + Capriccio Espagnol (Movement IV)
     * Shostakovich
          + Piano Concerto (All Movements)
     * Richard Strauss
          + Don Juan (Opening through Sec. B, Weich Solo, Vivo Solo, Sec.
            P)
          + Ein Heldenleben (1st and 2nd E-flat parts)
     * Igor Stravinsky
          + The Firebird (Infernal Dance) (any version)
          + Petrushka - 1st Cornet in 1911 version and 1st Trumpet in 1947
            version
     * Richard Wagner
          + Prelude to Parsifal

Instruction and method books

   One trumpet method publication of long-standing popularity is
   Jean-Baptiste Arban's Complete Conservatory Method for Trumpet
   (Cornet). Other well-known method books include "Technical Studies" by
   Herbert L. Clarke, "Grand Method" Louis Saint-Jacome, and methods by
   Claude Gordon and Charles Colin. The Charlier and Brandt books below
   are used in many college and conservatory trumpet studios, containing
   drills on permutations of standard orchestral trumpet repertoire,
   transpositions, and other advanced material. A common method book for
   beginners is the "Walter Beeler Method", and there have been several
   instruction books written by virtuoso Allen Vizzutti. The Breeze Eazy
   method is sometimes used to teach younger students, as it includes
   general musical information.

   Some notable books include:
     * Arban, Jean-Baptiste (1894, 1936, 1982). Arban's Complete
       Conservatory Method for TRUMPET. Carl Fischer, Inc. ISBN
       0-8258-0385-3.
     * Callet, Jerome, and Bahb Civiletti (2002). Trumpet Secrets: The
       Secrets of the Tongue-Controlled Embouchure. New York: Royal Press
       Printing Company.
     * Herbert L. Clarke (1984). TECHNICAL STUDIES FOR THE CORNET. Carl
       Fischer, Inc. ISBN 0-8258-0158-3.
     * Colin, Charles. Advanced Lip Flexibilities.
     * Schlossberg, Max. Daily Drills & Technical Studies.
     * Vassily Brandt Orchestral Etudes and Last Etudes. ISBN
       0-7692-9779-X
     * Theo Charlier. Trente-six Etudes Transcendantes pour Trompette.
       ISBN M-046-20452-4

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trumpet"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
