   #copyright

Turmeric

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Food and agriculture;
Plants

                   iTurmeric
   Curcuma longa
   Curcuma longa
           Scientific classification

   Kingdom:  Plantae
   Division: Magnoliophyta
   Class:    Liliopsida
   Subclass: Zingiberidae
   Order:    Zingiberales
   Family:   Zingiberaceae
   Genus:    Curcuma
   Species:  C. longa

                                Binomial name

   Curcuma longa
   Linnaeus

   Turmeric (Curcuma longa, also called tumeric or kunyit in some Asian
   countries) is a spice commonly used in curries and other South Asian
   cuisine. Its active ingredient is curcumin. It is a significant
   ingredient in most commercial curry powders. Turmeric is also used to
   give a yellow colour to some prepared mustards, canned chicken broth,
   and other foods (often as a much cheaper replacement for saffron). It
   makes a poor fabric dye as it is not very lightfast (the degree to
   which a dye resists fading due to light exposure).

   Turmeric, a representative of plant genus Curcuma, is a member of the
   ginger family, Zingiberaceae.

   In Ayurvedic medicine, turmeric is thought to have many healthful
   properties. It is taken in some Asian countries as a dietary
   supplement, which allegedly helps with stomach problems and other
   ailments. It is popular as a tea in Okinawa, Japan. It is currently
   being investigated for possible benefits in Alzheimer's disease, cancer
   and liver disorders.

   Sangli, a town in the southern part of the Indian state of Maharashtra,
   is the largest and most important trading centre for turmeric in Asia
   or perhaps in the entire world.

Food additive

   Turmeric powder is used extensively in Indian cuisine.
   Enlarge
   Turmeric powder is used extensively in Indian cuisine.

   Turmeric (coded as E100 when used as a food additive) is used in
   product systems that are packaged to protect them from sunlight. The
   oleoresin is used for oil-containing products. The curcumin/
   polysorbate solution or curcumin powder dissolved in alcohol is used
   for water containing products. Over-colouring, such as in pickles,
   relishes and mustard, is sometimes used to compensate for fading.

   Turmeric has found application in canned beverages, baked products,
   dairy products, ice cream, yogurts, yellow cakes, biscuits,
   popcorn-colour, sweets, cake icings, cereals, sauces, gelatines, direct
   compression tablets, etc. In combination with Annatto (E160b) it has
   been used to colour cheeses, dry mixes, salad dressings, winter butter
   and margarine.

Medicine

   The medicinal properties of the turmeric have for millennia been known
   to the ancient Indians and have been expounded in the Ayurvedic texts.
   It is only in recent years that Western scientists have increasingly
   recognised the medicinal properties of turmeric. According to a 2005
   article in the Wall Street Journal titled, "Common Indian Spice Stirs
   Hope," research activity into curcumin, the active ingredient in
   turmeric, is exploding. Two hundred and fifty-six curcumin papers were
   published in the past year according to a search of the U.S. National
   Library of Medicine. Supplement sales have increased 35% from 2004, and
   the U.S. National Institutes of Health has four clinical trials
   underway to study curcumin treatment for pancreatic cancer, multiple
   myeloma, Alzheimer's, and colorectal cancer.

   A 2004 UCLA-Veterans Affairs study involving genetically altered mice
   suggests that curcumin, the active ingredient in turmeric, might
   inhibit the accumulation of destructive beta amyloids in the brains of
   Alzheimer's disease patients and also break up existing plaques.
   "Curcumin has been used for thousands of years as a safe
   anti-inflammatory in a variety of ailments as part of Indian
   traditional medicine," Gregory Cole, Professor of medicine and
   neurology at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA said.

   Another 2004 study conducted at Yale University involved oral
   administration of circumin to mice homozygous for the most common
   allele implicated in cystic fibrosis. Treatment with circumin restored
   physiologically-relevant levels of protein function.

   Recent studies have shown that turmeric can be effective in fighting a
   number of STDs including chlamydia and gonorrhea.

   Investigations into the low incidence of colorectal cancer amongst
   ethnic groups with a large intake of curries compared with the
   indigenous population have suggested that some active ingredients of
   turmeric may have anti-cancer properties.

   Anti-tumoral effects against melanoma cells have been demonstrated .

   Second-stage trials of a turmeric-based drug as a possible treatment
   for cancer are currently underway. However, according to recent
   research results , the component curcumin causes degradation of the
   human protein p53. p53 is responsible for removing damaged cells that
   are likely to become tumors, suggesting curcumin could accelerate tumor
   development.

   Consuming large doses is not recommended in cases of gallstones,
   obstructive jaundice, acute bilious colic and toxic liver disorders.

   Curry Pharmaceuticals, based in North Carolina, is studying the use of
   a curcumin cream for psoriasis treatment. Another company is already
   selling a cream based on curcumin called "Psoria-Gold," which shows
   anecdotal promise of treating the disease.

   A recent study involving mice has shown that turmeric slows the spread
   of breast cancer into lungs and other body parts. Turmeric also
   enhances the effect of taxol in reducing metastasis of breast cancer .

   It is also said that turmeric can strengthen the blood-brain barrier
   against attacks that result from auto-immune diseases (such as Multiple
   sclerosis).

   In the November 2006 issue of Arthritis & Rheumatism, a study was
   published that showed the effectiveness of turmeric in the reduction of
   joint inflammation, and recommended clinical trials as a possible
   treatment for the alleviation of arthritis symptoms.

Cosmetics

   Turmeric is currently used in the formulation of some sun screens.
   Turmeric paste is used by Indian women to keep them free of superfluous
   hair.

   The Government of Thailand is funding a project to extract and isolate
   tetrahydrocurcuminoids (THC) from turmeric. THCs are colorless
   compounds that might have antioxidant and skin lightening properties
   and might be used to treat skin inflammations, making these compounds
   useful in cosmetics formulations.

Chemistry

   The active substance of turmeric is the polyphenol curcumin, also known
   as C.I. 75300, or Natural Yellow 3. Systematic chemical name is
   (1E,6E)-1,7-bis(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)-1,6-heptadiene-3,5-dione. It
   can exist at least in two tautomeric forms, keto and enol. The keto
   form is preferred in solid phase and the enol form in solution.
   Curcumin Keto form
   Curcumin Keto form
   Curcumin Enol form
   Curcumin Enol form


                              Herbs and spices
     Herbs Basil · Bay leaf · Boldo · Borage · Chervil · Chives ·
        Coriander leaf (cilantro) · Curry leaf · Dill · Epazote ·
   Eryngium foetidum (long coriander) · Fennel · Holy basil · Houttuynia
               cordata · Hyssop · Lavender · Lemon grass ·
   Limnophila aromatica (rice paddy herb) · Lovage · Marjoram · Mint ·
Oregano · Parsley · Perilla · Rosemary · Rue · Sage · Savory · Sorrel ·
        Stevia · Tarragon · Thyme · Vietnamese coriander (rau ram)
    Spices African pepper · Ajwain (bishop's weed) · Allspice · Amchur
  (mango powder) · Anise · Asafoetida · Caraway · Cardamom · Cardamom,
  black · Cassia · Celery seed · Chili · Cinnamon · Clove · Coriander
     seed · Cubeb · Cumin · Cumin, black · Dill seed · Fenugreek ·
 Galangal · Garlic · Ginger · Grains of paradise · Horseradish · Juniper
 berry · Liquorice · Mace · Mahlab · Mustard, black · Mustard, white ·
 Nigella (kalonji) · Nutmeg · Paprika · Pepper, black · Pepper, green ·
    Pepper, pink · Pepper, white · Pomegranate seed (anardana) · Poppy
 seed · Saffron · Sarsaparilla · Sassafras · Sesame · Sichuan pepper ·
      Star anise · Sumac · Tamarind · Turmeric · Wasabi · Zedoary

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turmeric"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
