   #copyright

Typhoon Ewiniar (2006)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Natural Disasters

   CAPTION: Typhoon Ewiniar (Ester)

   Typhoon  ( JMA)
   Category 4 super typhoon ( SSHS)
   Typhoon Ewiniar at its peak as a Category 4 super typhoon on the JTWC's
   scale
   Typhoon Ewiniar at its peak as a Category 4 super typhoon on the JTWC's
   scale
     __________________________________________________________________

   Formed June 29, 2006
   Dissipated July 11, 2006
   Highest
   winds
   100 knots (185 km/h, 115 mph) (10-minute sustained)
   130 knots (240 km/h, 150 mph) (1-minute sustained)
   Lowest pressure 930  hPa ( mbar)
   Damage Exact amount unknown, at least $250,000 estimated (2006 USD)
   Fatalities At least 40 (mostly indirect)^1
   Areas
   affected Palau, Yap, eastern China, Ryūkyū Islands of Japan, South
   Korea, North Korea
   Part of the
   2006 Pacific typhoon season

   Typhoon Ewiniar (international designation: 0603, JTWC designation:
   04W, designated Typhoon Ester by PAGASA and sometimes called Super
   Typhoon Ewiniar) was the third named storm of the 2006 Pacific typhoon
   season and one that lasted for twelve days as a tropical cyclone,
   moving on a generally northward track. During its lifespan, it affected
   Palau, Yap, eastern China, the Ryūkyū Islands of Japan, South Korea as
   well as North Korea, briefly threatening to make landfall in North
   Korea before doing so in South Korea. Ewiniar is responsible for at
   least 40 deaths.

Storm history

   Storm path
   Enlarge
   Storm path

   On June 29, a persistent tropical disturbance was classified as a
   tropical depression by the JTWC while east of Palau. The depression
   moved northwestward and was upgraded to Tropical Storm 04W by the JTWC
   the next day on June 30, while the JMA named the storm Tropical Storm
   Ewiniar at around the same time. The name "Ewiniar" was submitted by
   the Federated States of Micronesia, and refers to a traditional storm
   god of Chuuk.

   Ewiniar moved west-northwestward over the next two days, bringing heavy
   rain and localized flooding to the Yap Islands. Ewiniar turned to the
   northwest and reached its peak intensity of 130 knots (240 km/h or
   150 mph) on the U.S. method of measuring windspeeds by one-minute
   averages, or 100 knots (185 km/h or 115 mph) on the international
   method of measuring windspeeds by ten-minute averages, and its minimum
   pressure of 930 hPa (mbar). Ewiniar turned northward and brushed
   eastern China, forcing evacuations in many cities.

   Ewiniar gradually weakened as it moved over colder waters, and made
   landfall in South Korea on July 10 as a severe tropical storm, having
   briefly threatened to make landfall on impoverished North Korea.
   Ewiniar passed within 50 km (30 miles) of Seoul as it moved across the
   country before becoming extratropical over the Sea of Japan the next
   day.

   Ewiniar had also earlier brushed the Ryūkyū Islands of Japan.

Preparations

People's Republic of China

   As Ewiniar started to threaten the coast of China, the government in
   Beijing ordered emergency evacuations for all villagers in low-lying
   areas. A reported 7,634 people were evacuated from Ningbo, and over
   8,000 ships were asked to return to dock in harbours in Ningbo and
   Zhoushan. The municipal flood control headquarters in Shanghai also
   asked officials to prepare for the approaching typhoon, which was
   forecast to begin affecting the city on July 9.

Japan

   As Ewiniar started to approach the Ryūkyū Islands, Sasebo Naval Base in
   Kyūshū announced a Tropical Cyclone Condition of Readiness 3 at 4 p.m.
   local time on July 7, while a day earlier, on July 6, the USS Harpers
   Ferry had unanchored from the harbour for an area of safer weather
   conditions. The USS Essex also evacuated the area on July 7. The USS
   Juneau and USS Bowditch, however, both remained anchored in Sasebo,
   while the USS Guardian and USS Safeguard were both moved to a nearby
   dry dock.
   Ewiniar southwest of Jeju Island shortly before landfall on the Korean
   Peninsula.
   Enlarge
   Ewiniar southwest of Jeju Island shortly before landfall on the Korean
   Peninsula.

   All United States Military stations and bases on Okinawa were put into
   a Tropical Cyclone Condition of Readiness 2 on July 7 with an upgrade
   to a Condition of Readiness 1 expected the following day, and
   Commander's Cup softball tournaments that had been scheduled for the
   weekend of July 8 and July 9 at Camp Hansen and Marine Corps Air
   Station Futenma had to be postponed. Tropical Cyclone Condition of
   Readiness 1E, which means that all outdoor activities are prohibited as
   there are sustained winds of at least 50 knots (95 km/h, 60 mph) in
   force, was declared early on the morning of July 9.

South Korea

   As Ewiniar cleared the Ryūkyū Islands and began to threaten the Korean
   Peninsula, the Korea Meteorological Administration issued typhoon
   warnings for most of the country. The KMA also issued typhoon
   advisories for Dokdo and Ulleungdo.

   United States Navy commands in South Korea were put into a Tropical
   Cyclone Condition of Readiness level 3, with Condition of Readiness 2
   declared on July 8. TCCOR Level 1 was later declared by United States
   Forces Korea, which was cancelled after landfall on July 10.

Impact

   Ewiniar affected many areas due to its track and relatively long life,
   killing at least 40 people along the way and leaving much damage in its
   path.
   Total rainfall from June 29 through July 10 in the Western North
   Pacific. The areas with the most rainfall mark out Ewiniar's track. The
   moderate to isolated heavy rainfall near the top of the image is
   unrelated to Typhoon Ewiniar.
   Enlarge
   Total rainfall from June 29 through July 10 in the Western North
   Pacific. The areas with the most rainfall mark out Ewiniar's track. The
   moderate to isolated heavy rainfall near the top of the image is
   unrelated to Typhoon Ewiniar.

Yap and Palau

   Early in its life as a tropical cyclone, Ewiniar affected Yap and
   Palau, which fall under the warning jurisdiction of the National
   Weather Service office in Tiyan, Guam. Ewiniar caused coastal flooding
   in Yap of up to 5 feet (1.5 m), especially near the port and around the
   Colonia Bay area. Ewiniar also caused an island-wide power outage in
   Yap, although according to an NWS post-storm report, damage was
   minimised on Yap due to steadier structures after Super Typhoon Sudal
   of 2004 tore through the islands. Damage was also reported to
   agriculture due to salt spray. The total amount of damage caused was
   estimated to be just over $100 thousand (2006 USD).

   About 2.4 inches (61 mm) of rain fell on Yap, while Koror in Palau
   reported a 24-hour total of 1.88 inches (48 mm) of rain through 6 a.m.
   UTC on July 3. The peak wind gusts reported were 53 knots (98 km/h,
   61 mph) on Yap at the Weather Service Office (WSO) in Yap and 46 knots
   (85 km/h, 53 mph) at the WSO in Koror. During its course through the
   islands, Tropical Storm Ewiniar also necessitated tropical storm
   warnings and watches for Ngulu, Yap, Koror and Kayangel. No deaths in
   Yap or Palau were reported due to Ewiniar.

People's Republic of China

   Typhoon Ewiniar killed at least 34 people in China, with areas as far
   northwest as Gansu and Shanxi affected by landslides. It is not known
   if the landslides were triggered directly as a result of Ewiniar, or
   whether it was caused by a combination of Ewiniar and other weather.
   Therefore, the deaths that can be attributed to Ewiniar from the
   landslides are assumed to be indirectly caused, and not directly.
   Average rainfall reported in Shandong was 3.4 mm (0.133 inches) per
   hour from 6 a.m. July 9 through midnight July 10 (totalling about
   61.2 mm or 2.4 inches). At least 300 flights out of Beijing's Capital
   International Airport had to be delayed due to thunderstorms and
   effects of Ewiniar, while Air China and China Eastern Airlines
   cancelled flights to South Korea heading out of China.

   As Ewiniar did not affect the mainland directly, there are little to no
   reports of major damage.

Japan

   Ewinar hammered Okinawa with heavy rain, creating mass confusion and
   troubles for tourists. Flights and ferries out of Okinawa to
   neighbouring islands were cancelled, and as many as 3,500 tourists were
   left stranded at various airports because most hotels were already near
   full capacity. Other tourists reportedly stayed in the homes of some
   Okinawa residents, while some residents in landslide-prone areas
   evacuated to higher ground.

   The highest winds reported during the storm were 34.9  m/s (78 mph,
   126 km/h). These winds blew sand about 7 cm (3 in) deep off the beach
   and into residents' yards.

   Typhoon Ewinar caused a reported 20,000,000 yen ($173,778) worth of
   sugar cane and vegetable damage, and farmers experienced profit losses
   when ripe fruits were unable to be shipped to Asian markets.

   Seven people were injured in Nanjo from a fallen signboard, while an
   elderly woman in Nago City and a young girl in Yaese suffered
   wind-related injuries.

South Korea

   Radar image of Severe Tropical Storm Ewiniar near landfall in South
   Korea
   Enlarge
   Radar image of Severe Tropical Storm Ewiniar near landfall in South
   Korea

   In South Korea, much damage was reported. 150  km² (60  square miles)
   of farmland was reported to have been flooded across the nation, while
   most domestic ferry and air travel was disrupted or cancelled.
   Landslides and flooding destroyed roads and levees, while in South
   Cholla province, a landslide damaged a temple. According to an
   official, floods also damaged over 600 homes and houses.

   Rainfall totals varied from province to province. The KMA said up to
   234 mm (9.36 inches) of rain had fallen on the southern areas of South
   Korea, while Hamyang County in South Kyongsang province reported a
   total rainfall of 199 mm (7.83 inches) to 260 mm (10.2 inches).

   About 300 schools were ordered to be closed down in South Cholla, South
   Kyongsang and on Jeju However, two injuries were reported at a school
   in Jeju which ignored the orders. Injuries were also reported elsewhere
   across South Korea, while up to eight people were killed or went
   missing due to Ewiniar.

North Korea

   Due to the secrecy in North Korea, not much information is available on
   damage caused in the country. However, a TIME Asia report on North
   Korea noted that Ewiniar left 60,000 villagers homeless.

   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Typhoon_Ewiniar_%282006%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
