   #copyright

U.S. Navy Marine Mammal Program

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Military History and War

   The U.S. Navy Marine Mammal Program (NMMP) is a program administered by
   the U.S. Navy which studies the military use of marine mammals —
   principally Bottlenose Dolphins and California Sea Lions — and trains
   animals to perform tasks such as ship and harbour protection, mine
   detection and clearance, and equipment recovery. The program is based
   in San Diego, California, where animals are housed and trained on an
   ongoing basis. NMMP animal teams have been deployed for use in combat
   zones, such as during the Vietnam War and the Iraq War.

   The program has been dogged by controversy over the treatment of the
   animals and speculation as to the nature of its mission and training.
   This has been due at least in part to the secrecy of the program, which
   was de-classified in the early 1990s. Since that time there have been
   ongoing animal welfare concerns, with many opposing the use of marine
   mammals in military applications, even in essentially non-combatant
   roles such as mine detection. The Navy cites external oversight,
   including ongoing monitoring, in defence of its animal care standards.

History

   The origins of the program date back to 1960, when a Pacific
   White-sided Dolphin was acquired for hydrodynamic studies seeking to
   improve torpedo performance. The aim was to determine whether dolphins
   had evolved a sophisticated drag-reduction system, but the technology
   of the day failed to demonstrate that dolphins have any unusual
   capabilities in this respect. This research has now resumed with the
   benefit of modern-day technology; among the possible drag-reducing
   mechanisms being studied for human use are skin compliance,
   biopolymers, and boundary-layer heating.

   In 1953, the animals' intelligence, exceptional diving ability, and
   trainability led to the foundation of a new research program at Point
   Mugu, California, where a research facility was built on a sand spit
   between Mugu Lagoon and the ocean. The intention was to study the
   dolphins' senses and capabilities, such as their natural sonar and
   deep-diving physiology, and to determine how dolphins and sea lions
   might be used to perform useful tasks, such as searching for and
   marking objects in the water. A major accomplishment was the discovery
   that trained dolphins and sea lions could be reliably worked untethered
   in the open sea.

   In 1965, a Navy dolphin named Tuffy participated in the SEALAB II
   project off La Jolla, California, carrying tools and messages between
   the surface and the habitat 200 feet (60 m) below. Tuffy was also
   trained to locate and guide lost divers to safety.
   Dolphin pens at the NMMP facility in Point Loma, San Diego.
   Enlarge
   Dolphin pens at the NMMP facility in Point Loma, San Diego.

   In 1967, the Point Mugu facility and its personnel were relocated to
   Point Loma in San Diego, and placed under the control of the newly
   formed Space and Naval Warfare Systems Centre San Diego (SSC San Diego,
   previously known under a variety of other names). Additionally, a
   laboratory was established in Hawaii at the Marine Corps Air Station on
   Kāne'ohe Bay. However, in 1993, as the result of the Base Realignment
   and Closure process, the Hawaii lab was closed and the majority of the
   animals were moved to San Diego; some animals remained, as part of a
   program of joint research between the Navy and the University of
   Hawaii.

The program

   The Navy Marine Mammal Program is based in San Diego, California, as
   part of SSC San Diego. The animals are trained in San Diego Bay;
   dolphin handlers can frequently be seen on the bay, where specialized
   small boats are used to transport dolphins between their pens and the
   training areas. Other locations are sometimes used for specific
   research, such as San Clemente Island in the Channel Islands of
   California, and torpedo test ranges in Seattle and Canada. The
   program's stated animal activities include protecting ports and Navy
   assets from swimmer attack, locating and assisting in the recovery of
   expensive exercise and training targets, and locating potentially
   dangerous sea mines.

   There are five marine mammal teams, each trained for a specific type of
   mission. Each human-animal team is known in military jargon by a "mark"
   number (MK for short); the five teams are called "MK 4", "MK 5",
   "MK 6", "MK 7", and "MK 8". The MK 4, 7 and 8 teams use dolphins; MK 5
   uses sea lions, and MK 6 uses both sea lions and dolphins. These teams
   can be deployed at 72 hours' notice by ship, aircraft, helicopter, and
   land vehicle to regional conflicts or staging areas around the world.
   NMMP dolphins, such as the one pictured here wearing a locating pinger,
   performed mine clearance work in the Persian Gulf during the Iraq War.
   Enlarge
   NMMP dolphins, such as the one pictured here wearing a locating pinger,
   performed mine clearance work in the Persian Gulf during the Iraq War.

Mine hunting

   Three of the marine mammal teams are trained to clear enemy sea mines,
   which constitute a major hazard to U.S. Navy ships. MK 4 uses dolphins
   to detect and mark the location of tethered sea mines floating off the
   bottom, while MK 7 dolphins are trained to detect and mark the location
   of mines on the sea floor or buried in sediment. The MK 8 team is
   trained to swiftly identify safe corridors for the initial landing of
   troops ashore.

   In operation, a dolphin awaits a cue from its handler before starting
   to search a specific area using its natural echolocation. The dolphin
   reports back to its handler, giving particular responses to communicate
   whether a target object is detected. If a mine-like target is detected,
   the handler sends the dolphin to mark the location of the object, so it
   can be avoided by Navy vessels or neutralized by Navy divers.

   Mine-clearance dolphins were deployed to the Persian Gulf during the
   Iraq War in 2003. The Navy claims that these dolphins were effective in
   helping to clear more than 100 antiship mines and underwater booby
   traps from the port of Umm Qasr.

Force protection

   MK 6 uses dolphins and sea lions as sentries to protect harbour
   installations and ships against unauthorized human swimmers. MK 6 was
   first operationally deployed with dolphins during the Vietnam War from
   1971 to 1972 and in Bahrain from 1986 to 1987.

Object recovery

   An NMMP sea lion attaches a recovery line to a piece of test equipment
   during training.
   Enlarge
   An NMMP sea lion attaches a recovery line to a piece of test equipment
   during training.

   MK 5 is dedicated to the recovery of test equipment that is fired from
   ships or dropped from planes into the ocean; the team uses California
   Sea Lions to locate and attach recovery hardware to underwater objects
   such as practice mines. In this role they can out-perform human divers,
   who are restricted to short working times and limited repeat diving.

   This team first demonstrated its capabilities when it recovered an
   ASROC (Anti Submarine Rocket) from a depth of 180 feet (50 m) in
   November 1970. The team has trained in the recovery of dummy victims in
   a simulated airplane crash.

Attack missions

   There has been significant speculation that Navy dolphins are trained
   in attack missions, such as direct attacks against swimmers in the
   water or attaching limpet mines to enemy ships in harbour. This is also
   a popular theme in fiction.

   The Navy claims that it has never trained its marine mammals for attack
   missions against people or ships. Since dolphins cannot discern the
   difference between enemy and friendly vessels, or divers and swimmers,
   this would be a haphazard means of warfare; instead, the animals are
   trained to detect all mines and swimmers in an area of concern, and to
   report back to their handlers, who then decide upon an appropriate
   response.

   The U.S. Navy has an arsenal of more conventional weapons which can be
   used to attack enemy ships in harbour, such as the Mark 48 torpedo, the
   Mark 67 submarine-launched mobile mine, and the Mark 60 Captor mine. A
   single attack submarine could deliver up to forty Mark 67 mines in one
   mission, each carrying a 230 kg warhead, at a distance up to 5–7 miles
   (8–10 km). This is a significantly more powerful and more consistent
   capability than could be realized by the use of dolphins (presumably
   submarine-delivered to an enemy harbour).

Animals

   Bottlenose Dolphins are among the species used by the Navy's Marine
   Mammal Program.
   Enlarge
   Bottlenose Dolphins are among the species used by the Navy's Marine
   Mammal Program.

   The Navy identifies the following animal species as having been used or
   studied by the program at various times:

                              Cetaceans:
  * Beluga
  * Bottlenose Dolphin
  * Common Dolphin
  * Dall's Porpoise
  * False Killer Whale
  * Killer Whale
  * Pacific White-sided Dolphin
  * Pilot Whale
  * Risso's Dolphin
  * Rough-toothed Dolphin

                                                                      Pinnipeds:
                                          * California Sea Lion
                                          * Common Seal
                                          * Elephant Seal
                                          * Fur seals
                                          * Grey Seal
                                          * Steller's Sea Lion

                                                                                               Other:
                                                                 * Birds
                                                                 * Sharks

   Today, Bottlenose Dolphins and California Sea Lions are the main
   animals used, and are kept at the base in San Diego. Dolphins have
   powerful biological sonar, unmatched by artificial sonar technology in
   detecting objects in the water column and on the sea floor. Sea lions
   lack this, but have very sensitive underwater directional hearing and
   exceptional vision in low-light conditions. Both of these species are
   trainable and capable of repetitive deep diving. As of the late 1990s,
   about 140 marine mammals were part of the program.

Animal welfare

   An NMMP team performs for onlookers at Shelter Island, San Diego.
   Enlarge
   An NMMP team performs for onlookers at Shelter Island, San Diego.

   There has been continual controversy relating to alleged mistreatment
   of animals in the program. Allegations have been made concerning
   abusive treatment of animals in the past, and controversy continues
   over the use of marine mammals for military purposes.

   The Navy's policy requires that only positive reinforcement techniques
   be used in the training of their animals, and that they be cared for in
   accordance with accepted standards. The NMMP claims to comply strictly
   with United States Department of Defense requirements and federal laws
   regarding the proper care of the animals, including the Marine Mammal
   Protection Act and the Animal Welfare Act. The program is listed as an
   accredited institution by the Association for the Accreditation of
   Animal Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC), whose voluntary accreditation
   program requires research programs to demonstrate that they meet
   standards of animal care beyond those required by law. As a standard
   targeted at laboratory animals, this accreditation requires a specific
   standard of general animal care, but does not set restrictions on the
   purposes for which the animals are used. The NMMP is also listed as a
   member of the Alliance of Marine Mammal Parks and Aquariums. The NMMP
   protocols for both care and research must be approved by an
   institutional animal care and use committee (IACUC). The NMMP IACUC
   includes non-NMMP researchers, veterinarians, and members of the
   community.

   The use of marine mammals by the Navy, even in accordance with the
   Navy's stated policy, continues to meet opposition. Opponents cite the
   inevitable stresses involved in this type of training, which is
   contrary to the animals' natural lifestyles, particularly regarding
   their confinement when not training. There is continuing controversy
   over the use of anti-foraging devices, such as muzzles, which prevent
   the dolphins from foraging for food while working. The Navy states that
   this is to prevent their ingesting harmful objects, but opponents claim
   that this is done to reinforce the handlers' control over the dolphins,
   which is based on food rewards. The re-integration and/or extended care
   of "retired" animals is also a concern.

   The field use of the animals is also an issue for some critics, partly
   because of the stresses involved in transportation — particularly where
   dolphins are transported on dry carriers — as well as stresses arising
   from the sudden transplantation of the animals into an unfamiliar
   environment. Dolphins native to areas in which NMMP dolphins are
   introduced can also pose a threat, since they are known to defend their
   territory from intruders.

   Other people raise the issue of hazards to the animals in their working
   environments. The risk of accidental detonation of a mine by an animal
   is of concern to some; the Navy maintains that the chances of this are
   minimal, because the animals are trained not to touch the mines, which
   in any case are specifically designed not to be detonated by marine
   animals. Another fear is that opposing forces, aware of mine-hunting
   dolphins in a given area, may shoot dolphins in the water, leading to
   deaths of both NMMP and native animals.
   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/U.S._Navy_Marine_Mammal_Program"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
