   #copyright

Ulawun

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Geography of Oceania
(Australasia)

   Ulawun
   A steam plume from Ulawun is clearly visible on this satellite image
   Elevation 2,334 m (7,657 ft)
   Location West New Britain, Papua New Guinea
   Coordinates 5°3′0″S, 151°20′0″E
   Type Stratovolcano
   Last eruption 2005

   Ulawun is a volcano situated on the island of New Britain, Papua New
   Guinea, about 130 km southwest of Rabaul. It is the highest mountain in
   the Bismarck Archipelago, and one of the most active volcanoes in Papua
   New Guinea. Several thousand people live near the volcano.

Geological history

   The volcano's first known eruption was in 1700, when English explorer
   William Dampier found it in eruption. Eruptions have been common in the
   last century, generating frequent ash columns, and occasional
   pyroclastic flows. Particularly large eruptions occurred in 1898, 1915,
   1970, 1978,1980, and 1985.

   One potential hazard at the volcano is cone collapse. This seems to
   have happened at least once in the past, creating a large cliff on the
   north side of the mountain. Eruptions from the flank and seismic
   activity may destabilise the top of the mountain, leading to
   catastrophic landslides.

   In light of the dangers presented by the volcano to local populations,
   it has been designated a Decade Volcano and is subject to particular
   study by volcanologists.

Recent activity

   The last few years have seen almost constant activity at Ulawun, with
   frequent small explosions.

   Volcanoes in Papua New Guinea are some of the world's most prolific
   sources of sulphur dioxide. Recent studies have shown that Ulawun
   releases about 7 kg/s of SO[2], which is about 2% of the global total
   of SO[2] emissions into the atmosphere.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ulawun"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
