   #copyright

Umbrella Cockatoo

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Birds

                iUmbrella Cockatoo

                             Conservation status

   Vulnerable (VU)
            Scientific classification

   Kingdom:   Animalia
   Phylum:    Chordata
   Class:     Aves
   Order:     Psittaciformes
   Family:    Cacatuidae
   Subfamily: Cacatuinae
   Genus:     Cacatua
   Subgenus:  Cacatua
   Species:   C. alba

                                Binomial name

   Cacatua alba
   Muller, 1776

   The Umbrella Cockatoo, Cacatua alba also known as White Cockatoo is a
   medium-sized cockatoo endemic to the islands of Halmahera, Bacan,
   Ternate, Tidore, Kasiruta and Mandiole in North Maluku, Indonesia. At
   first sight it appears to be a white parrot with brown or black eyes
   and a dark grey beak. If it is surprised, it extends a large and
   striking crest, which has a semicircular shape (similar to an umbrella,
   hence the name). The crest is normally recumbent. The underside of the
   wings and tail have pale yellow or lemon colour, which flash when they
   fly.

   The Umbrella Cockatoo can live up to, and perhaps beyond, 80 years in
   age. They are very social, needing a lot of interaction. They can be
   very loud and their calls (a very loud screeching noise) can be heard
   up to three miles away.

   The Umbrella Cockatoo weighs about 600gm (based on weights of two male
   pet birds aged about 1 and 3 years).

Feathers

   The feathers of the Umbrella Cockatoo are mostly white. However, both
   upper and lower surfaces of the inner half of the trailing edge of the
   large wing feathers are a yellow colour. The yellow colour is most
   notable on the underside of the wings because the yellow portion of the
   upper surface of the feather is covered by the white of the feather
   immediately medial (nearer to the body) and above. Similarly, areas of
   larger tail feathers that are covered by other tail feathers, and the
   innermost covered areas of the larger crest feathers are yellow. Short
   white feathers grow from and closely cover the upper legs.
   Upper side of left wing feathers
   Enlarge
   Upper side of left wing feathers
   Under side of left wing feathers
   Enlarge
   Under side of left wing feathers

Umbrella Cockatoo as a vulnerable species

   Although the Umbrella Cockatoo is not classified as an endangered
   species it is classified as vulnerable. It numbers in the wild have
   declined owing to habitat loss and illegal trapping for the cage-bird
   trade. It is listed in appendix II of the CITES list of protected
   species. This gives it protection by making the trade of wild caught
   birds illegal.

Umbrella Cockatoo as pet birds

   Umbrella Cockatoo at play
   Enlarge
   Umbrella Cockatoo at play

   Hand reared Umbrella Cockatoos can make good pets, as they are
   sociable, intelligent and they can learn tricks and be trained. They
   require a large cage (at least 3ft x 3ft x 5ft) and they need to
   exercise outside of their cage often. They can imitate basic human
   speech, but they are not considered the most able speakers among
   parrots. They are not an easy pet to keep and require a lot of time,
   devotion and understanding from their caregivers. They can destroy
   furniture with their powerful beaks and even the sweetest cockatoo may
   inflict a serious bite without provocation. Additionally, they can make
   a lot of loud noise and their large droppings are quite messy. Umbrella
   cockatoos as pets need so much care and attention, and can be so
   destructive and expensive to keep, that they are often passed from one
   owner to the next.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umbrella_Cockatoo"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
