   #copyright

United States dollar

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Currency

   CAPTION: United States dollar


   $1 $1
   $1 $1
   ISO 4217 Code USD
   User(s) the United States, the British Virgin Islands, East Timor,
   Ecuador, El Salvador, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Palau, Panama,
   Turks and Caicos Islands, and the insular areas of the United States
   Inflation 3.2% (United States only)
   Source The World Factbook, 2005 est.
   Pegged by AWG, BSD, BHD, BBD, BSD, BMD, KYD, CUC, DJF, XCD, ERN, JOD,
   LBP, MVR, ANG, OMR, QAR, SAR, AED
   Subunit
   1/10 dime
   1/100 cent
   1/1000 mill
   Symbol $ or US $
   cent ¢ or c
   mill ₥
   Nickname Buck, Greenback, Dead President
   Coins
   Freq. used 1¢, 5¢, 1 dime, $¼
   Rarely used $½, $1
   Banknotes
   Freq. used $1, $5, $10, $20
   Rarely used $2, $50, $100
   Central bank Federal Reserve Bank
   Website www.federalreserve.gov
   Printer Bureau of Engraving and Printing
   Website www.moneyfactory.gov
   Mint United States Mint
   Website www.usmint.gov

   The dollar ( currency code USD and 840) is the unit of currency of the
   United States. It is normally abbreviated to the dollar sign $, or
   alternatively US$ to distinguish it from other dollar-denominated
   currencies (and others that use the $ symbol). The U.S. dollar is
   divided into 100 ( equal) cents.

   Adopted by the Congress of the Confederation of the United States on
   July 6, 1785 , the U.S. dollar today is the most-used - though not the
   strongest - currency in the world. Several countries use the U.S.
   dollar as their official currency, and many others allow it to be used
   in a de facto capacity. In 1995, over US$380 billion were in
   circulation, of which two-thirds was outside the United States. By 2005
   that figure had doubled to nearly $760 billion with an estimated half
   to two-thirds being held overseas , which is an annual growth of about
   6.6%.

Overview

   The U.S. dollar uses the decimal system, consisting of 100 ( equal)
   cents (symbol ¢). In another division, there are 1,000 mills or ten
   dimes to a dollar; additionally, the term eagle was used in the
   currency act of 1792 for the denomination of ten dollars, and
   subsequently was used in naming gold coins. In the second half of the
   19th century there were occasional discussions of creating a $50 gold
   coin, which was referred to as a "Half Union," thus implying a
   denomination of 1 Union = $100. However, only cents are in everyday use
   as divisions of the dollar; "dime" is used solely as the name of the
   coin with the value of 10¢, while "eagle" and "mill" are largely
   unknown to the general public, though mills are sometimes used in
   matters of tax levies and gasoline prices. When currently issued in
   circulating form, denominations equal to or less than a dollar are
   emitted as U.S. coins while denominations equal to or greater than a
   dollar are emitted as Federal Reserve notes. (Both one-dollar coins and
   notes are produced today, although the note form is significantly more
   common.) In the past, paper money was occasionally issued in
   denominations less than a dollar ( Fractional Currency) and gold coins
   were issued for circulation up to the value of 20 dollars.

   U.S. coins are produced by the United States Mint. U.S. dollar
   banknotes are printed by the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, and,
   since 1914, have been issued by the Federal Reserve. The " large-sized
   notes" issued before 1928 measured 7.42 inches by 3.125 inches;
   small-sized notes, introduced that year, measure 6.14 inches by 2.61
   inches.
   A 1917 era U.S. dollar bill
   Enlarge
   A 1917 era U.S. dollar bill

   Notes above the $100 denomination ceased being printed in 1946 and were
   officially withdrawn from circulation in 1969. These notes were used
   primarily either in inter-bank transactions or by organized crime; it
   was the latter usage that prompted President Richard Nixon to issue an
   executive order in 1969 halting their use. With the advent of
   electronic banking, they became less necessary. Notes in denominations
   of $500, $1,000, $5,000, $10,000, and $100,000 were all produced at one
   time; see large denomination bills in U.S. currency for details.

History

Origins

   There are two sources available for the origin of the dollar, one
   linked to the $ sign and another to the word dollar.

   The word dollar was introduced by the Dutch in the North-American
   colony. In the 17th century, the Dutch 'Leeuwendaalders' - or
   Liondollars - were also very popular in the English colonies; its value
   is 30 nickels . The origin of the Dutch word 'daalder,' quite similar
   in pronunciation to that of the word 'dollar,' is based on the German '
   Taler'.

   An American explanation states that the '$' symbol was historically a
   combination of both letters representing this nation: US. In the early
   days of the United States, they would type a 'U' on a typewriter, then
   back-space and type an 'S' over the 'U' to designate U.S. Currency. So
   the original symbol was more 'curved' at the bottom because of the 'U'.
   Over time, for convenience, the US currency symbol evolved as people
   would simply hand-write an 'S' and put two straight lines through it
   (which was originally the 'U'). As time went on, people only wrote one
   line through it, which became the dollar symbol '$' as we know it
   today. It since has become one of the most famous icons and is used
   world wide to indicate 'money' in general, however this symbol was
   originally meant to designate only United States currency.

   Another belief is that the '$' sign has been said to be based on the
   number 8. The Spanish eight- real coins were known as Spanish dollars.
   They circulated too alongside the currencies of the colonising
   countries. These currencies were denominated in pounds, shillings and
   pence ( £sd) and the Spanish dollar was "rated" at a particular value
   in the currency of each colony. The ratings varied over time. A second
   Spanish explanation for the $ sign is that the II (upon the S)
   represented the Pillars of Hercules, on which rests the Spanish coat of
   arms, while the S came about from the plural for Dollars or Pesos.

   For articles on the currencies of the colonies and states, see
   Connecticut pound, Delaware pound, Georgia pound, Maryland pound,
   Massachusetts pound, New Hampshire pound, New Jersey pound, New York
   pound, North Carolina pound, Pennsylvania pound, Rhode Island pound,
   South Carolina pound and Virginia pound.

Continental currency

   In 1775, the United States and the individual states began issuing
   "Continental Currency" denominated in Spanish dollars and (for the
   issues of the states) the £sd currencies of the states. The dollar was
   valued relative to the states' currencies at the following rates:
   Continental One Third Dollar Note (obverse)
   State           Value of Dollar
                  in State Currency
   Georgia           5 Shillings
   Connecticut
   Massachusetts
   New Hampshire
   Rhode Island
   Virginia          6 Shillings
   Delaware
   Maryland
   New Jersey
   Pennsylvania     7½ Shillings
   New York
   North Carolina    8 Shillings
   South Carolina   32½ Shillings

   The continental currency suffered from printing press inflation and was
   replaced by the silver dollar at the rate of 1 silver dollar = 1000
   continental dollars.

Silver and gold standards

   From 1792, when the Mint Act was passed, the dollar was pegged to
   silver and gold at 371.25 grains of silver, 24.75 grains of gold (15:1
   ratio). 1834 saw a shift in the gold standard to 23.2 grains, followed
   by a slight adjustment to 23.22 grains in 1838 (16:1 ratio).

   In 1862, paper money was issued without the backing of precious metals,
   due to the Civil War. Silver and gold coins continued to be issued and
   in 1878 the link between paper money and coins was reinstated.

   In 1900, the bimetallic standard was abandoned and the dollar was
   defined as 23.22 grains of gold. Silver coins continued to be issued
   for circulation until 1964, when all silver was removed from dimes and
   quarters, and the half dollar was reduced to 40% silver. Silver half
   dollars were last issued for circulation in 1969.

   Gold coins were withdrawn in 1933 and the gold standard was changed to
   13.71 grains, equivalent to setting the price of 1 troy ounce of gold
   at $35. This standard persisted until 1968. Between 1968 and 1975, a
   variety of pegs to gold were put in place. 1975 saw the U.S. dollar
   freely float on currency markets.

United States coins

   In normal circulation, there are coins of the denominations 1¢ ([One]
   Cent, also referred to as a Penny), 5¢ (Nickel), 10¢ (Dime), 25¢
   (Quarter Dollar officially, or simply Quarter in common usage), 50¢
   (Half Dollar; uncommon), and $1 (Dollar; uncommon). Federal Reserve
   Notes exist as $1, $2 (uncommon), $5, $10, $20, $50, and $100
   denominations.

   Dollar coins have not been very popular in the United States. Silver
   dollars were minted intermittently from 1794 through 1935; a
   copper-nickel dollar of the same large size, featuring President Dwight
   D. Eisenhower, was minted from 1971 through 1978. Gold dollars were
   also minted in the 1800s. The Susan B. Anthony dollar coin was
   introduced in 1979; these proved to be unpopular because they were
   often mistaken for quarters, due to their nearly-equal size, their
   milled edge, and their similar colour. Minting of these dollars for
   circulation was suspended in 1980 (collectors' pieces were struck in
   1981), but, as with all past U.S. coins, they remain legal tender. As
   the number of Anthony dollars held by the Federal Reserve and dispensed
   primarily to make change in postal and transit vending machines had
   been virtually exhausted, additional Anthony dollars were struck in
   1999. In 2000, a new $1 coin featuring Sacajawea was introduced, which
   corrected some of the mistakes of the Anthony dollar by having a smooth
   edge and a gold colour, without requiring changes to vending machines
   that accept the Anthony dollar. However, this new coin has failed to
   achieve the popularity of the still-existing $1 bill and is rarely used
   in daily transactions. The failure to simultaneously withdraw the
   dollar bill and weak publicity efforts have been cited by coin
   proponents as primary reasons for the failure of the dollar coin to
   gain popular support.

   In January 2007, The US Mint, under Public law 109–145—DEC. 22, 2005
   (PRESIDENTIAL $1 COIN ACT OF 2005), will be introducing a new $1 US
   Presidential dollar coin. Based on the success of the " 50 State
   Quarters" series, the new coin will feature a rotating portrait of
   deceased presidents in order of their inaugurations, starting with
   George Washington, on the obverse side. The reverse side will feature
   the Statue of Liberty. To allow for larger, more detailed portraits,
   the traditional inscriptions of "E Pluribus Unum," "In God We Trust,"
   the year of minting or issuance, and the mint mark will be inscribed on
   the side of the coin instead of the face. This feature, similar to the
   side inscriptions seen on the British £1 coin, is not usually
   associated with US coin designs. In addition, due to the nature of US
   coins, this will be the first time there will be circulating US coins
   of different denominations with the same President featured. (Lincoln\
   penny, Jefferson\ nickel, FDR\ dime, Washington\ quarter and Kennedy\
   half dollar.) Another unusual fact about the new $1 coin is Grover
   Cleveland will have two coins with his portrait issued due to the fact
   he was the only US President to be elected to two non-consecutive
   terms.

   Some cynics also erroneously point out that the Federal Reserve makes
   more profit from dollar bills than dollar coins because they wear out
   in a few years, whereas coins are more permanent. The fallacy of this
   argument arises because new notes printed to replace worn out notes
   which have been withdrawn from circulation bring in no net revenue to
   the government to offset the costs of printing new notes and destroying
   the old ones. As most vending machines are incapable of making change
   in banknotes, they commonly accept only $1 bills, though a few will
   give change in dollar coins. Also, some banks, such as Bank of America,
   distribute dollar coins only through the same mechanisms as for foreign
   currency.

   The United States has minted other coin denominations since 1793:
   half-cent, 2-cent, 3-cent, 20-cent, $2.50, $3.00, $4.00, $5.00, $10.00,
   and $20.00. Technically, all these coins are still legal tender at face
   value, though they are far more valuable today for their numismatic
   value, and for gold and silver coins, their precious metal value. An
   experimental $4.00 coin was also minted, but never placed into
   circulation and is properly considered to be a pattern rather than an
   actual coin denomination. A $50 coin was issued in 1915 for the
   Panama-Pacific International Exposition (1915) celebrating the opening
   of the Panama Canal.

   The United States Mint also produces silver, gold and platinum bullion
   coins, called "American Eagles," all of which are legal tender though
   their use in everyday transactions is non-existent. The reason for this
   is that they are not intended for use in transactions and thus the face
   value of the coins is much lower than the worth of the precious metals
   in them. The American Silver Eagle bullion coin is issued only in the
   $1 (1 troy ounce) denomination. The American Gold Eagle bullion coin
   denominations (with gold content) are: $5 (1/10 troy oz), $10 (1/4 troy
   oz), $25 (1/2 troy oz), and $50 (1 troy oz). The American Platinum
   Eagle bullion coin denominations (with platinum content) are: $10 (1/10
   troy oz), $25 (1/4 troy oz), $50 (1/2 troy oz), and $100 (1 troy oz).
   The silver coin is 99.9% silver, the gold coins are 91.67% gold (22
   karat), and the platinum coins are 99.95% platinum. These coins are not
   available from the Mint for individuals but must be purchased from
   authorized dealers. The Mint also produces high quality " proof" coins
   intended for collectors in the same denominations and bullion content
   which are available to individuals.

   The largest denominations of currency currently printed or minted by
   the United States are the $100 bill and the $100 troy ounce Platinum
   Eagle.

International use

   The currently produced U.S. $100 Federal Reserve Note, featuring a
   portrait of Benjamin Franklin.
   Enlarge
   The currently produced U.S. $100 Federal Reserve Note, featuring a
   portrait of Benjamin Franklin.
   The currently produced U.S. $50 Federal Reserve Note, featuring a
   portrait of President Ulysses S. Grant.
   Enlarge
   The currently produced U.S. $50 Federal Reserve Note, featuring a
   portrait of President Ulysses S. Grant.
   The currently produced U.S. $20 Federal Reserve Note, featuring a
   portrait of President Andrew Jackson.
   Enlarge
   The currently produced U.S. $20 Federal Reserve Note, featuring a
   portrait of President Andrew Jackson.
   The currently produced U.S. $10 Federal Reserve Note, featuring a
   portrait of Alexander Hamilton.
   Enlarge
   The currently produced U.S. $10 Federal Reserve Note, featuring a
   portrait of Alexander Hamilton.
   The currently produced U.S. $5 Federal Reserve Note, featuring a
   portrait of President Abraham Lincoln. It will get a new design similar
   to the above denominations in 2008.
   Enlarge
   The currently produced U.S. $5 Federal Reserve Note, featuring a
   portrait of President Abraham Lincoln. It will get a new design similar
   to the above denominations in 2008.
   The currently produced U.S. $2 Federal Reserve Note, featuring a
   portrait of President Thomas Jefferson.
   Enlarge
   The currently produced U.S. $2 Federal Reserve Note, featuring a
   portrait of President Thomas Jefferson.
   The currently produced U.S. $1 Federal Reserve Note, featuring a
   portrait of President George Washington.
   Enlarge
   The currently produced U.S. $1 Federal Reserve Note, featuring a
   portrait of President George Washington.

   Other nations besides the United States use the U.S. dollar as their
   official currency, a process known as official dollarization. Ecuador
   (2000), El Salvador (2001), and East Timor (2000) all adopted the
   currency independently. The former members of the U.S.-administered
   Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, which included Palau, the
   Federated States of Micronesia, and the Marshall Islands, chose not to
   issue their own currency after becoming independent, having all used
   the U.S. dollar since 1944. Panama also uses the U.S. dollar (since
   1904), although it issues its own currency (coins only). Two British
   dependencies also use the U.S. dollar: the British Virgin Islands
   (1959) and Turks and Caicos Islands (1973).

   Additionally, the local currencies of Bermuda, the Bahamas, Panama, and
   a few other states can be freely exchanged at a 1:1 ratio for USD. The
   currencies of Barbados and Belize are similarly convertible at an
   approximate 2:1 ratio. Argentina used a fixed 1:1 exchange rate between
   the Argentine peso and the U.S. dollar from 1991 until 2002. In
   Lebanon, one dollar is equal to 1500 Lebanese pound, and is used
   interchangeably with local currency as de facto legal tender. The
   exchange rate between the Hong Kong dollar and the United States dollar
   has also been linked since 1983 at HK$7.8/USD , and pataca of Macau,
   pegged to Hong Kong dollar at MOP1.03/HKD, indirectly linked to the
   U.S. dollar at roughly MOP8/USD. Several oil-producing Gulf Arab
   countries, including Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, peg their currencies to
   the dollar, since the dollar is the currency used in the international
   oil trade.

   The renminbi used by the People's Republic of China was informally and
   controversially pegged to the dollar in the mid-1990s at Y8.28/USD.
   Likewise, Malaysia pegged its ringgit at RM3.8/USD in 1997. On July 21,
   2005 both countries removed their pegs and adopted managed floats
   against a basket of currencies.

   The dollar is also used as the standard unit of currency in
   international markets for commodities such as gold and petroleum. Even
   foreign companies with little direct presence in the United States,
   such as the European company Airbus, list and sell their products in
   dollars, although some argue this is attributed to the aerospace market
   being dominated by American companies.

   At the present time, the U.S. dollar remains the world's foremost
   reserve currency, primarily held in $100 denominations. The majority of
   U.S. notes are actually held outside the United States. Economist Paul
   Samuelson and others maintain that the overseas demand for dollars
   allows the United States to maintain persistent trade deficits without
   causing the value of the currency to depreciate and the flow of trade
   to readjust. Milton Friedman at his death believed this to be the case
   but, more recently, Paul Samuelson has said he now believes that at
   some stage in the future these pressures will precipitate a run on the
   U.S. dollar with serious global financial consequences.

   Not long after the introduction of the Euro (€; ISO 4217 code EUR) as a
   cash currency in 2002, the dollar began to depreciate steadily in
   value. After the Euro started to rise in value in March 2002, the U.S.
   trade and budget deficits continued to increase. By Christmas 2004 the
   dollar had fallen to new lows against all major currencies, especially
   the Euro. The Euro rose above $1.36/€ (under 0.74 €/$) for the first
   time in late December 2004, in sharp contrast to its lows in early 2003
   ($0.87/€). In late May and early June, the U.S. dollar, with the
   advantage of Federal Reserve's Policy of raising rates, rose
   significantly against all major currencies. The U.S. dollar broke
   almost all expectations in 2005 (some analysts previewed the dollar
   dropping as far as $1.60 per Euro), finished the year with a
   significant double-digit recovery against the EU Euro and Japanese Yen.

Nicknames

   The colloquialism buck is often used to refer to dollars of various
   nations, including the U.S. dollar. This term, dating to the 18th
   century, may have originated with the colonial fur trade. Greenback, a
   nickname originally applied specifically to a 19th-century Demand Note,
   is still used to refer to the U.S. dollar (and not to the dollars of
   other countries).

   Grand, sometimes shortened to simply G, is a common term for the amount
   of $1,000. The suffix K (from " kilo") is also commonly used to denote
   this amount (such as "$10K" being pronounced "Ten kay" to mean
   $10,000). Banknotes' nicknames are usually the same as their values
   (such as five, twenty, etc.) The $5 bill has been referred to as a
   "fin" or a "fiver" and the $10 bill as a "sawbuck", a "ten-spot", or a
   "Hamilton", the $1 bill is sometimes called a "single", the rarely used
   $2 bill a "deuce" and the $100 bill has gotten the nickname Benjamin
   (after the portrait of Benjamin Franklin that it bears) or a C-note (C
   being the Roman numeral for 100). Benjamins can also be used as a
   nickname for large amounts of money, which would presumably come in
   large bills such as the $100. It is also sometimes referred to as a
   "bill", or "bills" for $200 or more. Some currency can be referred to
   collectively as "dead presidents", even though neither Hamilton ($10)
   nor Franklin ($100) were Presidents. $100 notes are often referred to
   as 'large' in banking ("twenty large" being $2,000, etc.). The bills
   can also be called by the persons on the respective bill (Benjamins,
   Washingtons, etc.).

Origin of the name dollar

   The U.S. dollar derives from the Spanish eight-reales coin which was
   composed of just under one ounce of silver. This coin was popular among
   American colonists, who called it the Spanish dollar, the name having
   derived from a German coin of similar size and composition known as the
   thaler. The first dollar coins issued by the United States Mint were of
   the same size and composition as the Spanish dollar and even after the
   American Revolutionary War the Spanish and U.S. silver dollars
   circulated side by side in the U.S.

   Although private banks issued currency backed by Spanish and U.S.
   silver dollars, the federal government did not do so until the American
   Civil War.

Slang Terms for American Money

   Many slang terms have developed over time for money. Terms include
   "grand" (being $1,000), "moolah", "green", "cash", "dough", "bill",
   "big one" (being $1,000), "green-back", "single" (being $1), "buck"
   (being $1), or simply saying the amount of dollar in a bill (ex. a 20).

Factors influencing the dollar price

   Borrowing costs, economic growth
          The minutes to the August 8, 2006 meeting, at which the Federal
          Open Market Committee kept short-term interest rates unchanged
          for the first time in more than two years, supported the view
          that US borrowing costs have peaked. The dollar fell on the news
          on August 29, 2006, and has continued lower August 30, 2006,
          largely ignoring news the US government has revised its estimate
          of second-quarter economic growth 2006 up to 2.9 pct from the
          initial 2.5 pct.

   Current USD exchange rates
   Use Yahoo! Finance: AUD CAD CHF EUR GBP HKD JPY
   Use XE.com:         AUD CAD CHF EUR GBP HKD JPY
     * Big Mac Index

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_dollar"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
