   #copyright

University of Cambridge

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Education

   CAPTION: University of Cambridge

   Cambridge University coat of arms
   Latin: Universitas Cantabrigiensis
     __________________________________________________________________

   Motto Hinc lucem et pocula sacra
   Literal translation: “From here, light and sacred draughts”.
   Non-literal: “From the University, we receive enlightenment and
   precious knowledge”.
   Established 1209
   Type Public
   Chancellor HRH The Duke of Edinburgh
   Vice-Chancellor Professor Alison Richard
   Students 18,933 (total; 2004–05)
   Postgraduates 6,649 (2004–05)
   Location Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, England
   University surroundings Historic landmark
   Affiliations Russell Group, Coimbra Group, EUA, LERU, IARU
   Website http://www.cam.ac.uk

   The University of Cambridge, located in Cambridge, England, is the
   second-oldest university in the English-speaking world. As reflected in
   international surveys, it has a reputation as one of the world's most
   prestigious universities.

   Early records indicate that the university grew out of an association
   of scholars in the city of Cambridge, probably formed in 1209 by
   scholars escaping from Oxford after a fight with local townsmen.

   The universities of Oxford and Cambridge are jointly referred to by the
   portmanteau Oxbridge. In addition to cultural and practical
   associations as a historic part of English society, the two
   universities also have a long history of rivalry with each other.

   Cambridge is a member of the Russell Group, a network of research-led
   British universities; the Coimbra Group, an association of leading
   European universities; the League of European Research Universities;
   and the International Alliance of Research Universities. It is also
   considered part of the "Golden Triangle", a geographical concentration
   of UK university research.

General information

   Left to Right: The Senate House, Gonville & Caius College and the
   University Church (Great St Mary's) from King’s Parade
   Enlarge
   Left to Right: The Senate House, Gonville & Caius College and the
   University Church ( Great St Mary's) from King’s Parade

   Cambridge is a collegiate university, with its main functions divided
   between the central departments of the university and 31 colleges. In
   general, the departments perform research and provide centralised
   lectures to students, while the colleges are responsible for the
   domestic arrangements and welfare of undergraduate students, graduate
   students, some of the postdocs and some University staff. The colleges
   also provide most of the small group teaching for undergraduates,
   referred to as supervisions. The thirty-one colleges are technically
   institutions independent of the university itself and enjoy
   considerable autonomy. For example, colleges decide which students they
   are to admit, and appoint their own fellows (senior members). (In
   Cambridge, “the university” often means the University as opposed to
   the Colleges.)

   The current Chancellor of the university is Prince Philip, Duke of
   Edinburgh. The current Vice-Chancellor is Professor Alison Richard. The
   office of Chancellor, which is held for life, is mainly symbolic, while
   the Vice-Chancellor (as is usual at British universities) is the real
   executive chief. The University is governed entirely by its own
   members, with no outside representation in its governing bodies.
   Ultimate authority lies with the Regent House, of which all current
   Cambridge academic staff are members, but most business is carried out
   by the Council. The Senate consists of all holders of the M.A. degree
   or higher degrees. It elects the Chancellor; until their abolition in
   1950, it elected Members to the House of Commons for Cambridge
   University, but otherwise has not had a major role since 1926.

Reputation

   International rankings of research universities produced in 2006 by The
   Times Higher Education Supplement (THES) and Shanghai Jiao Tong
   University both ranked Cambridge as second in the world. The THES also
   ranked Cambridge first in the international academic reputation peer
   review, first in science, first in biomedicine, first in the arts &
   humanities, fourth in social sciences, and sixth in technology (note
   that all university rankings are subject to controversy about their
   methodology, and that the THES and Jiao Tong tables are the only
   international rankings available).

   According to UCAS, Cambridge and Oxford are the most academically
   selective universities in the United Kingdom — there is a special
   national admissions process which sets Oxbridge apart from other UK
   universities.

   The university has often topped league tables ranking British
   universities — for instance, Cambridge was ranked first in the Sunday
   Times league table every year between 1997 and 2006. In the most recent
   UK government Research Assessment Exercise in 2001 , Cambridge was
   ranked first in the country. In 2005, it was reported that Cambridge
   produces more PhDs per year than any other UK university (over 30% more
   than second placed Oxford) . In 2006, a Thomson Scientific study showed
   that Cambridge has the highest research paper output of any UK
   university, and is also the top research producer (as assessed by total
   paper citation count) in 10 out of 21 major UK research fields analyzed
   . Another study published the same year by Evidence showed that
   Cambridge won a larger proportion (6.6%) of total UK research grants
   and contracts than any other university (coming first in three out of
   four broad discipline fields) .

   Historically, the university has produced a significant proportion of
   Britain’s prominent scientists, writers and politicians. Affiliates of
   Cambridge University have won a total of 81 Nobel Prizes , more than
   any other university in the world and more than any country in the
   world except the United Kingdom and the United States. Seventy of these
   awardees also attended Cambridge as undergraduate or graduate students.

   In addition to a long distinguished tradition in the humanities and the
   arts, the University of Cambridge is especially known for producing
   prominent scientists and mathematicians. This distinguished list
   includes Isaac Newton, Charles Darwin, William Harvey, Paul Dirac, J.
   J. Thomson, Ernest Rutherford, James Clerk Maxwell, Francis Crick, Alan
   Turing, Stephen Hawking, and Fred Sanger.

   The university is also closely linked with the development of the
   high-tech business cluster in and around Cambridge, which forms the
   area known as Silicon Fen or sometimes the “Cambridge Phenomenon”. In
   2004, it was reported that Silicon Fen was the second largest venture
   capital market in the world, after Silicon Valley. Estimates reported
   in February 2006 suggest that there were about 250 active startup
   companies directly linked with the university, worth around US$6
   billion .

Endowment

   Cambridge’s financial endowment (including the colleges), was estimated
   at £4.1 billion in late 2006 (it was estimated at £3.1 billion in late
   2005 ). The endowment is arguably the largest in Europe. Oxford
   (including its colleges) is possibly ranked second, having reported an
   endowment valued at £3.9bn in mid-2006 (in 2005, estimates for Oxford
   ranged from £2.4bn to £2.9bn ), and the Central European University in
   Budapest third with an estimated €400 million in 2005. The share of
   Cambridge’s endowment directly tied to the university itself is over
   £1.2 billion, as reported in late 2006 . However, investment income
   represents only a small percentage of Cambridge's income - the
   university still relies on funding by the UK government for roughly a
   third of its income (research grants accounting for another third). If
   ranked on a US university table using figures reported in 2005,
   Cambridge would rank sixth or seventh (depending on whether one
   includes the University of Texas System — which incorporates nine full
   scale universities and six health institutions), or 4th in the Ivy
   League .

   In 2005, the Cambridge 800th Anniversary Campaign was launched, aimed
   at raising £1 billion by 2012 — the first US-style university
   fundraising campaign in Europe. £300 million of funds had already been
   secured in the pre-launch period.

History

Early history

   Roger of Wendover wrote that Cambridge University could trace its
   origins to a crime committed in 1209. Although not always a reliable
   source, the detail given in his contemporaneous writings lends them
   credence. Two Oxford scholars were convicted of the murder or
   manslaughter of a woman and were hanged by the town authorities with
   the assent of the King. In protest at the hanging, the University of
   Oxford went into voluntary suspension, and scholars migrated to a
   number of other locations, including the pre-existing school at
   Cambridge (Cambridge had been recorded as a “school” rather than
   University when John Grim held the office of Master there in 1201).
   These post-graduate researchers from Oxford started Cambridge’s life as
   a University in 1209. Cambridge’s status as a University is further
   confirmed by a decree in 1233 from Pope Gregory IX which awarded the
   ius non trahi extra (a form of legal protection) to the chancellor and
   universitas of scholars at Cambridge. After Cambridge was recognised by
   papal bull as a studium generale by Pope Nicholas IV in 1290, it became
   common for researchers from other European medieval universities to
   come and visit Cambridge to study or to give lecture courses.

The Colleges

   Cambridge’s colleges were originally an incidental feature of the
   system. No college is as old as the university itself. The colleges
   were endowed fellowships of scholars. There were also institutions
   without endowments, called Hostels. The hostels were gradually absorbed
   by the colleges over the centuries, but they have left some indicators
   of their time, such as the name of Garrett Hostel Lane.

   Hugh Balsham, Bishop of Ely, founded Peterhouse in 1284, Cambridge’s
   first college. Many colleges were founded during the fourteenth and
   fifteenth centuries, but colleges continued to be established
   throughout the centuries to modern times, although there was a gap of
   204 years between the founding of Sidney Sussex in 1596 and Downing in
   1800. The most recent college established is Robinson, built in the
   late 1970s.

   In medieval times, colleges were founded so that their students would
   pray for the souls of the founders. For that reason they were often
   associated with chapels or abbeys. A change in the colleges’ focus
   occurred in 1536 with the dissolution of the monasteries. King Henry
   VIII ordered the university to disband its Faculty of Canon Law and to
   stop teaching “scholastic philosophy”. In response, colleges changed
   their curricula away from canon law and towards the classics, the
   Bible, and mathematics.
   Clare College (left) and King’s College Chapel (centre), seen from The
   Backs
   Enlarge
   Clare College (left) and King’s College Chapel (centre), seen from The
   Backs

Mathematics

   From the time of Isaac Newton in the later 17th century until the
   mid-19th century, the university maintained a strong emphasis on
   mathematics. Study of this subject was compulsory for graduation, and
   students were required to take an exam for the Bachelor of Arts degree,
   the main first degree at Cambridge in both arts and science subjects.
   This exam is known as a Tripos. Students awarded first-class honours
   after completing the mathematics Tripos were named wranglers. The
   Cambridge Mathematical Tripos was competitive and helped produce some
   of the most famous names in British science, including James Clerk
   Maxwell, Lord Kelvin, and Lord Rayleigh. However, some famous students,
   such as G. H. Hardy, disliked the system, feeling that people were too
   interested in accumulating marks in exams and not interested in the
   subject itself.

   Although diversified in its research and teaching interests, Cambridge
   today maintains its strength in mathematics. The Isaac Newton
   Institute, part of the university, is widely regarded as the UK’s
   national research institute for mathematics and theoretical physics.
   Cambridge alumni have won eight Fields Medals and one Abel Prize for
   mathematics. The University also runs a special Certificate of Advanced
   Studies in Mathematics course.

Women’s education

   Originally all students were male. The first colleges for women were
   Girton College (founded by Emily Davies) in 1869 and Newnham College in
   1872. The first women students were examined in 1882 but attempts to
   make women full members of the university did not succeed until 1947.
   Although Cambridge did not give degrees to women until this date women
   were in fact allowed to study courses, sit examinations, and have their
   results recorded from the nineteenth century onwards. In the twentieth
   century women could be given a “titular degree”; although they were not
   denied recognised qualifications, without a full degree they were
   excluded from the governing of the university. Since students must
   belong to a college, and since established colleges remained closed to
   women, women found admissions restricted to colleges established only
   for women. All of the men’s colleges began to admit women between 1960
   and 1988. One women’s college, Girton, also began to admit men, but the
   other women’s colleges did not follow suit. In the academic year
   2004-5, the university’s student gender ratio, including
   post-graduates, was male 52%: female 48% (Source: Cambridge University
   Reporter, ).

Research and teaching

   Cambridge University has research departments and teaching faculties in
   most academic disciplines. Cambridge tends to have a slight bias
   towards scientific subjects, but it also has a number of strong
   humanities and social science faculties. Academic staff (and often
   graduate students for the larger subjects) teach the undergraduates in
   both lectures and personal supervisions in which a ratio of one teacher
   to between one and three students is usually maintained. This
   pedagogical system is often cited as being unique to the Universities
   of Cambridge and Oxford (where “supervisions” are known as “tutorials”)
   — similar practices can be found elsewhere, though not on the Oxbridge
   scale.

   All research and lectures are conducted by University Departments. The
   colleges are in charge of giving or arranging most supervisions,
   student accommodation, and funding most extra-curricula activities.
   During the 1990s Cambridge added a substantial number of new specialist
   research laboratories on several University sites around the city, and
   major expansion continues on a number of sites .

Admissions

History

Modern

   Prior to 20th century reforms of the UK education system, modern
   Cambridge undergraduate admissions tended to be drawn largely from the
   fee-paying public or independent schools. This resulted in a student
   body predominantly drawn from members of the British social elite.

   The admissions process underwent major reforms in the 1960s

   The proportion drawn from public/independent schools has diminished
   over the years, and now form a significant minority of the intake. In
   2005, UK applicants from public/independent schools accounted for 38.3%
   of the total number of undergraduate acceptances .

Today

   The application system to Cambridge and Oxford is set apart from other
   British universities, with applications made earlier, and additional
   specific paperwork required. What is also unique is that all candidates
   are typically subject to face-to-face interviews.

   How applicants perform in the interview process best determines which
   candidates are accepted . Most applicants are expected to be predicted
   at least three A-grade A-level qualifications relevant to their chosen
   undergraduate course, or equivalent overseas qualifications. Due to a
   very high proportion receiving the highest school grades, this makes
   the intervew process crucial at distinguising the most able candidates
   . In 2005, 5,325 students were rejected who went on to get 3 A levels
   or more at grade A, representing about 60% of all applicants rejected .
   The interview is performed by College Fellows, who evaluate candidates
   on unexamined factors such as potential for original thinking and
   creativity as expressed in extra-curricular activities . In a few
   cases, candidates may be offered an unconditional place.

   In recent years, admissions tutors in certain subjects have required
   applicants to sit the more difficult STEP papers in addition to
   achieving top grades in their A-levels or International Baccalaureate
   diplomas. For example, Peterhouse requires 1 and 2 or better in STEP as
   well as A grades at A-levels including A-level Mathematics and Further
   Mathematics in order to be considered for entry for the Mathematical
   Tripos. Between one-half and two-thirds of those who apply with the
   correct grades are given offers of a place.

   Public debate in the United Kingdom continues over whether admissions
   processes at Oxford and Cambridge are entirely merit based and fair,
   whether enough students from state schools are encouraged to apply to
   Cambridge, and whether these students succeed in gaining entry. Almost
   half of all successful applicants come from independent schools.
   However, the average qualifications for successful applicants from
   state schools are poorer than the average qualification of successful
   applicants from private schools. The lack of state school applicants to
   Cambridge and Oxford has had a negative impact on Oxbridge’s reputation
   for many years, and the University has encouraged pupils from state
   schools to apply for Cambridge to help redress the imbalance. Critics
   counter that excessive government pressure to increase state school
   admissions constitutes inappropriate social engineering .

   Graduate admission is first decided by the faculty or department
   relating to the applicant’s subject. This effectively guarantees
   admission to a college - though not necessarily the applicant’s
   preferred choice (see the Board of Graduate Studies admissions
   flowchart).

Sports and other extracurricular activities

   Cambridge maintains a long tradition of student participation in sports
   and recreation. Rowing is a particularly popular sport at Cambridge,
   and there are competitions between colleges (notably the bumps races)
   and against Oxford (the Boat Race). There are also Varsity matches
   against Oxford in many other sports, ranging from rugby (see Cambridge
   University RUFC) and cricket, to chess and tiddlywinks. Athletes
   representing the university in certain sports entitle them to apply for
   a Cambridge Blue at the discretion of the Blues Committee, consisting
   of the captains of the thirteen most prestigious sports. There is also
   the self-described “unashamedly elite” Hawks’ Club (men only), whose
   membership is usually restricted to Cambridge Full Blues and Half
   Blues.

   The Cambridge Union serves as a focus for debating. Drama societies
   notably include the Amateur Dramatic Club (ADC) and the comedy club
   Footlights, which are known for producing well-known showbusiness
   personalities. Student newspapers include the long-established Varsity
   and its younger rival, The Cambridge Student. The student-run radio
   station, CUR1350, promotes broadcast journalism.

Myths, legends and traditions

   The Mathematical Bridge over the river Cam (at Queens’ College)
   Enlarge
   The Mathematical Bridge over the river Cam (at Queens’ College)

   There are many popular myths associated with Cambridge University.

   One famous myth relates to Queens’ College’s so-called Mathematical
   Bridge (pictured right). Supposedly constructed by Sir Isaac Newton, it
   reportedly held itself together without any bolts or screws. Legend has
   it inquisitive students took it apart and were then unable to
   reassemble it without bolts. However, the bridge was erected 22 years
   after Newton’s death. This myth may have arisen from the fact that
   earlier versions of the bridge used iron pins and screws at the joints,
   whereas the current bridge uses more visible nuts and bolts.

   Another famous myth involves the Clare Bridge of Clare College.
   Spherical stone ornaments adorn this bridge. One of these has a quarter
   sphere wedge removed from the back. This is a feature pointed out on
   almost all tours over the bridge. Legend has it that the bridge’s
   builder was not paid in full due to the college’s dissatisfaction with
   its construction. The builder thus took revenge and committed an act of
   petty vandalism. Though lacking evidence, this legend is commonly
   accepted.

   A discontinued tradition is that of the wooden spoon, the ‘prize’
   awarded to the student with the lowest passing grade in the final
   examinations of the Mathematical Tripos. The last of these spoons was
   awarded in 1909 to Cuthbert Lempriere Holthouse, an oarsman of the Lady
   Margaret Boat Club of St John’s College. It was over one metre in
   length and had an oar blade for a handle. Since 1909, results were
   published alphabetically within class rather than score order. This
   made it harder to ascertain who the winner of the spoon was (unless
   there was only one person in the third class), and so the practice was
   abandoned.

   On the other hand, the legend of the Austin Seven delivery van that
   ended up on the apex of the Senate House is no myth at all. The Caius
   College website recounts in detail how this vehicle “went up in the
   world”.

Colleges

   View over Trinity College, Gonville and Caius, Trinity Hall and Clare
   College towards King’s College Chapel, seen from St John’s College
   chapel. On the left, just in front of Kings College chapel, is the
   University Senate House
   Enlarge
   View over Trinity College, Gonville and Caius, Trinity Hall and Clare
   College towards King’s College Chapel, seen from St John’s College
   chapel. On the left, just in front of Kings College chapel, is the
   University Senate House

   The University of Cambridge currently has 31 colleges, of which three
   admit only women ( New Hall, Newnham and Lucy Cavendish). The remaining
   28 are mixed, Magdalene being the last all-male college to admit women
   in 1988. Two colleges admit only postgraduates ( Clare Hall and
   Darwin), and four more admit mainly mature students or graduate
   students ( Hughes Hall, Lucy Cavendish, St Edmund’s and Wolfson). The
   other 25 colleges admit mainly undergraduate students, but also
   postgraduates following courses of study or research. Although various
   colleges are traditionally strong in a particular subject, for example
   Churchill has a formalized bias towards the sciences and engineering,
   the colleges all admit students from just about the whole range of
   subjects, although some colleges do not take students for a handful of
   subjects such as architecture or history of art. It is noteworthy that
   costs to students (accommodation and food prices) vary considerably
   from college to college. This may be of increasing significance to
   potential applicants as Government grants decline in the next few
   years.

   There are several historical colleges which no longer exist, such as
   King’s Hall (founded in 1317) and Michaelhouse which were combined
   together by King Henry VIII to establish Trinity in 1546. Also,
   Gonville Hall was founded in 1348 and then re-founded in 1557 as
   Gonville & Caius.

   There are also several theological colleges in Cambridge, (for example
   Westminster College and Ridley Hall Theological College) that are
   loosely affiliated with the university through the Cambridge
   Theological Federation.

   See also the list of Fictional Cambridge Colleges

Selected notable members

     * Douglas Adams (St John’s)
     * Charles Babbage (Trinity, Peterhouse)
     * Sir Francis Bacon (Trinity)
     * Sir William Lawrence Bragg (Trinity)
     * Subhash Chandra Bose (Fitzwilliam)
     * Lord Byron (Trinity)
     * James Chadwick (Gonville & Caius)
     * Charles, Prince of Wales (Trinity)
     * John Cleese (Downing)
     * Samuel Taylor Coleridge (Jesus)
     * Francis Crick (Gonville & Caius)
     * Oliver Cromwell (Sidney Sussex)
     * Charles Darwin (Christ’s)
     * Paul Dirac (St John’s)
     * Desiderius Erasmus (Queens’)
     * Rosalind Franklin (Newnham)
     * Germaine Greer (Newnham)
     * William Harvey (Gonville & Caius)
     * Stephen Hawking (Trinity Hall, Gonville & Caius)
     * Ted Hughes (Pembroke)
     * Allama Mohammad Iqbal (Trinity)
     * Jinyong (Louis Cha) (St John’s)
     * Lord Kelvin (Peterhouse)
     * John Maynard Keynes (King’s)
     * Kim Dae-Jung (Clare Hall)
     * C. S. Lewis (Magdalene)
     * Christopher Marlowe (Corpus Christi)

     * James Clerk Maxwell (Peterhouse, Trinity)
     * Ian McKellen (St Catharine’s)
     * A. A. Milne (Trinity)
     * John Milton (Christ’s)
     * Vladimir Nabokov (Trinity)
     * Jawaharlal Nehru (Trinity)
     * Isaac Newton (Trinity)
     * Sylvia Plath (Newnham)
     * Salman Rushdie (King’s)
     * Bertrand Russell (Trinity)
     * Ernest Rutherford (Trinity)
     * Fred Sanger (St John’s)
     * Siegfried Sassoon (Clare)
     * Simon Schama (Christ’s)
     * Amartya Sen (Trinity)
     * Manmohan Singh (St. John’s)
     * Alfred, Lord Tennyson (Trinity)
     * J.J. Thomson (Trinity)
     * Emma Thompson (Newnham)
     * Alan Turing (King’s)
     * James D. Watson (Clare)
     * William Wilberforce (St John’s)
     * Maurice Wilkins (St John’s)
     * Michael Winner (Downing)
     * Ludwig Wittgenstein (Trinity)
     * William Wordsworth (St John’s)
     * Lee Kuan Yew (Fitzwilliam)

Cambridge University in literature and popular culture

Fiction

     * Chaucer’s The Reeve’s Tale takes place at Soler Halle – another
       name for King’s Hall, which later became part of Trinity College,
       Cambridge.
     * The Glittering Prizes (1976 TV drama) and Oxbridge Blues (1984 TV
       drama) by Frederic Raphael.
     * The Longest Journey and Maurice by E.M. Forster
     * Still Life by A. S. Byatt
     * Chariots of Fire, 1981 film
     * Peter's Friends, 1992 film
     * The Masters and The Affair by C. P. Snow (features an unnamed
       fictional college, partly based on his own college, Christ’s)
     * Porterhouse Blue and its sequel Grantchester Grind feature
       Porterhouse, a fictional Cambridge College.
     * Darkness at Pemberley by T. H. White
     * All Sorts and Conditions of Men by Sir Walter Besant
     * High Table, Lower Orders BBC Radio comedy serial broadcast in 2005
       and 2006 set in a college with some resemblance to Magdalene
     * The medieval murder mysteries of Susanna Gregory
     * Avenging Angel, a murder mystery by the philosopher Kwame Anthony
       Appiah
     * Eskimo Day is a 1996 BBC TV drama, written by Jack Rosenthal, and
       starring Maureen Lipman, Tom Wilkinson, and Alec Guinness, about
       the relationship between parents and teenagers during an admissions
       interview day at Queens’ College. There was also a 1997 sequel,
       Cold Enough for Snow.
     * The final episode of Star Trek: The Next Generation, ( All Good
       Things…) features the android character Data as Lucasian Professor
       of Mathematics in his Cambridge college rooms. An establishing
       location shot shows a futuristic version of the Cambridge
       University skyline around the year 2395.
     * Civilization (computer game) - a classic turn-based strategy video
       game by Sid Meier features “Isaac Newton’s College” as a Wonder of
       the World - this could be a reference to Cambridge University as a
       whole or to Trinity College, Cambridge specifically.
     * In many novels und plays by Thomas Bernhard, Cambridge
       (Geistesnest) is the refuge of a Geistesmensch escaping from
       Austria
     * In Tom Stoppard's 2006 play Rock 'n Roll, Cambridge University is a
       key setting.

Non-fiction

     * A concise history of the University of Cambridge, by Elisabeth
       Leedham-Green, Cambridge University Press, 1996, ISBN
       0-521-43978-7, ISBN 978-0-521-43978-7
     * A history of the University of Cambridge, by Christopher N.L.
       Brooke, Cambridge University Press, 4 volumes, 1988-2004, ISBN
       0-521-32882-9, ISBN 0-521-35059-X, ISBN 0-521-35060-3, ISBN
       0-521-34350-X
     * Bedders, bulldogs and bedells: a Cambridge glossary, by Frank
       Stubbings, Cambridge 1995 ISBN 0-521-47978-9
     * Japanese Students at Cambridge University in the Meiji Era,
       1868-1912: Pioneers for the Modernization of Japan , by Noboru
       Koyama, translated by Ian Ruxton , Lulu Press, September 2004, ISBN
       1-4116-1256-6. This book includes information about the wooden
       spoon and the university in the 19th century as well as the
       Japanese students.
     * Teaching and Learning in 19th century Cambridge, by J. Smith and C.
       Stray (ed.), Boydell Press, 2001 ISBN 0-85115-783-1
     * The Architectural History of the University of Cambridge and of the
       Colleges of Cambridge and Eton, Robert Willis, Edited by John
       Willis Clark, 1988. Three volume set, Cambridge University Press
       ISBN 0-521-35851-5
     * The Cambridge Apostles: A History of Cambridge University’s Elite
       Intellectual Secret Society, by Richard Deacon, Cassell, 1985, ISBN
       0-947728-13-9

University activities

History and traditions

     * Cambridge University Professorships, Chancellors and
       Vice-Chancellors
     * Cambridge University (UK Parliament constituency)
     * Registrary
     * List of Oxbridge sister colleges
     * Oxbridge scarf colours
     * Academic dress of the University of Cambridge
     * Formal Hall (formal evening meals)

Societies and leisure activities

Dramatic clubs

     * Amateur Dramatic Club
     * Footlights

Sports clubs

     * Cambridge University Association Football League
     * Cambridge University Boat Club which races the Boat Race against
       Oxford University
     * Cambridge University Cricket Club
     * Cambridge University Association Football Club
     * Cambridge University Rugby Union Football Club

Political clubs

     * The Cambridge Union Society
     * Cambridge Student Liberal Democrats
     * Cambridge University Conservative Association
     * Cambridge University Labour Club

Social clubs

     * Cambridge Apostles
     * Pitt Club

Other clubs

     * Cambridge University Student Alliances
     * CICCU, the Cambridge Inter-Collegiate Christian Union

     * Hawks’ Club
     * May Balls
     * Punting

     * For a more complete list see List of social activities at the
       University of Cambridge
     * See also: University website list of societies

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/University_of_Cambridge"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
