   #copyright

Ununtrium

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Chemical elements


              113            ununbium ← ununtrium → ununquadium
              Tl
             ↑
             Uut
             ↓
             (Uht)

                                  Periodic Table - Extended Periodic Table

                                                                   General
                                  Name, Symbol, Number ununtrium, Uut, 113
                                    Chemical series presumably poor metals
                                             Group, Period, Block 13, 7, p
                                      Appearance unknown, probably silvery
                                                    white or metallic gray
                                                   Atomic mass (293) g/mol
                 Electron configuration perhaps [Rn] 5f^14 6d^10 7s^2 7p^1
                                                 (guess based on thallium)
                               Electrons per shell 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 18, 3
                                                  Phase presumably a solid
                                            CAS registry number 54084-70-7
                                                                References

   Ununtrium ( IPA: /ˌjuːˈnʌntriəm/), or eka-thallium, is the temporary
   name of a synthetic element in the periodic table that has the
   temporary symbol Uut and has the atomic number 113. It comes from the
   alpha decay (release of a helium nucleus) of ununpentium. Following
   periodic trends it is expected to be a soft, silvery highly reactive
   metal, rather like sodium.

History

   On February 1, 2004, the discovery of ununtrium and ununpentium were
   reported by a team composed of Russian scientists at Dubna ( Joint
   Institute for Nuclear Research), and American scientists at the
   Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.

   On September 28, 2004, a team of Japanese scientists declared that they
   succeeded in synthesizing the element. ,

   In May 2006 in the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research the synthesis
   of this element was confirmed by another method (the chemical
   identifying on final products of decay of element).

Name

   Ununtrium is a temporary IUPAC systematic element name. Scientists from
   Japan proposed for the element the name japonium (symbol Jp) or
   rikenium (Rk) .

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ununtrium"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
