   #copyright

Ununbium

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Chemical elements


              112            roentgenium ← ununbium → ununtrium
              Hg
             ↑
             Uub
             ↓
             (Uhb)

                                  Periodic Table - Extended Periodic Table

                                                                   General
                                   Name, Symbol, Number ununbium, Uub, 112
                                         Chemical series transition metals
                                             Group, Period, Block 12, 7, d
                                      Appearance unknown, probably silvery
                                             white or metallic gray liquid
                                                   Atomic mass (288) g/mol
                      Electron configuration perhaps [Rn] 5f^14 6d^10 7s^2
                                                  (guess based on mercury)
                               Electrons per shell 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 18, 2
                                                     Phase probably liquid
                                            CAS registry number 54084-26-3
                                                                References

   Ununbium ( IPA: /ˌjuːˈnʌnbiəm/), or eka-mercury, is a temporary IUPAC
   systematic element name for a chemical element in the periodic table
   that has the temporary symbol Uub and the atomic number 112. Element
   112 is one of the superheavy elements. Following periodic trends, it is
   expected to be a liquid metal more volatile than mercury.

History

   Ununbium was first created on February 9, 1996 at the Gesellschaft für
   Schwerionenforschung (GSI) in Darmstadt, Germany. This element was
   created by fusing a zinc atom with a lead atom by accelerating zinc
   nuclei into a lead target in a heavy ion accelerator.

   The element was synthesized in 2000 and 2004 in the Joint Institute for
   Nuclear Research, Russia.

   On May 2006 in the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research the synthesis
   of this element was confirmed by another method (the chemical
   identifying on final products of decay of element).

   Speculation in chemistry circles is that the discoverers will likely
   propose helmholtzium with symbol Hh after the HGF consortium. HGF is
   the acronym for the Hermann von Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft Deutscher
   Forschungszentren which is the association of national research centers
   GSI is part of. Another suggestion is wixhausium with symbol Wi after
   the Wixhausen district of Darmstadt.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ununbium"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
