   #copyright

Ununpentium

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Chemical elements


              115          ununquadium ← ununpentium → ununhexium
              Bi
             ↑
             Uup
             ↓
             (Uhp)

                                  Periodic Table - Extended Periodic Table

                                                                   General
                                Name, Symbol, Number ununpentium, Uup, 115
                                    Chemical series presumably poor metals
                                             Group, Period, Block 15, 7, p
                                      Appearance unknown, probably silvery
                                                    white or metallic grey
                                                   Atomic mass (299) g/mol
                 Electron configuration perhaps [Rn] 5f^14 6d^10 7s^2 7p^3
                                                  (guess based on bismuth)
                               Electrons per shell 2, 8, 18, 32, 32, 18, 5
                                                  Phase presumably a solid
                                            CAS registry number 54085-64-2
                                                                References

   Ununpentium ( IPA: /ˌjuːnʌnˈpɛntiəm/) is the temporary name of a
   synthetic superheavy element in the periodic table that has the
   temporary symbol Uup and has the atomic number 115. Multiple isotopes
   have been made by a fusion of calcium and americium (Uup-288 with the
   most neutrons). It is expected to be a hard, low-melting metal (around
   250 °C) possibly slightly colored and to have diamagnetic properties
   like bismuth. It can be referred to as eka-bismuth.

   Element 115 also falls in the centre of the theoretical island of
   stability. Although no stable isotopes have yet been found,
   conventional models predict that if stable isotopes of element 115 can
   be produced, they will most likely need the "magic number" of 184
   neutrons, which would be Uup-299. The currently fabricated isotopes
   only had at most 173 neutrons (Uup-288), which is far short of 184
   neutrons.

History

   On February 2, 2004, the synthesis of ununpentium and ununtrium were
   reported in Physical Review C by a team composed of Russian scientists
   at Dubna University's Joint Institute for Nuclear Research and American
   scientists at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.

   The team reported that they bombarded americium (element 95) with
   calcium (element 20) to produce four atoms of ununpentium (element
   115). These atoms, they report, alpha decayed to ununtrium (element
   113) in approximately 100 milliseconds. The ununtrium produced then
   existed for 1.2 seconds before decaying into natural elements.

   The synthesizing of the element also reported by scientists of Japan.

   In May 2006 in the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research the synthesis
   of this element was confirmed by another method (the chemical
   identifying on final products of decay of element).

   Ununpentium is a temporary IUPAC systematic element name. Element 115
   is also sometimes called eka-bismuth.

Chemical properties

   Although element 115 is in the same group as bismuth, its chemistry
   will be strongly altered by relativistic effects, so it will be
   somewhat unique in the periodic table. One important difference from
   bismuth is the presence a stable oxidation state of I, and a Uup^+ ion
   with a chemistry similar to Tl^+.

In popular culture

   Ununpentium has been theorized to be inside the island of stability.
   This probably explains why it was mentioned regularly in popular
   culture, especially in UFO conspiracy theories.

          See ununpentium's entries at fictional applications of real
          materials.

   The most popular account of element 115, from Bob Lazar, is considered
   pseudoscience . Although it is reasonable to suppose that element 115
   will have unique properties, there is no openly available empirical
   evidence to back up Lazar's claims.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ununpentium"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
