   #copyright

Utrecht (city)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: European Geography

          There is also Utrecht, KwaZulu-Natal in South Africa, which gave
          its name to one of the former Boer republics

   Coordinates: 52.11° N 5.15° E
   Utrecht

   Location municipality Utrecht
   Country           Netherlands
   Province          Utrecht
   Coordinates       52.11° N 5.15° E
   Area              99.32 km²
   - Land            95.67 km²
   - Water           3.65 km²
   Population (2006) 283,000
   - Density         2,883/km²

   Utrecht ( pronunciation ( help· info)) is a municipality and the
   capital city of the Dutch province of Utrecht. It is the fourth largest
   city of the Netherlands.

History

   The origin of the city is a Roman fortification ( castellum) around the
   year 47. Originally built from wood at the river Rhine, which had a
   more northern bed than nowadays, it was a border fortress of the Roman
   Empire. The name of the place was Traiectum, which means fordable
   place; later with the addition Ut (near to the mouth) to distinguish it
   from other settlements near fords. In the middle ages it appeared on
   maps as Ultra Traiectum (beyond the ford - as the city was north of the
   Rhine); which names merged and changed into the current name (Utrecht).
   In the second century the wooden walls were replaced by sturdier stone
   walls, remnants of which are still to be found below the buildings
   around Dom square. Around 500 Romans were encamped here. Near the fort
   there was a settlement with artisans, traders and soldiers' women and
   children.

   In the middle of the 2nd century Germanic tribes regularly invaded the
   Roman territories, and around 270 the Romans left Utrecht. About the
   period 270- 500 little is known. In the 6th century Utrecht came under
   the influence of the Franks.

   During the Middle Ages Utrecht was the most important city of the
   Northern Netherlands. Willibrordus is usually considered to be its
   first bishop. In 695 he was appointed archbishop of the Frisians and in
   703 or 704 Pepin II of Herstal gave him Utrecht as see for his
   missionary activities further north. Utrecht received city rights in
   1122.

   Later the bishops of Utrecht exercised worldly power as prince-bishops
   not only in the province of Utrecht (Nedersticht, 'lower Sticht') but
   also further to the northeast. The Veluwe soon became part of Gelre but
   Overijssel remained the Oversticht. In 1528 the wordly power over both
   Neder- and Oversticht was transferred to Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor,
   who became the Lord of the 17 Netherlands (the current Benelux and the
   Northern parts of France). This transition was not an easy one and
   Charles V had to build castle Vredenburg to maintain order in the city.
   Celebrating the liberation of Utrecht by the Canadian Army, 7 May 1945
   Enlarge
   Celebrating the liberation of Utrecht by the Canadian Army, 7 May 1945

   In 1579 the northern seven provinces of these Low Countries signed the
   Union of Utrecht, in which they decided to join forces against Spanish
   rule. The Union of Utrecht is seen as the beginning of the Dutch
   Republic. In 1580 this predominantly Protestant state abolished the
   bishoprics, including the one in Utrecht, which had become an
   archiepiscopal see in 1559. Only in 1853 was the see reinstated (by
   Rome). However, since 1723, but especially after 1870, Utrecht has been
   the centre of the non-Roman Old Catholic Churches in the world.

   The Treaty of Utrecht in 1713 settled the War of the Spanish
   Succession. Its most lasting result was the cession by Spain of
   Gibraltar to Great Britain.

   In the 17th century Utrecht became a major fortified city in the Dutch
   Water Line severely limiting its growth. Only in the early 19th century
   the fortresses became outdated with the construction of the Nieuwe
   Hollandse Waterlinie, just east of Utrecht. The ramparts were
   demolished, although the water defenses remained intact; which were
   remodelled into a English style landscape park that remains mainly
   intact until today.

   In 1843, a railway connecting Utrecht to Amsterdam was opened. After
   that, Utrecht gradually became the main hub of the Dutch railway
   network. With the industrial revolution finally gathering speed in the
   Netherlands and the ramparts taken down, Utrecht finally began to grow
   far beyond the medieval centre from the 1880's onward with the
   construction of neighbourhoods such as Oudwijk, Wittevrouwen, and
   Vogelenbuurt.

   New middle class residential areas, such as Tuindorp and Oog in Al,
   were built in the 1920s and 1930s.

   During World War II, Utrecht was held by the Germans until the general
   German surrender of the Netherlands on 5 May 1945. Canadian troops
   entered the city on May 7, 1945.

   Since World War II, the city has grown considerably when new
   neighbourhoods such as Overvecht, Kanaleneiland, Hoograven, Lunetten,
   and (recently) Leidsche Rijn were built.

Population centres in the municipality

     * The city of Utrecht (population: 281,000)
     * Vleuten-De Meern (population: 30.000)
          + Haarzuilens
          + De Meern
          + Veldhuizen
          + Vleuten

   Vleuten-De Meern was a separate municipality until 2001, which included
   the villages of Haarzuilens and Veldhuizen. Population data are of Jan
   1, 2005.

   About 68% of the population is Dutch, 9% is Moroccan, 5% is Turkish, 3%
   Surinamese and 15% of other ethnicities. Utrecht is expected to have
   340,000 inhabitants in 2020.

The city of Utrecht

   Oudegracht, the 'old canal' in central Utrecht
   Enlarge
   Oudegracht, the 'old canal' in central Utrecht
   Dom tower. The Dom tower, with to the left behind it the remaining
   section of the Dom church. The two parts haven't been connected since
   the collapse of the nave in 1674
   Enlarge
   Dom tower. The Dom tower, with to the left behind it the remaining
   section of the Dom church. The two parts haven't been connected since
   the collapse of the nave in 1674
   An aerial view of the canals in central Utrecht
   Enlarge
   An aerial view of the canals in central Utrecht
   Utrecht UFO on the top of the ProRail HQ
   Enlarge
   Utrecht UFO on the top of the ProRail HQ

   Utrecht is famous for the Dom Tower of Utrecht and the canal structure
   in the inner city. It is the centre of the Dutch railroad network and
   the location of the head office of the Nederlandse Spoorwegen (Dutch
   Railways). NS's former head office ' De Inktpot' in Utrecht is the
   largest brick building in the Netherlands (the "UFO" gracing its facade
   stems from an art program in 2000). The building is currently used by
   ProRail.

   A large indoor shopping centre called Hoog Catharijne ( nl) is located
   between the central railway station and the city centre. The corridors
   have been considered public places like streets, and the main route
   from station to city centre is therefore open all night. Over the next
   20 years (counting from 2004), parts of Hoog Catharijne will disappear
   as a consequence of the renovation of the Station-area . Parts of the
   city's network of canals, which were filled to create the shopping
   centre and central station area, will be recreated.

   Utrecht University is the largest university of The Netherlands.
   Utrecht is also home to the FC Utrecht football club, which plays in
   Stadium Nieuw Galgenwaard.

   At the westside of the central railway station is the Jaarbeurs (
   convention centre).

   The city also has a minor skyline ,dominated by the Dom tower, which
   will be expended in the next couple of years. The second highest
   building of the city, the 'Rabobanktoren', will be completed in 2009
   and will stand 105m tall. Two antennas will increase that height to
   120m.

   Two other buildings are currently under construction around the 'Nieuw
   Galgenwaard' stadium. These buildings, the 'Kantoortoren Galghenwert'
   and 'Apollo Residence', will be completed in 2007 and will stand 85,5
   and 64,5 metres high respectively.

Education

   Utrecht University, the largest university of The Netherlands (26.787
   students as of 2004), is based in the inner city and in the Uithof
   campus area, on the east of the city. It's the 41st best university in
   the world, according to Shanghai Jiaotong University's university
   ranking in 2005. Utrecht also houses the much smaller University of
   Humanistics (estimated at a few hundred students).

   Utrecht is also home to two other large institutions and one small
   institution of higher education: the HU University of Professional
   Education Utrecht (30,000 students), the HKU Utrecht School of the Arts
   (3,000 students).

Transport

   Because of its central location, the City of Utrecht is well connected
   to the rest of the Netherlands, and has a well developed public
   transport network.

Public transport

   Rail connections

   Centered on the Utrecht Centraal railway station ( Utrecht Centraal, NS
   (Dutch Railways) internal abbreviation:ut), which is a main node of the
   Dutch railway network. The main station services:
     * Regular Intercity trains to all major Dutch cities, and since March
       2006 a direct service to Schiphol airport-railway station.
     * International trains to Germany.

   There are three minor railway stations in Utrecht: Utrecht Overvecht
   (uto), Utrecht Lunetten (utl), and Utrecht Terwijde (utt).
   Additionally, at least three new railway stations are planned. Special
   train services are operated to the closed Maliebaan station, which is
   now home to the railroad museum

   A light-rail (sneltram in Dutch) line runs from the Utrecht Centraal
   station, through the neighbourhoods of Lombok and Kanaleneiland, to
   Nieuwegein and IJsselstein. This line is operated by Connexxion.

   Bus transport

   Utrecht Central railway station also operates as the main local and
   regional bus station. The bus network of Utrecht includes
     * Local buses, operated by GVU, including a high-quality bus line to
       the Uithof university district to the east of the city, served by
       double- articulated buses.
     * Regional Connexxion buses
     * Regional Arriva buses
     * BBA buses to and from the region northwest of the city, and to
       Breda and Oosterhout ( Interliner).

   The Utrecht Central railway station is also frequented by the
   pan-european Eurolines bus company and acts as the departure and arival
   place of many bus trips to holiday resorts in Spain and France and
   during winter in Austria and Switserland.

Other transport

   Roads

   Utrecht is well connected to the main roads in the Netherlands. Two of
   the most important major roads cross near Utrecht: The A12 [The Hague -
   Germany] and the A2 [Amsterdam - Maastricht]. Other roads are the A27
   [Almere - Bavel] and the A28 [Utrecht - Groningen]. Due to the
   increasing traffic, traffic congestion is a common phenomenon in and
   around Utrecht.

   Shipping

   Utrecht also has a port located on the Amsterdam-Rhine Canal, which is
   connected to the Rhine river. The CTU container terminal has a capacity
   of 80,000 containers a year. In 2003, the port facilitated the
   transport of four million tons of cargo; mostly sand, gravel,
   fertilizer, and fodder.

   Additionally some touristic boat trips are organised from various
   places on the Oudegracht.

Culture

   Rietveld Schröder House
   Enlarge
   Rietveld Schröder House

   Utrecht city has an active cultural life. There are several theatres,
   the classical music centre Vredenburg, the rock club Tivoli, several
   cinemas including three arthouse cinemas. There are also many galleries
   selling art, and a fair number of museums (listed below). To involve a
   broad layer of the population into culture, Utrecht regularly organizes
   cultural Sundays, in which several organizations offer free admission
   around a changing theme. Utrecht also houses one of the landmarks of
   modern architecture, the 1924 Rietveld Schröder House, which is listed
   on UNESCO's world heritage sites.

Museums

     * Aboriginal Art Museum
     * Centraal Museum (arts and municipal history)
     * Museum Catharijneconvent (history of Christian culture and arts in
       the Netherlands)
     * National museum 'From musical clock to street organ' (several
       centuries of mechanical musical instruments, see Wikipedia page)
     * Railroad Museum (history of Dutch railroad, see Wikipedia page)
     * University museum (see Utrecht University)

   Birth place of Adrian Dedel, later Pope Adrian VI
   Enlarge
   Birth place of Adrian Dedel, later Pope Adrian VI

Famous people from Utrecht

Arts

     * Louis Andriessen - composer
     * Dick Bruna - writer, illustrator ( Miffy)
     * Theo van Doesburg - painter, artist ( De Stijl movement)
     * Gerhard van Honthorst - painter
     * Gerrit Rietveld - designer, architect ( De Stijl movement)
     * Erhard Reuwich - fifteenth-century artist and illustrator
     * Herman van Veen - comedian, singer
     * Henk Westbroek - singer, DJ, local politician, bar owner
     * Ronald Giphart - author ( nl)

Science

     * C.H.D. Buys Ballot - meteorologist, Buys Ballot law
     * Gerard 't Hooft - Nobel prize in Physics 1999

Sports

     * Johan Aantjes - water polo player and coach
     * Tessa Appeldoorn - rower
     * Marco van Basten - soccer player and coach
     * Det de Beus - field hockey player
     * Jacques Brinkman - field hockey player
     * Marieke van Drogenbroek - rower
     * Rob Druppers - middle distance runner
     * Anton Geesink - judo champion
     * Fedor den Hertog - cyclist
     * Martha Laurijsen - rower
     * John van Loen - soccer player
     * Hans Parrel - water polo player
     * Diana van der Plaats - swimmer
     * Wesley Sneijder - soccer player
     * Wim van Spingelen - water polo player
     * Patricia Stokkers - swimmer
     * Carole Thate - field hockey player
     * Jochem Uytdehaage - ice speed skater
     * Gerald Vanenburg - soccer player
     * Gerrit Wormgoor - water polo player
     * Jan Wouters - soccer player

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Utrecht_%28city%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
