   #copyright

Uzbekistan

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Asian Countries;
Countries

   SOS Children works in Uzbekistan. For more information see SOS Children
   in Uzbekistan
                           O‘zbekiston Respublikasi
   O‘zbekiston Jumhuriyati
   Republic of Uzbekistan

   Flag of Uzbekistan Coat of arms of Uzbekistan
   Flag               Coat of arms
   Motto: none
   Anthem: National Anthem of the Republic of Uzbekistan
   Location of Uzbekistan
   Capital
   (and largest city)    Tashkent
                         41°16′N 69°13′E
    Official languages   Uzbek
   Government            Authoritarian republic
    - President          Islom Karimov
    - Prime Minister     Shavkat Mirziyoyev
       Independence      from the Soviet Union
    - Declared           September 1, 1991
    - Recognized         December 8, 1991
    - Completed          December 25, 1991
    - Formation          1747, as Bukharian Emirate, Kokand Khanate, Khwarezm
                                      Area
    - Total              447,400 km² ( 56th)
                         172,742 sq mi
    - Water (%)          4.9
                                   Population
    - July 2005 estimate 26,593,000 ( 44th)
    - Density            59/km² ( 136th)
                         153/sq mi
        GDP ( PPP)       2005 estimate
    - Total              $50.395 billion ( 74th)
    - Per capita         $1,920 ( 145th)
        HDI  (2003)      0.694 (medium) ( 111th)
         Currency        Uzbekistani som ( UZS)
         Time zone       UZT ( UTC+5)
    - Summer ( DST)      not observed ( UTC+5)
       Internet TLD      .uz
       Calling code      +998

   Uzbekistan, officially the Republic of Uzbekistan ( Uzbek: O‘zbekiston
   Respublikasi or O‘zbekiston Jumhuriyati), is a doubly landlocked
   country in Central Asia. It shares borders with Kazakhstan to the west
   and to the north, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan to the east, and
   Afghanistan and Turkmenistan to the south. This gives Uzbekistan a
   rather unusual status shared only with Europe's Liechtenstein in that
   their nation is surrounded entirely by other landlocked states. The
   language, Uzbek, is a Turkic language mutually intelligible with
   Turkish and other Turkic languages. Some sources estimate that Tajiks,
   an ethnic group closely related to Persians, make up approximately 42%
   of the population. The word "Ozbek" means, Real/original/true (Oz)
   Leaders, Nobles (bek).

History

   The territory of Uzbekistan was populated in the second millennium BC.
   There are findings of early human tools and monuments in Ferghana,
   Tashkent, Bukhara, Khorezm (Khwarezm, Chorasmia) and Samarkand regions.

   The first civilizations to appear in Uzbekistan were Sogdiana, Bactria
   and Khwarezm (Chorasmia). Territories of these states became a part of
   the Persian Achaemenid empire in the 6th century, hence becoming part
   of Persia for centuries. In fact, Persian culture is preserved in
   Uzbekistan even today, as is evident in many areas where Persian is
   spoken.

   Alexander the Great conquered Sogdiana and Bactria in 327 BC, marrying
   Roxana, daughter of a local Sogdian chieftain. However, the conquest
   was supposedly of little help to Alexander as popular resistance was
   fierce, causing Alexander's army to be bogged down in the region.

   For many centuries the region of Uzbekistan was ruled by Iranian
   Empires such as the Parthian and Sassanid Empires.

   In the 14th century, Timur, known in the west as Tamerlane, overpowered
   the Mongols and built an empire. In his military campaigns Tamerlane
   reached as far as the Middle East. He defeated Ottoman Emperor Bayezid
   I. The war is known to be the only war in history where a Turkic
   country fought against another Turkic country. Bayezid was captured,
   and died in captivity. Tamerlane sought to build a capital of his
   empire in Samarkand (largely a Tajik-populated city). Today Tamerlane
   is considered to be one of the greatest heroes in Uzbekistan who plays
   a significant role in its national identity and history. Following the
   fall of the Timurid Empire, Uzbek nomads conquered the region.
   Khiva under Russian attack.
   Enlarge
   Khiva under Russian attack.

   In the 19th century, the Russian Empire began to expand, and spread
   into Central Asia. The " Great Game" period is generally regarded as
   running from approximately 1813 to the Anglo-Russian Convention of
   1907. Following the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 a second less
   intensive phase followed. At the start of the 19th century there were
   some 2,000 miles (3,200 km) separating British India and the outlying
   regions of the Tsarist Russia. Much of the land in between was
   unmapped.

   By the beginning of the 20th century, Central Asia was firmly in the
   hands of Russia and despite some early resistance to Bolsheviks,
   Uzbekistan and the rest of Central Asia became a part of the Soviet
   Union. On August 31, 1991, Uzbekistan reluctantly declared
   independence, marking September 1 as a national holiday. In subsequent
   ethnic tensions, two million Russians left the country for Russia.

   The country now seeks to gradually lessen its dependence on agriculture
   - it is the world's second-largest exporter of cotton - while
   developing its mineral and petroleum reserves.

Politics

   Islom Karimov - President of Uzbekistan
   Enlarge
   Islom Karimov - President of Uzbekistan

   Constitutionally, the Government of Uzbekistan provides for democracy.
   In reality, the executive holds a great deal of power. However,
   recently the judiciary become more independent and the parliament (Oliy
   Majlis) has more power to shape laws. Under terms of a December 1995
   referendum, Islom Karimov's first term was extended. Another national
   referendum was held January 27, 2002 to yet again extend Karimov's
   term. The referendum passed and Karimov's term was extended by act of
   the parliament to December 2007. Most international observers refused
   to participate in the process and did not recognize the results,
   dismissing them as not meeting basic standards. The 2002 referendum
   also included a plan to create a bicameral parliament, consisting of a
   lower house (the Oliy Majlis) and an upper house (Senate). Members of
   the lower house are to be "full time" legislators. Elections for the
   new bicameral parliament took place on December 26, but no truly
   independent opposition candidates or parties were able to take part.
   The OSCE limited observation mission concluded that the elections fell
   significantly short of OSCE commitments and other international
   standards for democratic elections. Several political parties have been
   formed with government approval. Similarly, although multiple media
   outlets (radio, TV, newspaper) have been established, these either
   remain under government control or rarely broach political topics.
   Independent political parties were allowed to organize, recruit
   members, and hold conventions and press conferences, but have been
   denied registration under restrictive registration procedures.
   Terrorist bombings were carried out March 28-April 1, 2004 in Tashkent
   and Bukhara.

Human rights

   The Constitution of the Republic of Uzbekistan asserts that "democracy
   in the Republic of Uzbekistan shall be based upon common human
   principles, according to which the highest value shall be the human
   being, his life, freedom, honour, dignity and other inalienable
   rights."

   However, credible non-government human right watchdogs, such as IHF,
   Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International, as well as United States
   Department of State and Council of the European Union define Uzbekistan
   as "an authoritarian state with limited civil rights" and express
   profound concern about "wide-scale violation of virtually all basic
   human rights" . According to the reports, the most widespread
   violations are torture, arbitrary arrests, and various restrictions of
   freedoms: of religion, of speech and press, of free association and
   assembly . The reports maintain that the violations are most often
   committed against members of religious organizations, independent
   journalists, human right activists, and political activists, including
   members of the banned opposition parties. In 2005, Uzbekistan was
   included into Freedom House's "The Worst of the Worst: The World's Most
   Repressive Societies".

   The official position is summarized in a memorandum "The measures taken
   by the government of the Republic of Uzbekistan in the field of
   providing and encouraging human rights" and amounts to the following.
   The government does everything that is in its power to protect and to
   guarantee the human rights of Uzbek citizens. Uzbekistan continuously
   improves its laws and institutions in order to create a more humane
   society. Over 300 laws regulating the rights and basic freedoms of the
   people have been passed by the parliament. For instance, an office of
   Ombudsman was established in 1996 . On August 2, 2005, President Islam
   Karimov signed a decree that will abolish capital punishment in
   Uzbekistan on January 1, 2008.

   The May 2005 unrest in Uzbekistan, which resulted in several hundred
   people being killed is viewed by many as a landmark event in the
   history of human rights abuse in Uzbekistan , , . A concern has been
   expressed and a request for an independent investigation of the events
   has been made by the United States, European Union, the UN, the OSCE
   Chairman-in-Office and the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and
   Human Rights. The government of Uzbekistan is accused of unlawful
   termination of human life, denying its citizens freedom of assembly and
   freedom of expression. The government vehemently rebuffs the
   accusations, maintaining that it merely conducted an anti-terrorist
   operation, exercising only necessary force . In addition, some Uzbek
   officials claim that "an information war on Uzbekistan has been
   declared" and the human rights violations in Andijan are invented by
   the enemies of Uzbekistan as a convenient pretext for intervention into
   the country's internal affairs .

Geography

   Uzbekistan is approximately the size of Morocco or California and has
   an area of 447,400 square kilometers (172,700  sq mi). It is the
   56th-largest country (after Sweden).

   Uzbekistan stretches 1,425 kilometers (885  mi) from west to east and
   930 kilometers (578 mi) from north to south. Bordering Turkmenistan to
   the southwest, Kazakhstan and the Aral Sea to the north, and Tajikistan
   and Kyrgyzstan to the south and east, Uzbekistan is not only one of the
   larger Central Asian states but also the only Central Asian state to
   border all of the other four. Uzbekistan also shares a short border
   with Afghanistan to the south.

   Uzbekistan is a dry, double- landlocked country of which 10% consists
   of intensely cultivated, irrigated river valleys. It is one of two
   double-landlocked countries in the world - the other being
   Liechtenstein, although in the case of Uzbekistan this is less clear,
   since it has borders with two countries (Kazakhstan in the north and
   Turkmenistan in the south) bordering the landlocked but non-freshwater
   Caspian Sea from which ships can reach the Sea of Azov and thus the
   Black Sea, the Mediterranean Sea and the oceans.

   The highest point in Uzbekistan is Adelunga Toghi at 4,301 meters
   (14,111  ft).

   See also: List of cities in Uzbekistan

Administrative divisions

   Uzbekistan is divided into 12 provinces (viloyatlar, singular -
   viloyat, [viloyati] in compound, e.g. Toshkent viloyati, Samarqand
   viloyati), 1 autonomous republic ([respublika], respublikasi in
   compound, e.g. Qaraqalpaqstan Avtonom Respublikasi, Karakalpakistan
   Autonomous Republic), and 1 independent city ([shahar] or [shahri] in
   compounds, e.g. the Tashkent city with a K, Toshkent shahri). Names are
   given below in the Uzbek language, although numerous variations of the
   transliterations of each name exist.
   Map of Uzbekistan
   Enlarge
   Map of Uzbekistan
   Political Map of Uzbekistan
            Division               Capital City       Area
                                                    (km²)     Population Key
        Andijon Viloyati       Andijon              4,200     1,899,000  2
         Buxoro Viloyati       Buxoro ( Bukhara)    39,400    1,384,700  3
        Farg'ona Viloyati      Farg'ona ( Fergana)　 6,800     2,597,000  4
         Jizzax Viloyati       Jizzax               20,500    910,500    5
         Xorazm Viloyati       Urganch              6,300　    1,200,000  13
        Namangan Viloyati      Namangan             7,900     1,862,000  6
         Navoiy Viloyati       Navoiy               110,800   767,500    7
      Qashqadaryo Viloyati     Qarshi               28,400    2,029,000  8
   Qaraqalpaqstan Respublikasi Nukus                1,400,000 167,000    14
       Samarqand Viloyati      Samarqand            16,400　   2,322,000  9
        Sirdaryo Viloyati      Guliston             5,100     648,100    10
      Surxondaryo Viloyati     Termez               20,800    1,676,000  11
        Toshkent Viloyati      Toshkent (Tashkent)  15,300　   4,450,000  12
         Toshkent Shahri       Toshkent (Tashkent)   ???       ???       1

   The statistics for Toshkent Viloyati also include the statistics for
   Toshkent Shahri.

Enclaves and exclaves

   There are four Uzbek Exclaves, all of them surrounded by Kyrgyz
   territory in the Fergana valley region where Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and
   Uzbekistan meet. Two of them are the towns of: Sokh, area of 325 km²
   (125 sq mi) with a population of 42,800 in 1993 (although some
   estimates go as high as 70,000) (99% are Tajiks and the remainder
   Uzbeks ); and Shakhrimardan (also known as Shakirmardon or
   Shah-i-Mardan), area of 90 km² (35 sq mi) with a population of 5,100 in
   1993 (91% are Uzbeks and the remainder Kyrgyz). The other two are the
   tiny territories of Chong-Kara (or Kalacha), roughly 3 km (1.9 mi) long
   by 1 km (0.6 mi) wide, and Dzhangail, a dot of land barely 2 or 3 km
   (1.5 mi) across. Chong-Kara is on the Sokh river, between the Uzbek
   border and the Sokh exclave.

   Uzbekistan has a Tajikistan enclave, the village of Sarvan, which
   includes a narrow, long strip of land about 15 km (9 mi) long by 1 km
   (0.6 mi) wide, alongside the road from Angren to Kokand. Last but not
   least, there is a tiny Kyrgyzstan enclave, the village of Barak
   (population 627), between the towns of Margilan and Fergana.

Economy

   Uzbekistan is a country with a GNI per capita of US$460 and PPP
   equivalent of US$1860 . Economic production is concentrated in
   commodities: Uzbekistan is now the world's fourth-largest producer and
   the world's second-largest exporter of cotton and the seventh world
   major producer of gold. It is also a regionally significant producer of
   natural gas, coal, copper, oil, silver, and uranium . Agriculture
   contributes about 37% of GDP while employing 44% of the labor force .
   Unemployment and underemployment are estimated to be at least 20% .
   Tashkent, the capital of Uzbekistan.
   Enlarge
   Tashkent, the capital of Uzbekistan.

   Facing a multitude of economic challenges upon acquiring independence,
   the government adopted an evolutionary reform strategy, with emphasis
   on state control, reduction of import, and self-sufficiency in energy.
   Since 1994, state controlled media repeatedly proclaimed success of
   this "Uzbek Economic Model" as a unique example of smooth transition to
   the market economy while avoiding shock, pauperization, and stagnation.
   The gradualist reform strategy has involved postponing significant
   macroeconomic and structural reforms. The state in the hands of the
   bureaucracy has remained a dominant influence in the economy.
   Corruption permeated the society: Uzbekistan's 2005 Index of perception
   of corruption is 137 out of 159. A February 2006 report on the country
   by the International Crisis Group illustrates one aspect of this
   corruption:

          Much of Uzbekistan’s GDP growth comes from favourable prices for
          certain key exports, especially cotton, gold, and, increasingly,
          gas, but the revenues from these commodities are distributed
          among a very small circle of the ruling elite, with little or no
          benefit for the populace at large. , .

   According to the Economist Intelligence Unit, "the government is
   hostile to allowing the development of an independent private sector,
   over which it would have no control" . Thus, the national bourgeoisie
   in general, and the middle class in particular, are marginalized
   economically, and, consequently, politically.

   The economic policies have repelled foreign investment, which is the
   lowest per capita in the CIS . For years, the largest barrier to
   foreign companies entering the Uzbek market has been difficulty in
   currency conversion. In 2003, the government accepted the obligations
   of Article VIII under the International Monetary Fund , providing for
   full currency convertibility. However, strict currency controls and
   tightening of borders have lessened its effects.

   Inflation, though lower than in the mid-1990s, remained high up until
   2003 (estimated 50% in 2002, 21.9% in 2003, ). Tight economic policies
   in 2004 resulted in drastic reduction of inflation, to 3.8% (while
   alternative estimates based on price of true market basket, put it at
   15%). However, the relief appears to be transient, as IMF estimate of
   CPI-based inflation in Uzbekistan in 2005 is 14.1% .

   The government of Uzbekistan restricts imports in many ways, including
   high import duties. Excise taxes are applied in a highly discriminatory
   manner to protect locally produced goods. Official tariffs are combined
   with unofficial, discriminatory charges resulting in total charges
   amounting to as much as 100 to 150 percent of the actual value of the
   product, making imported products virtually unaffordable . Import
   substitution is an officially declared policy and the government
   proudly reports reduction in the consumer goods import by a factor of
   two. A number of the CIS countries are officially exempt from
   Uzbekistan import duties.

Demographics

   Uzbekistan is Central Asia's most populous country. Its 26 million
   people, concentrated in the south and east of the country, comprise
   nearly half the region's total population. Uzbekistan had been one of
   the poorest republics of the Soviet Union; much of its population was
   engaged in cotton farming in small rural collective farms ( kolkhozy).
   In the recent years, the fraction of the rural population has continued
   to increase now reaching 63.5%. The population of Uzbekistan is very
   young: 34.1% of it are people younger than 14.

   Uzbekistan is predominantly Uzbek in ethnic composition. According to
   the CIA World Factbook , Uzbeks comprise 80% of the total population.
   Other ethnic groups include Russian 5.5%, Tajik 5%, Kazakhs 3%,
   Karakalpak 2.5%, and Tatar 1.5%. However, some sources put the
   percentage of Tajik population of Uzbekistan at approximately 42%
   (11-14 million people) . The nation is 88% Muslim (mostly Sunni, with a
   5% Shi'a minority) and 9% Eastern Orthodox. Uzbek is the only official
   state language. However, Russian is the de facto language for
   interethnic communication, including much day-to-day technical,
   scientific, governmental and business use. According to Ethnologue, 49%
   of the population of Uzbekistan can speak Russian.

   According to government figures about 817,000 disabled people were
   registered in Uzbekistan in 2003. This figure only shows how many
   disabled people have been registered according to Uzbek law. As many
   disabled people do not have the chance to get registered (due to
   knowledge about the legislation and difficulties to go through the
   registration procedure) it can be assumed that many more people are
   disabled. The World Health Organisation estimates that about 10% of
   each population have a disability. According to the WHO estimations the
   number of 2.5 million disabled people is more realistic.

   The name Uzbek, both for the people and for the nation itself, is said
   to be self-referential from the period the Russians first encountered
   the people, parsing as ozum bek, or "I am the lord (or ruler)".

   Uzbekistan enjoys 99.3% literacy rate (among adults older than 15)
   which, in part, is attributable to the free and universal high-quality
   education system of the Soviet Union.

Communications

   According to the official source report, by the end of 2004, there were
   544.1 thousand users of cellular phones in Uzbekistan (an increase of
   168% since the beginning of the year). An independent source,
   Ferghana.Ru, claims, however, that the users of cellular phones in
   Uzbekistan was only 450,000.

   The number of Internet providers and operators by the end of 2004 was
   477 (+181.4%). There were 675,000 Internet users in the country
   (+137%). 96.4% cities and 72.5% district centers have digital
   telecommunications systems.

Transportation

   Tashkent, the nation's capital and largest city, has a 4 lines subway
   built in 1977, and expanded 2001 after independence from the Soviet
   Union. There are government operated trams, buses and trolleybuses
   (buses connected to the electric cables above them) running across the
   city. Also there are many taxis, both registered and not registered.
   The train links are good. They connect many towns within Uzbekistan as
   well as with neighbouring ex-republics of the Soviet Union.

Military

   Uzbekistan possesses the largest military force in the Central Asian
   region, having around 65,000 people in uniform. Its structure is
   inherited from the Soviet armed forces, although it is moving rapidly
   toward a fully restructured organization, which will eventually be
   built around light and Special Forces. The Uzbek Armed Forces'
   equipment is not modern, and training, while improving, is neither
   uniform nor adequate for its new mission of territorial security. The
   government has accepted the arms control obligations of the former
   Soviet Union, acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (as a
   non-nuclear state), and supported an active program by the U.S. Defense
   Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) in western Uzbekistan (Nukus and
   Vozrozhdeniye Island). The Government of Uzbekistan spends about 3.7%
   of GDP on the military but has received a growing infusion of Foreign
   Military Financing (FMF) and other security assistance funds since
   1998. Uzbekistan approved the U.S. Central Command's request for access
   to a vital military air base, Karshi-Khanabad Airbase, in southern
   Uzbekistan following the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks in the
   U.S. After the Andijan riot and subsequent U.S. reaction, Uzbekistan
   demanded that the U.S. withdraw from the airbases. The last US troops
   left Uzbekistan in November 2005.

Foreign relations

   Uzbekistan joined the Commonwealth of Independent States in December
   1991. However, it is opposed to reintegration and withdrew from the CIS
   collective security arrangement in 1999. Since that time, Uzbekistan
   has participated in the CIS peacekeeping force in Tajikistan and in
   UN-organized groups to help resolve the Tajik and Afghan conflicts,
   both of which it sees as posing threats to its own stability.

   Previously close to Washington (which gave Uzbekistan half a billion
   dollars in aid in 2004, about a quarter of it military), the government
   of Uzbekistan has restricted American military use of the airbase at
   Karshi-Khanabad which is used for air operations in neighboring
   Afghanistan. See AP article

   Uzbekistan was an active supporter of U.S. efforts against worldwide
   terrorism and joined the coalitions that have dealt with both
   Afghanistan and Iraq. The relationship between Uzbekistan and the
   United States began to deteriorate after the so-called " colour
   revolutions" in Georgia and Ukraine (and to a lesser extent Kyrgystan).
   When the U.S. joined in a call for an independent international
   investigation of the bloody events at Andijon, the relationship took an
   additional nosedive and President Islam Karimov changed the political
   alignment of the country closer to Russia and China, countries which
   chose not to criticize Uzbekistan's leaders for the alleged human
   rights violations.

   In late July, 2005, the government of Uzbekistan ordered the United
   States to vacate an air base in Karshi-Kanabad (near the Uzbek border
   with Afghanistan) within 180 days. Karimov had offered use of the base
   to the U.S. shortly after 9/11. It is also believed by some Uzbeks that
   the protests in Andijan were inspired seclusively by the UK and US
   influences in the area of Andijan. So far, this is another reason for
   the hostility between Uzbekistan and the West.

   It is a member of the United Nations, the Euro-Atlantic Partnership
   Council, Partnership for Peace, and the Organization for Security and
   Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). It belongs to the Organization of the
   Islamic Conference (OIC) and the Economic Cooperation
   Organization--comprised of the five Central Asian countries,
   Azerbaijan, Turkey, Iran, Afghanistan, and Pakistan. In 1999,
   Uzbekistan joined the GUAM alliance (Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and
   Moldova), which was formed in 1997 (making it GUUAM), but pulled out of
   the organization in 2005. Uzbekistan is also a member of the Shanghai
   Cooperation Organization (SCO) and hosts the SCO’s Regional
   Anti-Terrorist Structure (RATS) in Tashkent. Uzbekistan also joined the
   new Central Asian Cooperation Organization (CACO) in 2002. The CACO
   consists of Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan. It is a
   founding member of and remains involved in the Central Asian Union,
   formed with Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan, joined in March, 1998, by
   Tajikistan.

   In September the UNESCO presented Islam Karimov an award for
   Uzbekistan's preservation of its rich culture and traditions. Despite
   the fact that the former received criticism, this seems to be a sign of
   ameliorating relationships between Uzbekistan and the West.

   The month of October 2006 tends to decrease the isolation of Uzbekistan
   from the West. The EU recently announced that it was planning to send
   its delegation to Uzbekistan to talk about human rights and liberties
   after a long time of hostile relations between the two. Although it is
   not completely decisive on whether the official or unofficial version
   about the Andijan Massacre is true, the EU showed concern at easing its
   economic sanctions against Uzbekistan. Nevertheless, it is highly
   assumed among the Uzbek population that the Uzbek government will stand
   firm in maintaining its close ties with the Russian Federation and in
   its critique that the 2004-2005 protests in Uzbekistan were promoted by
   the USA and UK.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uzbekistan"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
