   #copyright

Venezuela

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Central & South American
Countries; Countries

   SOS Children works in Venezuela. For more information see SOS Children
   in Venezuela
                 República Bolivariana de Venezuela^1
   Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela^1

   Flag of Venezuela Coat of Arms of Venezuela
   Flag              Coat of Arms
   Motto: None ^2
   Anthem: Gloria al Bravo Pueblo
   ("Glory to the Brave People")
   Location of Venezuela
   Capital
   (and largest city)    Caracas
                         10°30′N 66°58′W
    Official languages   Spanish ^3
   Government            Federal republic
    - President          Hugo Chávez Frías
    - Vice president     José Vicente Rangel
       Independence
    - From Spain         July 5, 1811
    - From Gran Colombia November 21, 1831
    - Recognised         March 30, 1845
                                 Area
    - Total              916,445 km² ( 33rd)
                         353,841 sq mi
    - Water (%)          0.3
                              Population
    - July 2005 estimate 26,749,000 ( 43rd)
    - 2001 census        23,054,210
    - Density            29/km² ( 175th)
                         75/sq mi
        GDP ( PPP)       2005 estimate
    - Total              $163.503 billion ( 51st)
    - Per capita         $6,186 ( 95th)
        HDI  (2003)      0.772 (medium) ( 75th)
         Currency        Venezuelan bolívar ( VEB)
         Time zone       AST ( UTC-4)
       Internet TLD      .ve
       Calling code      +58
   ^1 The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has been the full official
   title of the state since the adoption of the 1999 constitution, when
   the state was renamed in honour of Simón Bolívar.
   ^2 Historical: Dios y Federación ( English: "God and Federation")
   ^3 The Constitution also recognizes all indigenous languages existing
   in the country.

   Venezuela ( IPA: [ˌvɛnɪˈzweɪlə]; Spanish: Venezuela, IPA: [beneˈswela])
   is a country on the northern coast of South America. Comprising a
   continental mainland and numerous islands in the Caribbean Sea,
   Venezuela borders Guyana to the east, Brazil to the south, and Colombia
   to the west. Trinidad and Tobago, Curaçao, Bonaire, Aruba, and the
   Leeward Antilles lie just north of the Venezuelan coast.

   A former Spanish colony, Venezuela is a federal republic. Historically,
   Venezuela has had territorial disputes with Guyana, largely concerning
   the Essequibo area, and with Colombia concerning the Gulf of Venezuela.
   Today, Venezuela is known widely for its petroleum industry, the
   environmental diversity of its territory, and its natural features.
   Christopher Columbus was so enthralled by Venezuela's landscape, when
   arriving to its coast in 1498, that he referred to the land as Tierra
   de Gracia (Land of Grace), which has become the country’s nickname.

Origin of Venezuela

   A palafito, like the ones seen by Amerigo Vespucci
   Enlarge
   A palafito, like the ones seen by Amerigo Vespucci

   The name Venezuela is believed to have originated from the cartographer
   Amerigo Vespucci who, together with Alonso de Ojeda, led a 1499 naval
   expedition along the northwestern coast's Gulf of Venezuela. Upon
   reaching the Guajira Peninsula, the crew observed the distinctive stilt
   villages ( palafitos) that the indigenous Añu people had built over the
   water. This reminded Vespucci of the city of Venice (Venezia in
   Italian); as a result the region was named Veneziela. Some argue that
   this actually meant Little Venice, later evolving to Venezuela. Other
   historians (notably Francisco Herrera Luque), noted that the Spanish
   suffix -zuela usually has a pejorative meaning (e.g., mujerzuela,
   cazuela) and sustain the thesis that the name more implied the notion
   of a second-rate Venice.

   On the other hand, the Spanish geographer Martín Fernández de Enciso, a
   member of the same crew, says in his work Summa de Geografía that the
   aforementioned population was called Veneciuela, and that it was built
   on a large, plain rock. According to this theory, the name Venezuela
   could be a native word. Nevertheless, the first account remains by far
   the most popular and accepted version of the origin of the country's
   name.

History of colonization

   Simón Bolívar, El Libertador
   Enlarge
   Simón Bolívar, El Libertador

   Venezuela was first colonized by Spain in 1522. Indeed, the Spanish
   Empire's first permanent South American settlement was in what is now
   Cumaná. Most of Venezuela eventually became part of the Viceroyalty of
   New Granada; portions of eastern Venezuela became part of New
   Andalusia. After a series of unsuccessful uprisings, Venezuela — under
   the leadership of Francisco de Miranda, a Venezuelan who was a marshal
   in the French Revolution — declared independence from Spain on July 5,
   1811. However, full sovereignty over Venezuelan territory was only
   achieved after Simón Bolívar, El Libertador, aided by General José
   Antonio Páez and especially the then General Grand Marshall Antonio
   José de Sucre, whose battle plan Bolívar chose to follow, won the
   Battle of Carabobo on June 24th 1821, and after José Prudencio Padilla
   won the Naval Battle of Lake Maracaibo on July 24th 1823.
   The castillo Santa Rosa was a Spanish colonial fort used to defend
   Margarita Island from pirates and foreign invaders
   Enlarge
   The castillo Santa Rosa was a Spanish colonial fort used to defend
   Margarita Island from pirates and foreign invaders

   New Granada's congress gave Bolívar control of the Granadian army, he
   then led several countries to freedom and created a new republic called
   Colombia (also known as Great or Greater Colombia to differentiate it
   from the Republic of Colombia) consisting of what are now Colombia,
   Panama, Ecuador and Venezuela. He then led the army towards the south,
   liberating Peru and founding Bolivia (named after the Libertador,
   formerly a part of Peru, known as 'Alto Peru') from the Spaniards.
   Antonio José de Sucre, who won many battles for Bolívar, was to become
   his natural successor, until he was murdered in Berruecos. Venezuela
   became, after the war of independence, along with Colombia and Ecuador,
   part of the Republic of Gran Colombia (República de Gran Colombia)
   until 1830, when the country separated through a rebellion led by José
   Antonio Páez and declared itself a sovereign republic. Páez became the
   first president of Venezuela.

   Much of Venezuela's 19th- and early 20th-century history was
   characterized by political instability, political struggle and
   dictatorial rule. Following the death of Juan Vicente Gómez in 1935 and
   the temporary demise of caudillismo (authoritarian rule), democratic
   struggles eventually forced the military to withdraw from direct
   involvement in national politics in 1958. Since that year, Venezuela
   has enjoyed an unbroken tradition of democratic civilian rule, though
   even this has not been without conflict.

   Venezuela is member of the South American Community of Nations ( SACN).

Government and politics

   The National Assembly Building in downtown Caracas.
   Enlarge
   The National Assembly Building in downtown Caracas.

   The Venezuelan president is elected by vote, with direct and universal
   suffrage, and functions as both head of state and head of government.
   The term of office is six years, and a president may be re-elected to a
   single consecutive term. The president appoints the vice-president and
   decides the size and composition of the cabinet and makes appointments
   to it with the involvement of the legislature. The president can ask
   the legislature to reconsider portions of laws he finds objectionable,
   but a simple parliamentary majority can override these objections.

   The unicameral Venezuelan parliament is the National Assembly or
   Asamblea Nacional. Its 167 deputies, of which three are reserved for
   indigenous peoples, serve five-year terms and may be re-elected for a
   maximum of two additional terms. They are elected by popular vote
   through a combination of party lists and single member constituencies.
   The highest judicial body is the Supreme Tribunal of Justice or
   Tribunal Supremo de Justicia, whose magistrates are elected by
   parliament for a single 12-year term. The National Electoral Council
   (Consejo Nacional Electoral, or CNE) is in charge of electoral
   processes; it is formed by five main directors elected by the National
   Assembly.

   Venezuela abolished the death penalty in 1863, making it the country
   where this practice has been outlawed the longest.

Administrative divisions

States

   Venezuela is divided into 23 states (estados), a capital district
   (distrito capital) correspondent to the city of Caracas, the federal
   dependencies (dependencias federales) and Guayana Esequiba (border
   dispute/Guyana). Venezuela is further subdivided into 335
   municipalities (municipios), and further subdivided into 1,084 parishes
   (parroquias).
   Political Map of Venezuela
   Enlarge
   Political Map of Venezuela

   The states (with capitals in parentheses) include:
    1. Amazonas ( Puerto Ayacucho)
    2. Anzoátegui ( Barcelona)
    3. Apure ( San Fernando de Apure)
    4. Aragua ( Maracay)
    5. Barinas ( Barinas)
    6. Bolívar ( Ciudad Bolívar)
    7. Carabobo ( Valencia)
    8. Cojedes ( San Carlos)
    9. Delta Amacuro ( Tucupita)
   10. Falcón ( Coro)
   11. Guárico ( San Juan De Los Morros)
   12. Lara ( Barquisimeto)

                                         13. Mérida ( Mérida)
                                         14. Miranda ( Los Teques)
                                         15. Monagas ( Maturín)
                                         16. Nueva Esparta ( La Asunción)
                                         17. Portuguesa ( Guanare)
                                         18. Sucre ( Cumaná)
                                         19. Táchira ( San Cristóbal)
                                         20. Trujillo ( Trujillo)
                                         21. Yaracuy ( San Felipe)
                                         22. Vargas ( La Guaira)
                                         23. Zulia ( Maracaibo)
                                         24. Federal Dependencies

   Note: The Venezuelan Federal Dependencies are not a real state, but a
   special territorial subdivision.

Regions

   Administrative regions.
   Enlarge
   Administrative regions.

   The states are grouped into nine administrative regions (regiones
   administrativas), which were established by presidential decree. The
   regions are listed below along with the states:

   Andean - Barinas, Mérida, Táchira, Trujillo; Páez Municipality of
   Apure.

   Capital - Miranda, Vargas, Capital District (Caracas).

   Central - Aragua, Carabobo, Cojedes.

   Central-Western - Falcón, Lara, Portuguesa, Yaracuy.

   Guayana - Bolívar, Amazonas, Delta Amacuro.

   Insular - Nueva Esparta, Federal Dependencies.

   Llanos - Apure (excluding Paez Municipality), Guárico.

   North-Eastern - Anzoátegui, Monagas, Sucre.

   Zulian - Zulia.

Geography

   Angel Falls (Salto Ángel), the world's highest waterfall, in Canaima
   National Park.
   Enlarge
   Angel Falls (Salto Ángel), the world's highest waterfall, in Canaima
   National Park.

   At 916,445  km² (353,841  mi²), Venezuela is the world's 33rd-largest
   country (after Nigeria). It is comparable in size to Namibia, and is
   about half the size of the American state of Alaska. Mainland Venezuela
   rests on the South American Plate; its Caribbean islands were formed by
   subduction at the margins of the bordering Caribbean Plate. With
   2,800 km of coastline, Venezuela is home to a wide variety of
   landscapes. The extreme northeastern extensions of the Andes reach into
   Venezuela's northwest and continue along the northern Caribbean coast.
   There, the nation's highest point, Pico Bolívar, is found.

   The country's centre is characterized by the llanos, extensive plains
   that stretch from the Colombian border in the far west to the delta of
   the Orinoco River in the east. To the south, the dissected Guiana
   Highlands is home to the northern edge of Amazonia and Angel Falls, the
   world's highest waterfall. Venezuelan forests are being depleted at the
   rate of 200,000  ha per annum by logging and shifting cultivation.

   The country can be further divided into nine geographical areas, some
   corresponding to the natural regions, one being the Andes Range. The
   Lake Maracaibo region comprises the lowlands near the Gulf of
   Venezuela. The Coro System, a mountainous block in the northwest, is
   home to several sierras and valleys. The Central Range runs parallel to
   the coast and includes the hills surrounding Caracas; the Eastern
   Range, separated from the Central Range by the Gulf of Cariaco, covers
   all of Sucre and northern Monagas. The Llanos region makes up a third
   of the country's area above the Orinoco River. Under it, is the South
   Orinoco Region (the Guianas, above described). The Insular Region is
   formed by Nueva Esparta and the Federal Dependencies. The last
   geographical region is the Deltaic System which forms a pantanous
   triangle, covering Delta Amacuro, with the Atlantic platform branching
   off the coast.
   Pico Bolívar (c.5000m) in Mérida is Venezuela's highest mountain.
   Enlarge
   Pico Bolívar (c.5000m) in Mérida is Venezuela's highest mountain.

   The Orinoco River is the largest and most important river of the
   country, originating in one of the biggest watersheds in Latin America.
   Other important rivers are the Caroní and the Apure.

   The local climate is tropical and generally hot and humid, though
   moderate and cold in the highlands. The capital, Caracas is also the
   country's largest city. Other major cities include Maracaibo,
   Barquisimeto, Valencia, Maracay, and Ciudad Guayana.

   Venezuela is one of the seventeen megadiverse countries, for the great
   number of animal and vegetable species that habitate there.

Economy

   The petroleum sector dominates the Venezuela's mixed economy,
   accounting for roughly a third of GDP, around 80% of export earnings,
   and more than half of government revenues. The oil sector operates
   through the government-owned Petroleos de Venezuela (PDVSA), which
   among other things owns the US-based distributor CITGO and its more
   than 14,000 retail gasoline outlets. Despite the significant oil
   wealth, 50% of the population live in poverty, and thousands are
   unemployed.

   Venezuela is also highly dependend on its agricultural sector. Sectors
   with major potential for export-led growth are production of both
   coffee and cocoa crops. At one time, Venezuela ranked close to Colombia
   in coffee production, but in the 1960s and 1970s, as petroleum
   temporarily turned Venezuela into the richest country in South America,
   coffee was relegated to the economic back burner. Today, Venezuela
   produces less than 1% of the world's coffee, most of it consumed by the
   domestic market. However, Venezuelan coffees are again entering the
   North American specialty markets. Venezuela's cocoa industry has
   decayed since the days of Spanish colonialism, when African slaves
   worked on cocoa estates. The focus of cocoa cultivation has long since
   moved to tropical West Africa. In recent years, there has been an
   attempt to resuscitate this industry, as its rare variety of cacao,
   known as Chuao, is considered the finest and most aromatic in the world
   and is used in certain single-origin chocolates. The largest Venezuelan
   fine chocolate producer is El Rey, though some companies such as Savoy
   ( Nestlé) also manufacture chocolate from Venezuelan cacao and export
   it to Europe.

   Venezuela is one of the five founding members of OPEC, the
   international oil cartel. The initiative of Juan Pablo Pérez Alfonzo,
   OPEC was proposed in 1960 as a response to low domestic and
   international oil prices. Since 2005, Venezuela has been a member of
   Mercosur, joining Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay, and Uruguay; it has yet
   to gain voting rights.

Demographics

   Caracas, the capital city of Venezuela.
   Enlarge
   Caracas, the capital city of Venezuela.

   A recent study on racial groups showed that 60% of the population are
   Mestizo (mixed race between white, African and indian), 29% white
   (mostly Spaniards, Italian, Germans and Portuguese), 8% African, 1%
   Amerindian and 2% Asian (China, Japan, Vietnam, Korea, and the Middle
   East ). The Venezuelan people comprise a combination of heritages. The
   historically present Amerindians, Spanish colonists and imported
   African slaves were joined by sponsored European groups and others from
   neighbouring countries in South America during waves of immigration in
   the 20th century. There are also various communities from Eastern
   Europe such as Czech Republic, Poland, Romania, Ukraine, Lithuania,
   Latvia, Bulgaria, Croatia and Hungary. About 85% of the population live
   in urban areas in the northern portion of the country. While almost
   half of Venezuela's land area lies south of the Orinoco river, this
   region contains only 5% of the population.

   The national and official language is Spanish, but about 31 other
   indigenous languages also exist ( Wayuu, Pemon, Warao, Kariña,
   Yanomami, Guajibo, etc), as do languages introduced by immigrants. 96%
   of the population is at least nominally Roman Catholic. Around 4% of
   the population adheres to other faiths.

Public health

   The Teresa Carreño Cultural Complex at Caracas.
   Enlarge
   The Teresa Carreño Cultural Complex at Caracas.

   Infant mortality in Venezuela stands at 21.54 deaths per 1000 births,
   for comparison this rate is almost eight times higher than Sweden.
   Child malnutrition (for children under age five) stands at about 17
   percent of the population classified as stunted or wasted, which are
   the official United Nations categories for malnutrition. Areas more
   affected by the stunting and wasting include some of the poorest
   populations: Amacuro Delta (30%) and Amazonas (24%).

   According to the United Nations, the fraction of population without
   adequate sanitation is 32 percent, with a majority of people in many
   rural areas lacking in this basic commodity. Travellers to Venezuela
   are advised to obtain vaccinations for a variety of diseases including
   typhoid, yellow fever, cholera, hepatitis A, hepatitis B and hepatitis
   D. In a cholera epidemic of contemporary times in the Orinoco Delta,
   Venezuela's political leaders were accused of racial profiling of their
   own indigeneous people to deflect blame from the country's
   institutions, thereby aggravating the epidemic.. Visitors to Venezuela
   are advised to drink only bottled water, due to the prevalence of cross
   contamination of drinking water with untreated sewage. In Venezuela
   only three percent of the sewage receives treatment, and none of the
   following major cities have any wastewater treatment: Caracas,
   Maracaibo and Valencia. There are approximately 5,000,000 people in
   Venezuela living without access to safe drinking water, resulting in a
   percentage of population ranking of Venezuela among the poorest in
   South America. As of the year 1999 there were an estimated 110,000
   people in Venezuela living with HIV.

Military

Culture & heritage

   Worship of the Virgin of the Valley, Isla Margarita.
   Enlarge
   Worship of the Virgin of the Valley, Isla Margarita.

   Venezuela's heritage, art, and culture has been heavily influenced by
   the historical evolutions of its Latin American counterparts. These
   elements extend to its historic buildings, architecture, art,
   landscape, boundaries, and monuments. Venezuelan culture has been
   shaped by indigenous, Spanish, and African influences dating at early
   as the colonial period. Before this period, indigenous culture was
   expressed in art ( petroglyphs), crafts, architecture ( shabonos), and
   social organization. Aboriginal culture was subsequently assimilated by
   Spaniards; over the years, the hybrid culture had diversified by
   region.

   Venezuelan art is gaining attention within and outside the country.
   First dominated by religious motives, in the late 19th century it
   changed to historical and heroic representations, led by Martín Tovar y
   Tovar. Modernism took over in the 20th century. Some remarkable
   Venezuelan artists include Arturo Michelena, Cristóbal Rojas, Armando
   Reverón, Manuel Cabré, Jesús-Rafael Soto, Carlos Cruz-Diez (who both
   contributed greatly to kinetic art) and Yucef Merhi.
   Venezuelan Joropo. Drawing by Eloy Palacios (1912).
   Enlarge
   Venezuelan Joropo. Drawing by Eloy Palacios (1912).

   Venezuelan literature began developing soon after the Spanish conquest,
   and it was dominated by Spanish culture and thinking. Following the
   rise of political literature during the Independence War, then came
   Romanticism, the first important genre in the region, whose great
   exponent was Juan Vicente González. Although mainly focused on
   narrative, poets also figure with great importance, Andrés Eloy Blanco
   being the most famous of them, and also Fermín Toro. Major writers and
   novelists are Rómulo Gallegos, Teresa de la Parra, Arturo Uslar Pietri,
   Adriano González León, Miguel Otero Silva and Mariano Picón Salas.
   Another great poet and humanist was Andrés Bello, besides being an
   educator and an intellectual. Other philosophers and intellectuals,
   like Laureano Vallenilla Lanz and José Gil Fortoul, along with many
   other writers, sustained the theory of Venezuelan positivism.

   The great architect of the Venezuelan modern era was Carlos Raúl
   Villanueva, who designed the Universidad Central de Venezuela, (a World
   Heritage Site) and its Aula Magna. Venezuelan architectural examples
   are the Capitol, the Baralt Theatre, the Teresa Carreño Cultural
   Complex, and the General Rafael Urdaneta Bridge.

   Indigenous musical styles are sort of a crucible of Venezuelan cultural
   inheritances, most exemplified by groups like Un Solo Pueblo and
   Serenata Guayanesa. The national musical instrument is the cuatro. The
   typical or representative musical styles are mainly from the llanos
   area and its surroundings, such as Alma Llanera (by Pedro Elías
   Gutiérrez and Rafael Bolivar Coronado), Florentino y el Diablo (by
   Alberto Arvelo Torrealba), Concierto en la llanura by Juan Vicente
   Torrealba, and Caballo Viejo (by Simón Díaz). The Gaita (music style)
   is also a popular style, played generally during Christmas, typical of
   the Zulian region. The national dance is the joropo. Teresa Carreño was
   a world famous piano virtuosa during the late 19th century.

   Venezuela is also known for their world famous baseball players, such
   as Luis Aparicio, who is in the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown,
   New York (USA), David Concepción, Oswaldo Guillén, Andrés Galarraga,
   Omar Vizquel, Luis Sojo, Bobby Abreu, and Johan Santana, winner of the
   Cy Young Award in 2004 and 2006. Although baseball is tremendously
   popular (it's the national pastime), football (soccer) is also gaining
   popularity, due to the increasing performance of the Venezuela national
   football team.

Holidays

   Date Local Name English Name Remarks
   January 1 Día de Año Nuevo New Year's Day Beginning of the Civil Year
   January 6 Día de Reyes Epiphany Christian feast, the visit of the three
   Magi to Jesus.
   January 15 Día del Maestro Teacher's Day -
   Monday and Tuesday before Ash Wednesday Carnaval Carnival -
   From Palm Sunday to Easter Semana Santa Holy Week Commemoration of the
   Passion and Resurrection of Christ.
   March 19 Día de San José Saint Joseph's Day In honour of Saint Joseph
   April 19 19 de abril Beginning of the Independence Movement Remembering
   the 1810 coup and start of the Venezuelan Independence
   May 1 Día del Trabajador Labour Day -
   June 24 Batalla de Carabobo Battle of Carabobo Ensurance of the
   Venezuelan Independence; tagged also as Army's Day
   July 5 5 de julio Independence Day Signing of the Venezuelan
   Declaration of Independence
   July 24 Natalicio del Libertador Birth of Simón Bolívar Also tagged as
   Navy's Day.
   August 3 Día de la Bandera Flag Day Previously, in Venezuela the Flag
   Day was celebrated in March 12, until August 3, 2006, in honour of the
   disembarkation of Francisco de Miranda in La Vela de Coro, 1806.
   October 12 Día de la Resistencia Indígena Day of Indigenous Resistance
   Previously, in Venezuela the holiday was called Día de la Raza,
   conmemorating the arrival of Christopher Columbus to the Americas.
   November 1 Día de Todos los Santos All Saints Day -
   November 17 to November 19 Feria de la Chinita Feria of La Chinita Only
   in the Zulian region; celebrating the miracle of Our Lady of Rosario of
   Chiquinquirá.
   December 8 Inmaculada Concepción Immaculate Conception Celebrating the
   preservance of Mary, the mother of Jesus from the original sin by the
   Grace of God.
   December 24 Nochebuena Christmas Eve Birth of Jesus (Divino Niño).
   December 31 Nochevieja New Year's Eve Final day of the Civil Year

National symbols

   Picture of an Araguaney.
   Enlarge
   Picture of an Araguaney.

   Venezuela's national symbols are the the Flag, the Coat of Arms, and
   the National Anthem. Since the flora and fauna of the territory are
   remarkable, the government also officially declared these national
   symbols:
     * The National Flower is the orchid (Cattleya mossiae). This kind of
       orchid is also known as Flor de Mayo (May Flower). It was first
       discovered in the northern land in 1839 and was given the status of
       National Flower on 23 May 1951.

     * The National Tree is the araguaney (Tabebuia chrysantha). Called
       aravanei by the caribes, it can be found mostly in regions with
       temperate weather. It can reach a height between 6 and 12 m. The
       araguaney flourishes within the period following a rainy season,
       mostly in the first months of the year. Rómulo Gallegos referred to
       these months as "La primavera de oro de los araguaneyes" (the
       golden spring of the araguaneyes). Declared National Tree on 29 May
       1945.

     * The National Bird is the turpial (Icterus icterus). Fully coloured
       with yellow-orange tones except in the head and the wings, which
       are black with a few tones in white; also has a blue spot
       surrounding the eyes. It can be found in woods, the llanos, at the
       shores of jungles, and in northern and southern Orinoco. The
       turpial is fairly appreciated due to its singing and was declared
       the National Bird on 23 May 1958.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Venezuela"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
