   #copyright

Venus

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: The Planets

   CAPTION: Venus Astronomical symbol of Venus

   Venus

   Click image for description
         Orbital characteristics ( Epoch J2000)
   Semi-major axis       108,208,926 km
                         0.723 331 99 AU
   Orbital circumference 680,000,000 km
                         4.545 AU
   Eccentricity          0.006 773 23
   Perihelion            107,476,002 km
                         0.718 432 70 AU
   Aphelion              108,941,849 km
                         0.728 231 28 AU
   Orbital period        224.700 69 d
                         (0.615 197 0 a)
   Synodic period        583.92 d
   Avg. orbital speed    35.020 km/ s
   Max. orbital speed    35.259 km/s
   Min. orbital speed    34.784 km/s
   Inclination           3.394 71 °
                         (3.86° to Sun's equator)
   Longitude of the
   ascending node        76.680 69°
   Argument of the
   perihelion            54.852 29°
   Number of satellites  0
                Physical characteristics
   Equatorial diameter   12,103.7 km
                         (0.949 Earths)
   Surface area          4.60×10^8 km^2
                         (0.902 Earths)
   Volume                9.28×10^11 km³
                         (0.857 Earths)
   Mass                  4.8685×10^24 kg
                         (0.815 Earths)
   Mean density          5.204 g/cm^3
   Equatorial gravity    8.87 m/s^2
                         (0.904 g)
   Escape velocity       10.36 km/s
   Rotation period       −243.0185 d
   Rotation velocity     6.52 km/h (at the equator)
   Axial tilt            2.64°
   Right ascension
   of North pole         272.76° (18 h 11 min 2 s) ^1
   Declination           67.16°
   Albedo                0.65
   Surface* temp.
                         min*  mean   max
                         228 K 737 K 773 K
   Adjective             Venusian or (rarely) Cytherean
   (*min temperature refers to cloud tops only)
               Atmospheric characteristics
   Atmospheric pressure  9.2 MPa
   Carbon dioxide        ~96.5%
   Nitrogen              ~3.5%
   Sulfur dioxide        .015%
   Argon                 .007%
   Water vapor           .002%
   Carbon monoxide       .0017%
   Helium                .0012%
   Neon                  .0007%
   Carbonyl sulfide
   Hydrogen chloride
   Hydrogen fluoride     trace

   Venus ( IPA: /ˈviːnəs/) is the second-closest planet to the Sun,
   orbiting it every 224.7 Earth days. After Earth's Moon, it is brightest
   object in the night sky, reaching an apparent magnitude of −4.6. As an
   inferior planet, from Earth it never appears to venture far from the
   Sun, and its elongation reaches a maximum of 47.8°. Venus reaches its
   maximum brightness shortly before sunrise or shortly after sunset, and
   is often referred to as the Morning Star or as the Evening Star.

   A terrestrial planet, it is sometimes called Earth's "sister planet",
   as the two are similar in size and bulk composition. The planet is
   covered with an opaque layer of highly reflective clouds and its
   surface cannot be seen from space in visible light, making it a subject
   of great speculation until some of its secrets were revealed by
   planetary science in the twentieth century. Venus has the densest
   atmosphere of the terrestrial planets, consisting mostly of carbon
   dioxide, and the atmospheric pressure at the planet's surface is 90
   times that of the Earth.

   Venus' surface has been mapped in detail only in the last 20 years. It
   shows evidence of extensive volcanism, and some of its volcanoes may
   still be active today. In contrast to the constant crustal movement
   seen on Earth, Venus is thought to undergo periodic episodes of plate
   tectonics, in which the crust is subducted rapidly within a few million
   years separated by stable periods of a few hundred million years.

   The planet is named after Venus, the Roman goddess of love, and most of
   its surface features are named after famous and mythological women. The
   adjective Venusian is commonly used for items related to Venus, though
   the Latin adjective is the rarely used Venereal; the now-archaic
   Cytherean is still occasionally encountered.

Structure

   Venus is one of the four terrestrial planets, meaning that, like the
   Earth, it is a rocky body. In size and mass, it is very similar to the
   Earth, and is often described as its 'twin'. The diameter of Venus is
   only 650 km less than the Earth's, and its mass is 81.5% of the
   Earth's. However, conditions on the Venusian surface differ radically
   from those on Earth, due to its dense carbon dioxide atmosphere.

Internal structure

   Though there is little direct information about its internal structure,
   the similarity in size and density between Venus and Earth suggests
   that it has a similar internal structure: a core, mantle and crust.
   Like that of Earth, the Venusian core is at least partially liquid. The
   slightly smaller size of Venus suggests that pressures are
   significantly lower in its deep interior than Earth. The principal
   difference between the two planets is the lack of plate tectonics on
   Venus, likely due to the dry surface and mantle. This results in
   reduced heat loss from the planet, preventing it from cooling and
   providing a likely explanation for its lack of an internally generated
   magnetic field.

Geography

   About 80% of Venus' surface consists of smooth volcanic plains. Two
   highland 'continents' make up the rest of its surface area, one lying
   in the planet's northern hemisphere and the other just south of the
   equator. The northern continent is called Ishtar Terra, after Ishtar,
   the Babylonian goddess of love, and is about the size of Australia.
   Maxwell Montes, the highest mountain on Venus, lies on Ishtar Terra.
   Its peak lies 11 km above Venus' average surface elevation; in
   contrast, Earth's highest mountain, Mount Everest, rises to just under
   9 km above sea level. The southern continent is called Aphrodite Terra,
   after the Greek goddess of love, and is the larger of the two highland
   regions at roughly the size of South America. Much of this continent is
   covered by a network of fractures and faults.

   As well as the impact craters, mountains, and valleys commonly found on
   rocky planets, Venus has a number of unique surface features. Among
   these are flat-topped volcanic features called farra, which look
   somewhat like pancakes and range in size from 20–50 km across, and
   100–1000 m high; radial, star-like fracture systems called novae;
   features with both radial and concentric fractures resembling spiders'
   webs, known as arachnoids; and coronae, circular rings of fractures
   sometimes surrounded by a depression. All of these features are
   volcanic in origin.

   Almost all Venusian surface features are named after historical and
   mythological women. The only exceptions are Maxwell Montes, named after
   James Clerk Maxwell, and two highland regions, Alpha Regio and Beta
   Regio. These three features were named before the current system was
   adopted by the International Astronomical Union, the body that oversees
   planetary nomenclature.

Surface geology

   Map of Venus, showing the elevated 'continents' in yellow: Ishtar Terra
   at the top and Aphrodite Terra just below the equator to the right
   Enlarge
   Map of Venus, showing the elevated 'continents' in yellow: Ishtar Terra
   at the top and Aphrodite Terra just below the equator to the right

   Much of Venus' surface appears to have been shaped by volcanic
   activity. Overall, Venus has several times as many volcanoes as Earth,
   and it possesses some 167 giant volcanoes that are over 100 km across.
   The only volcanic complex of this size on Earth is the Big Island of
   Hawaii. However, this is not because Venus is more volcanically active
   than Earth, but because its crust is older. Earth's crust is
   continually recycled by subduction at the boundaries of tectonic
   plates, and has an average age of about 100 million years, while Venus'
   surface is estimated to be about 500 million years old.

   Several lines of evidence point to ongoing volcanic activity on Venus.
   During the Russian Venera program, the Venera 11 and Venera 12 probes
   detected a constant stream of lightning, and Venera 12 recorded a
   powerful clap of thunder soon after it landed. While rainfall drives
   thunderstorms on Earth, there is no rainfall on Venus. One possibility
   is that ash from a volcanic eruption was generating the lightning.
   Another intriguing piece of evidence comes from measurements of sulfur
   dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere, which were found to drop by a
   factor of 10 between 1978 and 1986. This may imply that the levels had
   earlier been boosted by a large volcanic eruption.
   Impact craters on the surface of Venus
   Enlarge
   Impact craters on the surface of Venus

   There are almost 1,000 impact craters on Venus, more or less evenly
   distributed across its surface. On other cratered bodies, such as Earth
   and the Moon, craters show a range of states of erosion, indicating a
   continual process of degradation. On the Moon, degradation is caused by
   subsequent impacts, while on Earth, it is caused by wind and rain
   erosion. However, on Venus, about 85% of craters are in pristine
   condition. The number of craters together with their well-preserved
   condition indicates that the planet underwent a total resurfacing event
   about 500 million years ago. Earth's crust is in continuous motion, but
   it is thought that Venus cannot sustain such a process. Without plate
   tectonics to dissipate heat from its mantle, Venus instead undergoes a
   cyclical process in which mantle temperatures rise until they reach a
   critical level that weakens the crust. Then, over a period of about 100
   million years, subduction occurs on an enormous scale, completely
   recycling the crust.

   Venusian craters range from 3 km to 280 km in diameter. There are no
   craters smaller than 3 km, because of the effects of the dense
   atmosphere on incoming objects. Objects with less than a certain
   kinetic energy are slowed down so much by the atmosphere that they do
   not create an impact crater.

Atmosphere

   Venus has an extremely thick atmosphere, which consists mainly of
   carbon dioxide and a small amount of nitrogen. The pressure at the
   planet's surface is about 90 times that at Earth's surface—a pressure
   equivalent to that at a depth of 1 kilometer under Earth's oceans. The
   enormously CO[2]-rich atmosphere generates a strong greenhouse effect
   that raises the surface temperature to over 400 °C. This makes Venus'
   surface hotter than Mercury's, even though Venus is nearly twice as
   distant from the Sun and receives only 25% of the solar irradiance.
   Cloud structure in Venus' atmosphere, revealed by ultraviolet
   observations
   Enlarge
   Cloud structure in Venus' atmosphere, revealed by ultraviolet
   observations

   Studies have suggested that several billion years ago Venus' atmosphere
   was much more like Earth's than it is now, and that there were probably
   substantial quantities of liquid water on the surface, but a runaway
   greenhouse effect was caused by the evaporation of that original water,
   which generated a critical level of greenhouse gases in its atmosphere.
   Venus is thus an example of an extreme case of climate change, making
   it a useful tool in climate change studies.

   Thermal inertia and the transfer of heat by winds in the lower
   atmosphere mean that the temperature of Venus' surface does not vary
   significantly between the night and day sides, despite the planet's
   extremely slow rotation. Winds at the surface are slow, moving at a few
   kilometers per hour, but because of the high density of the atmosphere
   at Venus' surface, they exert a significant amount of force against
   obstructions, and transport dust and small stones across the surface.

   Above the dense CO[2] layer are thick clouds consisting mainly of
   sulfur dioxide and sulfuric acid droplets. These clouds reflect about
   60% of the sunlight that falls on them back into space, and prevent the
   direct observation of Venus' surface in visible light. The permanent
   cloud cover means that although Venus is closer than Earth to the Sun,
   the Venusian surface is not as well heated or lit. In the absence of
   the greenhouse effect caused by the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere,
   the temperature at the surface of Venus would be quite similar to that
   on Earth. Strong 300 km/h winds at the cloud tops circle the planet
   about every four to five earth days.

Magnetic field and core

   In 1980, The Pioneer Venus Orbiter found that Venus' magnetic field is
   both weaker and smaller (i.e. closer to the planet) than Earth's. What
   small magnetic field is present is induced by an interaction between
   the ionosphere and the solar wind, rather than by an internal dynamo in
   the core like the one inside the Earth. Venus' magnetosphere is too
   weak to protect the atmosphere from cosmic radiation.

   This lack of an intrinsic magnetic field at Venus was surprising given
   that it is similar to Earth in size, and was expected to also contain a
   dynamo in its core. A dynamo requires three things: a conducting
   liquid, rotation, and convection. The core is thought to be
   electrically conductive, however. Also, while its rotation is often
   thought to be too slow, simulations show that it is quite adequate to
   produce a dynamo. This implies that the dynamo is missing because of a
   lack of convection in Venus' core. On Earth, convection occurs in the
   liquid outer layer of the core because the bottom of the liquid layer
   is much hotter than the top. Since Venus has no plate tectonics to let
   off heat, it is possible that it has no solid inner core, or that its
   core is not currently cooling, so that the entire liquid part of the
   core is at approximately the same temperature. Another possibility is
   that its core has already completely solidified.

Orbit and rotation

   Venus orbits the Sun at an average distance of about 106 million km,
   and completes an orbit every 224.7 days. Although all planetary orbits
   are elliptical, Venus' is the closest to circular, with an eccentricity
   of less than 1%. When Venus lies between the Earth and the Sun, a
   position known as 'inferior conjunction', it makes the closest approach
   to Earth of any planet, lying at a distance of about 40 million km. The
   planet reaches inferior conjunction every 584 days, on average.

   Venus rotates once every 243 days – by far the slowest rotation period
   of any of the major planets. A Venusian sidereal day thus lasts more
   than a Venusian year (243 versus 224.7 Earth days). However, the length
   of a solar day on Venus is significantly shorter than the sidereal day;
   to an observer on the surface of Venus the time from one sunrise to the
   next would be 116.75 days. The Sun would appear to rise in the west and
   set in the east. At the equator, Venus' surface rotates at 6.5 km/h; on
   Earth, the rotation speed at the equator is about 1,600 km/h.

   If viewed from above the Sun's north pole, all of the planets are
   orbiting in an anticlockwise direction; but while most planets also
   rotate anticlockwise, Venus rotates clockwise in "retrograde" rotation.
   The question of how Venus came to have a slow, retrograde rotation was
   a major puzzle for scientists when the planet's rotation period was
   first measured. When it formed from the solar nebula, Venus would have
   had a much faster, prograde rotation, but calculations show that over
   billions of years, tidal effects on its dense atmosphere could have
   slowed down its initial rotation to the value seen today.

   A curious aspect of Venus' orbit and rotation periods is that the
   584-day average interval between successive close approaches to the
   Earth is almost exactly equal to five Venusian solar days. Whether this
   relationship arose by chance or is the result of some kind of tidal
   locking with the Earth, is unknown.

   Venus is currently moonless, though the asteroid 2002 VE[68] presently
   maintains a quasi-orbital relationship with it. According to Alex Alemi
   and David Stevenson of the California Institute of Technology, their
   recent study of models of the early solar system shows that it is very
   likely that, billions of years ago, Venus had at least one moon,
   created by a huge impact event. About 10 million years later, according
   to Alemi and Stevenson, another impact reversed the planet's spin
   direction. The reversed spin direction caused the Venusian moon to
   gradually spiral inward until it collided and merged with Venus. If
   later impacts created moons, those moons also were absorbed the same
   way the first one was. The Alemi/Stevenson study is recent, and it
   remains to be seen what sort of acceptance it will achieve in the
   scientific community.

Observation

   Venus as the Evening Star, next to a crescent moon
   Enlarge
   Venus as the Evening Star, next to a crescent moon

   Venus is always brighter than the brightest stars, with its apparent
   magnitude ranging from −3.8 to −4.6. This is bright enough to be seen
   even in the middle of the day, and the planet can be easy to see when
   the Sun is low on the horizon. As an inferior planet, it always lies
   within about 47° of the Sun.

   Venus 'overtakes' the Earth every 584 days as it orbits the Sun. As it
   does so, it goes from being the 'Evening star', visible after sunset,
   to being the 'Morning star', visible before sunrise. While Mercury, the
   other inferior planet, reaches a maximum elongation of only 28° and is
   often difficult to discern in twilight, Venus is almost impossible not
   to identify when it is at its brightest. Its greater maximum elongation
   means it is visible in dark skies long after sunset. As the brightest
   point-like object in the sky, Venus is a commonly misreported '
   unidentified flying object'. In 1969, future U.S. President Jimmy
   Carter reported having seen a UFO, which later analysis suggested was
   probably the planet, and countless other people have mistaken Venus for
   something more exotic.

   As it moves around its orbit, Venus displays phases like those of the
   Moon: it is new when it passes between the Earth and the Sun, full when
   it is on the opposite side of the Sun, and a crescent when it is at its
   maximum elongations from the Sun. Venus is brightest when it is a thin
   crescent; it is much closer to Earth when a thin crescent than when
   gibbous, or full.
   Venus transits the face of the Sun on 2004-06-08. Here, the black drop
   effect is visible.
   Enlarge
   Venus transits the face of the Sun on 2004- 06-08. Here, the black drop
   effect is visible.

   Venus' orbit is slightly inclined relative to the Earth's orbit; thus,
   when the planet passes between the Earth and the Sun, it usually does
   not cross the face of the Sun. However, transits of Venus do occur in
   pairs separated by eight years, at intervals of about 120 years, when
   the planet's inferior conjunction coincides with its presence in the
   plane of the Earth's orbit. The most recent transit was in 2004; the
   next will be in 2012. Historically, transits of Venus were important,
   because they allowed astronomers to directly determine the size of the
   astronomical unit, and hence of the solar system. Captain Cook's
   exploration of the east coast of Australia came after he had sailed to
   Tahiti in 1768 to observe a transit of Venus.

   A long-standing mystery of Venus observations is the so-called 'ashen
   light'—an apparent weak illumination of the dark side of the planet,
   seen when the planet is in the crescent phase. The first claimed
   observation of ashen light was made as long ago as 1643, but the
   existence of the illumination has never been reliably confirmed.
   Observers have speculated that it may result from electrical activity
   in the Venusian atmosphere, but it may be illusory, resulting from the
   physiological effect of observing a very bright crescent-shaped object.

Studies of Venus

Early studies

   Galileo's discovery that Venus showed phases proved that it orbits the
   Sun and not the Earth
   Enlarge
   Galileo's discovery that Venus showed phases proved that it orbits the
   Sun and not the Earth

   Venus was known in the Hindu Jyotisha since early times as the planet
   Shukra. In the West, before the advent of the telescope, Venus was
   known only as a ' wandering star'. Several cultures historically held
   its appearances as a morning and evening star to be those of two
   separate bodies. Pythagoras is usually credited with recognizing in the
   sixth century BC that the morning and evening stars were a single body,
   though he espoused the view that Venus orbited the Earth. When Galileo
   first observed the planet in the early 17th century, he found that it
   showed phases like the Moon's, varying from crescent to gibbous to full
   and vice versa. This could be possible only if Venus orbited the Sun,
   and this was among the first observations to clearly contradict the
   Ptolemaic geocentric model that the solar system was concentric and
   centered on the Earth.

   Venus' atmosphere was discovered as early as 1790 by Johann Schröter.
   Schröter found that when the planet was a thin crescent, the cusps
   extended through more than 180°. He correctly surmised that this was
   due to scattering of sunlight in a dense atmosphere. Later, Chester
   Smith Lyman observed a complete ring around the dark side of the planet
   when it was at inferior conjunction, providing further evidence for an
   atmosphere. The atmosphere complicated efforts to determine a rotation
   period for the planet, and observers such as Giovanni Cassini and
   Schröter incorrectly estimated periods of about 24 hours from the
   motions of apparent markings on the planet's surface.

Ground-based research

   Little more was discovered about Venus until the 20th century. Its
   almost featureless disc gave no hint as to what its surface might be
   like, and it was only with the development of spectroscopic, radar and
   ultraviolet observations that more of its secrets were revealed. The
   first UV observations were carried out in the 1920s, when Frank E. Ross
   found that UV photographs revealed considerable detail that was absent
   in visible and infrared radiation. He suggested that this was due to a
   very dense yellow lower atmosphere with high cirrus clouds above it.

   Spectroscopic observations in the 1900s gave the first clues about
   Venus' rotation. Vesto Slipher tried to measure the Doppler shift of
   light from Venus, but found that he could not detect any rotation. He
   surmised that the planet must have a much longer rotation period than
   had previously been thought. Later work in the 1950s showed that the
   rotation was retrograde. Radar observations of Venus were first carried
   out in the 1960s, and provided the first measurements of the rotation
   period which were close to the modern value.

   Radar observations in the 1970s revealed details of Venus' surface for
   the first time. Pulses of radio waves were beamed at the planet using
   the 300 m radio telescope at Arecibo Observatory, and the echoes
   revealed two highly reflective regions, designated the Alpha and Beta
   regions. The observations also revealed a bright region attributed to
   mountains, which was called Maxwell Montes. These three features are
   now the only ones on Venus which do not have female names.

   The best radar images obtainable from Earth revealed features no
   smaller than about 5 km across. More detailed exploration of the planet
   could only be carried out from space.

Research with space probes

Early efforts

   The first unmanned space mission to Venus, and the first to any planet,
   began on 12 February 1961 with the launch of the Venera 1 probe. The
   first craft of the otherwise highly successful Soviet Venera program,
   Venera 1 was launched on a direct impact trajectory, but contact was
   lost seven days into the mission, when the probe was about 2 million km
   from Earth. It was estimated to have passed within 100,000 km from
   Venus in mid-May.

   The United States' exploration of Venus also started badly with the
   loss of the Mariner 1 probe on launch. The subsequent Mariner 2 mission
   enjoyed greater success, and after a 109-day transfer orbit on 14
   December 1962 it became the world's first successful interplanetary
   mission, passing 34,833 km above the surface of Venus. Its microwave
   and infrared radiometers revealed that while Venus' cloud tops were
   cool, the surface was extremely hot — at least 425°C, finally ending
   any hopes that the planet might harbour ground-based life. Mariner 2
   also obtained improved estimates of Venus' mass and of the astronomical
   unit, but was unable to detect either a magnetic field or radiation
   belts.

Atmospheric entry

   The Venera 3 probe crash-landed on Venus on March 1, 1966. It was the
   first man-made object to enter the atmosphere and strike the surface of
   another planet, though its communication system failed before it was
   able to return any planetary data. Venus' next encounter with an
   unmanned probe came on October 18, 1967 when Venera 4 successfully
   entered the atmosphere and deployed a number of science experiments.
   Venera 4 showed that the surface temperature was even hotter than
   Mariner 2 had measured at almost 500°C, and that the atmosphere was
   about 90 to 95% carbon dioxide. The Venusian atmosphere was
   considerably denser than Venera 4's designers had anticipated, and its
   slower than intended parachute descent meant that its batteries ran
   down before the probe reached the surface. After returning descent data
   for 93 minutes, Venera 4's last pressure reading was 18 bar at an
   altitude of 24.96 km.

   Another probe arrived at Venus one day later on October 19, 1967 when
   Mariner 5 conducted a flyby at a distance of less than 4,000 km above
   the cloud tops. Mariner 5 was originally built as backup for the
   Mars-bound Mariner 4, but when that mission was successful, the probe
   was refitted for a Venus mission. A suite of instruments more sensitive
   than those on Mariner 2, in particular its radio occultation
   experiment, returned data on the composition, pressure and density of
   Venus' atmosphere. The joint Venera 4–Mariner 5 data were analyzed by a
   combined Soviet-American science team in a series of colloquia over the
   following year, in an early example of space cooperation.

   Armed with the lessons and data learned from Venera 4, the Soviet Union
   launched the twin probes Venera 5 and Venera 6 five days apart in
   January 1969; they encountered Venus a day apart on May 16 and May 17
   that year. The probes were strengthened to improve their crush depth to
   25 atmospheres and were equipped with smaller parachutes to achieve a
   faster descent. Since the then current atmospheric models of Venus
   suggested a surface pressure of between 75 and 100 atmospheres, neither
   were expected to survive to the surface. After returning atmospheric
   data for a little over fifty minutes, they both were crushed at
   altitudes of approximately 20 km before going on to strike the surface
   on the night side of Venus.

Surface science

   Venera 7 represented a concerted effort to return data from the
   planet's surface, and was constructed with a reinforced descent module
   capable of withstanding a pressure of 180 bar. The module was
   pre-cooled prior to entry and equipped with a specially reefed
   parachute for a rapid 35-minute descent. Entering the atmosphere on 15
   December 1970, the parachute is believed to have partially torn during
   the descent, and the probe struck the surface with a hard, yet not
   fatal, impact. Probably tilted onto its side, it returned a weak signal
   supplying temperature data for 23 minutes, the first telemetry received
   from the surface of another planet.

   The Venera program continued with Venera 8 sending data from the
   surface for 50 minutes, and Venera 9 and Venera 10 sending the first
   images of the Venusian landscape. The two landing sites presented very
   different visages in the immediate vicinities of the landers: Venera 9
   had landed on a 20 degree slope scattered with boulders around 30-40 cm
   across; Venera 10 showed basalt-like rock slabs interspersed with
   weathered material.
   The Pioneer Venus orbiter
   Enlarge
   The Pioneer Venus orbiter

   In the meantime, the United States had sent the Mariner 10 probe on a
   gravitational slingshot trajectory past Venus on its way to Mercury. On
   February 5, 1974, Mariner 10 passed within 5790 km of Venus, returning
   over 4,000 photographs as it did so. The images, the best then
   achieved, showed the planet to be almost featureless in visible light,
   but ultraviolet light revealed details in the clouds that had never
   been seen in Earth-bound observations.

   The American Pioneer Venus project consisted of two separate missions.
   The Pioneer Venus Orbiter was inserted into an elliptical orbit around
   Venus on December 4, 1978, and remained there for over thirteen years
   studying the atmosphere and mapping the surface with radar. The Pioneer
   Venus Multiprobe released a total of five probes which entered the
   atmosphere on December 9, 1978, returning data on its composition,
   winds and heat fluxes.

   Four more Venera lander missions took place over the next four years,
   with Venera 11 and Venera 12 detecting Venusian electrical storms; and
   Venera 13 and Venera 14, landing four days apart on March 1 and March
   5, 1982, returning the first colour photographs of the surface. All
   four missions deployed parachutes for braking in the upper atmosphere,
   but released them at altitudes of 50 km, the dense lower atmosphere
   providing enough friction to allow for an unaided soft landing. Both
   Venera 13 and 14 analyzed soil samples with an on-board X-ray
   fluorescence spectrometer, and attempted to measure the compressibility
   of the soil with an impact probe. Venera 14, though, had the misfortune
   to strike its own ejected camera lens cap and its probe failed to make
   contact with the soil. The Venera program came to a close in October
   1983 when Venera 15 and Venera 16 were placed in orbit to conduct
   mapping of the Venusian terrain with synthetic aperture radar.

   The Soviet Union had not finished with Venus, and in 1985 it took
   advantage of the opportunity to combine missions to Venus and Comet
   Halley, which passed through the inner solar system that year. En route
   to Halley, on June 11 and June 15, 1985 the two spacecraft of the Vega
   program each dropped a Venera-style probe (of which Vega 1's partially
   failed) and released a balloon-supported aerobot into the upper
   atmosphere. The balloons achieved an equilibrium altitude of around
   53 km, where pressure and temperature are comparable to those at
   Earth's surface. They remained operational for around 46 hours, and
   discovered that the Venusian atmosphere was more turbulent than
   previously believed, and subject to high winds and powerful convection
   cells.

Radar mapping

   Magellan topographical map of Venus
   Enlarge
   Magellan topographical map of Venus

   The United States' Magellan probe was launched on 4 May 1989 with a
   mission to map the surface of Venus with radar. The high-resolution
   images it obtained during its 4½ years of operation far surpassed all
   prior maps and were comparable to visible-light photographs of other
   planets. Magellan imaged over 98% of Venus' surface by radar and mapped
   95% of its gravity field. In 1994, at the end of its mission, Magellan
   was deliberately sent to its destruction into the atmosphere of Venus
   in an effort to quantify its density. Venus was observed by the Galileo
   and Cassini spacecraft during flybys on their respective missions to
   the outer planets, but Magellan would otherwise be the last dedicated
   mission to Venus for over a decade.

Current and future missions

   The Venus Express probe successfully assumed orbit around Venus on
   April 11, 2006. It was designed and built by the European Space Agency
   and launched by the Russian Federal Space Agency on November 9, 2005.
   On April 11 of the following year, its main engine was successfully
   fired to place it in a polar orbit about the planet. The probe is
   undertaking a detailed study of the Venusian atmosphere and clouds, and
   will also map the planet's plasma environment and surface
   characteristics, particularly temperatures. Its mission is intended to
   last a nominal 500 Earth days, or around two Venusian years. One of the
   first results emerging from Venus Express is the discovery that a huge
   double atmospheric vortex exists at the south pole of the planet.

   Japan's aerospace body JAXA (formerly ISAS) is planning to launch its
   Venus climate orbiter, the PLANET-C, in 2010.

   Future flybys en route to other destinations include the MESSENGER and
   BepiColombo missions to Mercury.

Venus in human culture

Historic connections

   As one of the brightest objects in the sky, Venus has been known since
   prehistoric times and from the earliest days has had a significant
   impact on human culture. It is described in Babylonian cuneiformic
   texts such as the Venus tablet of Ammisaduqa, which relates
   observations that possibly date from 1600 BC. The Babylonians named the
   planet Ishtar, the personification of womanhood, and goddess of love.
   The Ancient Egyptians believed Venus to be two separate bodies and knew
   the morning star as Tioumoutiri and the evening star as Ouaiti.
   Likewise believing Venus to be two bodies, the Ancient Greeks called
   the morning star Φωσφόρος, Phosphorus, the "Bringer of Light" or
   Εωσφόρος, Eosphorus, the "Bringer of Dawn"; the evening star they
   called Hesperos (Ἓσπερος, the star of the dusk) — by Hellenistic times,
   it was realized they were the same planet. Hesperos would be translated
   into Latin as Vesper and Phosphorus as Lucifer, a poetic term later
   used to refer to the fallen angel cast out of heaven. The Romans would
   later name the planet in honour of their goddess of love, Venus,
   whereas the Greeks used the name of its Greek counterpart, Aphrodite.

   To the Hebrews it was known as Noga ("shining"), Ayeleth-ha-Shakhar
   ("deer of the dawn") and Kochav-ha-'Erev ("star of the evening"). Venus
   was important to the Mayan civilization, who developed a religious
   calendar based in part upon its motions, and held the motions of Venus
   to determine the propitious time for events such as war. The Maasai
   people named the planet Kileken, and have an oral tradition about it
   called The Orphan Boy. In western astrology, derived from its
   historical connotation with goddesses of femininity and love, Venus is
   held to influence those aspects of human life. In Vedic astrology,
   where such an association was not made, Venus or Shukra affected
   wealth, comfort, and attraction. Early Chinese astronomers called the
   body Tai-pe, or the "beautiful white one". Modern Chinese, Korean,
   Japanese and Vietnamese cultures refer to the planet literally as the
   metal star (Chinese: 金星), based on the Five elements.
   ♀

   The astronomical symbol for Venus is the same as that used in biology
   for the female sex, a stylized representation of the goddess Venus'
   hand mirror: a circle with a small cross underneath. The Venus symbol
   also represents femininity, and in ancient alchemy stood for the metal
   copper. Alchemists constructed the symbol from a circle (representing
   spirit) above a cross (representing matter).

In fiction

   Venus' impenetrable cloud cover gave science fiction writers free rein
   to speculate on conditions at its surface; all the more so when early
   observations showed that it was very similar in size to Earth and
   possessed a substantial atmosphere. The planet was frequently depicted
   as warmer than Earth beneath the clouds, but still habitable by humans.
   The genre reached its peak between the 1930s and 1950s, at a time when
   science had revealed some aspects of Venus, but not yet the harsh
   reality of its surface conditions. Robert Heinlein's Future History
   series was set on a Venus inspired by the chemist Svante Arrhenius's
   prediction of a steamy carboniferous swamp upon which the rain dripped
   incessantly. It probably inspired Henry Kuttner to the subsequent
   depiction given in his novel Fury. Ray Bradbury's short stories The
   Long Rain (found in the collection The Illustrated Man) and All Summer
   in a Day (found in the collection A Medicine for Melancholy) also
   depicted Venus as a habitable planet with incessant rain. Other works,
   such as C. S. Lewis's 1943 Perelandra or Isaac Asimov's 1954 Lucky
   Starr and the Oceans of Venus, drew from a vision of a Cambrian-like
   Venus covered by a near planet-wide ocean filled with exotic aquatic
   life.

   As scientific knowledge of Venus has advanced, the authors of science
   fiction have endeavored to keep pace, particularly by conjecturing
   human attempts to terraform Venus. In his 1997 novel 3001: The Final
   Odyssey, Arthur C. Clarke postulated humans steering cometary fragments
   to impact Venus, the resulting addition of water to the Venus
   environment intended to lower its temperature and absorb carbon
   dioxide. A terraformed Venus is the setting for a number of diverse
   works of fiction that have included Star Trek, Exosquad, Cowboy Bebop
   and the manga Venus Wars, and the theme seems to be in little danger of
   dying out. A variation of this theme is Frederik Pohl's The Merchants
   of Venus (1972), which started his celebrated Heechee Series, where
   Venus was colonised long ago by mysterious aliens whose abandoned
   dwellings and artifacts make human colonization both materially easier
   and provide a strong economic incentive.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Venus"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
