   #copyright

Vernon Kell

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Military People

   Sir Vernon George Waldegrave Kell, KCMG ( 21 November 1873 – 27 March
   1942) was the founder and first director general (DG) of the British
   Security Service, otherwise known as MI5.

   Kell was the son of Major Waldegrave Kell (38th Regt) and his wife,
   Georgiana Augusta Konarska. She was daughter of a Polish emigré,
   Aleksander Konarski, a surgeon with the 1st Podhalian Rifle Regiment
   who had fought in the November Uprising and had been awarded the V.M.
   (Gold, 4th class) and his English wife.

   No doubt Kell learned Polish from his mother. Kell's first cousin
   Valentine MacSwiney was also a linguist speaking eleven European
   languages. Valentine (a Papal diplomat & marquis) was arrested during
   the Easter Rising in Dublin in 1916, but was released the following
   day; Kell had had his Irish Catholic cousin under surveillance and knew
   he was not associated with the rebels.

   A graduate from Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, Kell fought in the
   Boxer Rebellion in 1900. He was in the Staffordshire Regt. As he could
   speak German, Italian, French and Polish with equal facility, he served
   and studied in China and Russia and subsequently learned to speak their
   respective languages.

   While he served as an intelligence staff in Tientsin, he was also the
   foreign correspondent of the Daily Telegraph.

   From 1902 to 1906 Kell was head of the German section of the War
   Office, eventually rising to the rank of staff captain.

   Removed from office by Winston Churchill during World War II, Kell was
   knighted for his services ( KCMG) shortly before his death.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vernon_Kell"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
