   #copyright

Walter Scott

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Writers and critics

   Portrait of Sir Walter Scott, by Sir Edwin Henry Landseer
   Enlarge
   Portrait of Sir Walter Scott, by Sir Edwin Henry Landseer

   Sir Walter Scott, 1st Baronet ( 15 August 1771 – 21 September 1832) was
   a prolific Scottish historical novelist and poet popular throughout
   Europe during his time. In some ways Scott was the first author to have
   a truly international career in his lifetime, with many contemporary
   readers all over Europe, Australia, and North America.

   His novels and (to a lesser extent) his poetry are still read, but he
   is less popular today than he was at the height of his fame.
   Nevertheless many of his works remain classics of both English-language
   literature and specifically Scottish literature. Famous titles include
   Ivanhoe, Rob Roy, The Lady of the Lake, Waverley and The Heart of
   Midlothian.

Early days

   Born in College Wynd in the Old Town of Edinburgh in 1771, the son of a
   solicitor, the young Walter Scott survived a childhood bout of polio
   that would leave him lame in his right leg for the rest of his life. To
   restore his health he was sent to live for some years in the rural
   Borders region at his grandparents' farm at Sandyknowe. Here he learned
   the speech patterns and many of the tales and legends which
   characterised much of his work. Also, for his health, he spent a year
   in Bath, England.

   After studying law at the University of Edinburgh, he followed in his
   father's footsteps and became a lawyer in Edinburgh. As a lawyer's
   clerk he made his first visit to the Scottish Highlands directing an
   eviction. He was admitted to the Faculty of Advocates in 1792. He had
   an unsuccessful love suit with Williamina Belsches of Fettercairn, who
   married Sir William Forbes.

Literary career launched

   At the age of 25 he began dabbling in writing, translating works from
   German, his first publication being rhymed versions of ballads by
   Bürger in 1796. He then published a three-volume set of collected
   Scottish ballads, The Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border. This was the
   first sign of his interest in Scottish history from a literary
   standpoint.

   Scott then became an ardent volunteer in the yeomanry and on one of his
   "raids" he met at Gilsland Spa Margaret Charlotte Charpentier (or
   Charpenter), daughter of Jean Charpentier of Lyon in France whom he
   married in 1797. They had five children. In 1799 he was appointed
   Sheriff-Depute of the County of Selkirk, based in the Royal Burgh of
   Selkirk.

   In his earlier married days, Scott had a decent living from his
   earnings at the law, his salary as Sheriff-Depute, his wife's income,
   some revenue from his writing, and his share of his father's rather
   meagre estate.

   After Scott had founded a printing press, his poetry, beginning with
   The Lay of the Last Minstrel in 1805, brought him fame. He published a
   number of other poems over the next ten years, including the popular
   The Lady of the Lake, printed in 1810 and set in the Trossachs.
   Portions of the German translation of this work were later set to music
   by Franz Schubert. One of these songs, Ellens dritter Gesang, is
   popularly labeled as "Schubert's Ave Maria".

   Another work from this time period, Marmion, produced some of his most
   quoted (and most often mis-attributed) lines. Canto VI. Stanza 17
   reads:

          Yet Clare's sharp questions must I shun,
          Must separate Constance from the nun
          Oh! what a tangled web we weave
          When first we practice to deceive!
          A Palmer too! No wonder why
          I felt rebuked beneath his eye;

   In 1809 his Tory sympathies led him to become a co-founder of the
   Quarterly Review, a review journal to which he made several anonymous
   contributions.

The novels

   Walter Scott
   Enlarge
   Walter Scott

   When the press became embroiled in pecuniary difficulties, Scott set
   out, in 1814, to write a cash-cow. The result was Waverley, a novel
   which did not name its author. It was a tale of the "Forty-Five"
   Jacobite rising in the Kingdom of Great Britain with its English
   protagonist Edward Waverley, by his Tory upbringing sympathetic to
   Jacobitism, becoming enmeshed in events but eventually choosing
   Hanoverian respectability. The novel met with considerable success.
   There followed a succession of novels over the next five years, each
   with a Scottish historical setting. Mindful of his reputation as a
   poet, he maintained the anonymous habit he had begun with Waverley,
   always publishing the novels under the name Author of Waverley or
   attributed as "Tales of..." with no author. Even when it was clear that
   there would be no harm in coming out into the open he maintained the
   façade, apparently out of a sense of fun. During this time the nickname
   The Wizard of the North was popularly applied to the mysterious
   best-selling writer. His identity as the author of the novels was
   widely rumoured, and in 1815 Scott was given the honour of dining with
   George, Prince Regent, who wanted to meet "the author of Waverley".

   In 1819 he broke away from writing about Scotland with Ivanhoe, a
   historical romance set in 12th-century England. It too was a runaway
   success and, as he did with his first novel, he unleashed a slew of
   books along the same lines. Among other things, the book is noteworthy
   for having a very sympathetic Jewish major character, Rebecca,
   considered by many critics to be the book's real heroine - relevant to
   the fact that the book was published at a time when the struggle for
   the Emancipation of the Jews in England was gathering momentum.

   As his fame grew during this phase of his career, he was granted the
   title of baronet, becoming Sir Walter Scott. At this time he organised
   the visit of King George IV to Scotland, and when the King visited
   Edinburgh in 1822 the spectacular pageantry Scott had concocted to
   portray George as a rather tubby reincarnation of Bonnie Prince Charlie
   made tartans and kilts fashionable and turned them into symbols of
   Scottish national identity.

   Scott included little in the way of punctuation in his drafts which he
   left to the printers to supply.

Financial woes

   Beginning in 1825 he went into dire financial straits again, as his
   company nearly collapsed. That he was the author of his novels became
   general knowledge at this time as well. Rather than declare bankruptcy
   he placed his home, Abbotsford House, and income into a trust belonging
   to his creditors, and proceeded to write his way out of debt. He kept
   up his prodigious output of fiction (as well as producing a non-fiction
   biography of Napoleon Bonaparte) until 1831. By then his health was
   failing, and he died at Abbotsford in 1832. Though not in the clear by
   then, his novels continued to sell, and he made good his debts from
   beyond the grave. He was buried in Dryburgh Abbey where nearby,
   fittingly, a large statue can be found of William Wallace—one of
   Scotland's most romantic historical figures.

His home, Abbotsford House

   Displays of armour at Abbotsford House
   Enlarge
   Displays of armour at Abbotsford House

   When Sir Walter Scott was a boy he sometimes travelled with his father
   from Selkirk to Melrose, in the Border Country where some of his novels
   are set. At a certain spot the old gentleman would stop the carriage
   and take his son to a stone on the site of the battle of Melrose
   (1526). Not far away was a little farm called Cartleyhole, and this he
   eventually purchased. In due course the farmhouse developed into a
   wonderful home that has been likened to a fairy palace. Through windows
   enriched with the insignia of heraldry the sun shone on suits of
   armour, trophies of the chase, fine furniture, and still finer
   pictures. Panelling of oak and cedar and carved ceilings relieved by
   coats of arms in their correct colour added to the beauty of the house.
   More land was purchased, until Scott owned nearly 1,000 acres (4 km²),
   and it is estimated that the building cost him over £25,000. A
   neighbouring Roman road with a ford used in olden days by the abbots of
   Melrose suggested the name of Abbotsford.

Assessment

   The Scott Monument, EdinburghAlternate View
   Enlarge
   The Scott Monument, Edinburgh
   Alternate View

   Among the early critics of Scott was Mark Twain, who blamed Scott's
   "romantacization of battle" for the South's decision to fight the Civil
   War. Twain's ridiculing of chivalry in A Connecticut Yankee in King
   Arthur's Court is considered as specifically targeting Scott's books.

   From being one of the most popular novelists of the 19th century, Scott
   suffered from a disastrous decline in popularity after the First World
   War. The tone was set early on in E.M. Forster's classic "Aspects of
   the Novel" (1927), where Scott was savaged as being a clumsy writer who
   wrote slapdash, badly plotted novels. Scott also suffered from the
   rising star of Jane Austen. Considered merely an entertaining "woman's
   novelist" in the 19th century, in the 20th Austen began to be seen as
   perhaps the major English novelist of the first few decades of the 19th
   century. As Austen's star rose, Scott's sank, although, ironically, he
   had been one of the few male writers of his time to recognize Austen's
   genius.

   Scott's many flaws (ponderousness, prolixity, lack of humor) were
   fundamentally out of step with Modernist sensibilities. Nevertheless,
   Scott was responsible for two major trends that carry on to this day.
   First, he essentially invented the modern historical novel; an enormous
   number of imitators (and imitators of imitators) would appear in the
   19th century. It is a measure of Scott's influence that Edinburgh's
   central railway station, opened in 1854 for the North British Railway,
   is called the Waverley Station. Second, his Scottish novels followed on
   from James Macpherson's Ossian cycle in rehabilitating the public
   perception of Highland culture after years in the shadows following
   southern distrust of hill bandits and the Jacobite rebellions. As
   enthusiastic chairman of the Celtic Society of Edinburgh he contributed
   to the reinvention of Scottish culture. It is worth noting, however,
   that Scott was a Lowland Scot, and that his re-creations of the
   Highlands were more than a little fanciful. His organisation of the
   visit of King George IV to Scotland in 1822 was a pivotal event,
   leading Edinburgh tailors to invent many "clan tartans" out of whole
   cloth, so to speak. After being essentially unstudied for many decades,
   a small revival of interest in Scott's work began in the 1970s and
   1980s. Ironically, postmodern tastes (which favoured discontinuous
   narratives, and the introduction of the 'first person' into works of
   fiction) were more favourable to Scott's work than Modernist tastes.
   Despite all the flaws, Scott is now seen as an important innovator, and
   a key figure in the development of Scottish and world literature.

   Scott was also responsible, through a series of pseudonymous letters
   published in the Edinburgh Weekly News in 1826, for retaining the right
   of Scottish banks to issue their own banknotes, which is reflected to
   this day by his continued appearance on the front of all notes issued
   by the Bank of Scotland.

   Many of his works were illustrated by his friend, William Allan.

Works

The Waverley Novels

     * Waverley ( 1814)
     * Guy Mannering (1815)
     * The Antiquary ( 1816)
     * Rob Roy ( 1818)
     * Ivanhoe ( 1819)
     * Kenilworth ( 1821)
     * The Pirate ( 1822)
     * The Fortunes of Nigel (1822)
     * Peveril of the Peak (1822)
     * Quentin Durward ( 1823)
     * St. Ronan's Well ( 1824)
     * Redgauntlet (1824)
     * Tales of the Crusaders, consisting of The Betrothed and The
       Talisman ( 1825)
     * Woodstock ( 1826)
     * Chronicles of the Canongate, 2nd series, The Fair Maid of Perth
       (1828)
     * Anne of Geierstein ( 1829)

Tales of My Landlord

     * 1st series The Black Dwarf and Old Mortality (1816)
     * 2nd series, The Heart of Midlothian (1818)
     * 3rd series, The Bride of Lammermoor and A Legend of Montrose (1819)
     * 4th series, Count Robert of Paris and Castle Dangerous ( 1832)

Short stories

     * Chronicles of the Canongate, 1st series ( 1827). Collection of
       three short stories:

   The Highland Widow, The Two Drovers and The Surgeon's Daughter.
     * The Keepsake Stories ( 1828). Collection of three short stories:

   My Aunt Margaret's Mirror, The Tapestried Chamber and Death Of The
   Laird's Jock.

Poems

     * William and Helen, Two Ballads from the German (translator) ( 1796)
     * The Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border ( 1802- 1803)
     * The Lay of the Last Minstrel ( 1805)
     * Ballads and Lyrical Pieces ( 1806)
     * Marmion ( 1808)
     * The Lady of the Lake ( 1810)
     * The Vision of Don Roderick ( 1811)
     * The Bridal of Triermain ( 1813)
     * Rokeby (1813)
     * The Field of Waterloo ( 1815)
     * The Lord of the Isles (1815)
     * Harold the Dauntless ( 1817)
     * "Young Lochinvar"
     * Bonnie Dundee ( 1830)

Other

     * Introductory Essay to The Border Antiquities of England and
       Scotland ( 1814- 1817)
     * The Chase (translator) ( 1796)
     * Goetz of Berlichingen (translator) ( 1799)
     * Paul's Letters to his Kinsfolk (1816)
     * Provincial Antiquities of Scotland ( 1819- 1826)
     * Lives of the Novelists (1821- 1824)
     * Halidon Hall (1822)
     * The Life of Napoleon Buonaparte (1827)
     * Religious Discourses ( 1828)
     * Tales of a Grandfather, 1st series (1828)
     * History of Scotland, 2 vols. (1829- 1830)
     * Tales of a Grandfather, 2nd series (1829)
     * The Doom of Devorgoil (1830)
     * Essays on Ballad Poetry (1830)
     * Tales of a Grandfather, 3rd series (1830)
     * Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft ( 1831)
     * The Bishop of Tyre

Quote

   Breathes there the man, with soul so dead, Who never to himself hath
   said, This is my own, my native land! from The Lay of the Last Minstrel
   by Walter Scott
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walter_Scott"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
