   #copyright

Wars of Castro

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Military History and War

   Pope Innocent X, on whose orders the city of Castro was destroyed on
   September 2, 1649. Portrait by Diego Velázquez.
   Enlarge
   Pope Innocent X, on whose orders the city of Castro was destroyed on
   September 2, 1649. Portrait by Diego Velázquez.

   The Wars of Castro describe a series of events in the mid- seventeenth
   century revolving around the ancient city of Castro (located in
   present-day Lazio, Italy), which eventually resulted in the city's
   destruction on September 2, 1649. The conflict was a result of a power
   struggle between the papacy — represented by members of two deeply
   entrenched Roman families, the Barberini Pope Urban VIII and then the
   Pamphili Pope Innocent X — and the Farnese dukes of Parma, who
   controlled Castro and its surrounding territories.

   Papal politics of the mid- seventeenth century were complicated, with
   frequently shifting military and political alliances across the
   Catholic world. While it is difficult to trace the precise origins of
   the feud between the duchy of Parma and the papacy, its origins can be
   looked for in political maneuverings occurring in the years or even
   decades preceding the start of military action. The duke of Parma and
   his immediate family had narrowly escaped a planned mass assassination
   of the Farnese in 1611, for which ten high-born conspirators were
   executed in the main square of Parma in May of the following year.

   Odoardo Farnese, Duke of Parma and Piacenza, who controlled Castro, had
   quarrelled with Pope Urban VIII's influential Barberini nephews during
   a visit to Rome in 1639. These offended relatives of the Pope convinced
   him to ban grain shipments originating in Castro from being distributed
   in Rome and the surrounding territory, thereby depriving Duke Odoardo
   of an important source of income. As a result, Duke Odoardo was unable
   to pay debts due to Roman creditors, which he had accumulated in
   military adventures against the Spanish in Milan and in luxurious
   living. These unpaid and unhappy creditors sought relief from the pope,
   who turned to military action in an attempt to force payment.

First War of Castro

   Pope Urban VIII responded to the requests of Duke Odoardo's creditors
   by occupying the city of Castro with the forces of his nephew Taddeo
   Barberini (general in chief of the papal army) and Luigi Mattei on
   October 13, 1641. Securely in possession at Castro, Taddeo arrived with
   his forces in the papal city of Ferrara January 5, 1642. On January 11
   the opera L'Armida by the Barberini house composer Marco Marazzoli was
   presented in his honour, and Marazzoli composed a work Le pretensioni
   del Tebro e del Po to compliment recent events.

   Urban excommunicated Odoardo and rescinded his fiefdoms (which had been
   granted by Pope Paul III — Odoardo's great-great-great-grandfather — in
   1545) on January 13. Odoardo countered with a military march of his
   own, this time on the papal state; his forces threatened to enter Rome.
   Odoardo also allied with the Republic of Venice, Modena, and his
   father-in-law, Cosimo II de' Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany. The Pope,
   who had earlier turned to Spain for assistance, received little, as
   Spanish forces were fully occupied by the Thirty Years' War.

   After attempted peace negotiations failed in 1643, the papal forces
   suffered a crucial defeat in the Battle of Lagoscuro in 1644 resulting
   in the surrender of the papal forces; a peace was agreed to in Ferrara
   on March 31 of that year. Under the terms of the peace, Odoardo was
   readmitted to the Catholic Church and his fiefdoms were restored to
   him. Grain shipments from Castro to Rome were once again allowed, and
   Odoardo was to resume payments to his Roman creditors. This peace
   settlement concluded the first war of Castro, and was widely considered
   a disgrace to the papacy, which was unable to impose its will through
   use of military force.

   Pope Urban VIII died just a few months after the peace settlement was
   agreed to, on July 29, 1644. On September 15, Pope Innocent X was
   elected to replace him. Two of the nephews of Pope Urban VIII, Taddeo
   and his brother Cardinal Antonio Barberini, were forced to abandon Rome
   after the first War of Castro and flee to France when Pope Innocent X
   began an investigation into illicit profits taken by the Barberini
   family during the war. There they depended on the hospitality of Louis
   XIV, King of France, until 1653 when they returned to Rome, sealing a
   reconciliation with Innocent X by the marriage of Taddeo Barberini's
   son Maffeo with Olimpia Giustiniani, a niece of Innocent's.

Second War of Castro

   The Wars of Castro were renewed in 1649, when Odoardo's son, Duke
   Ranuccio II, who had succeeded to the title September 11, 1646, refused
   to pay back Roman creditors as his father had agreed to in the treaty
   signed five years prior. He also refused to recognize the new bishop of
   Castro appointed by Pope Innocent X. When the bishop, Mons. Cristoforo
   Giarda, was killed en route to Castro, near Monterosi, Pope Innocent X
   accused Duke Ranuccio II of murdering him. In retaliation for this
   alleged crime, forces under the pope marched on Castro on September 2,
   and on the pope's orders completely destroyed the city. Duke Ranuccio
   II was forced to cede control of the territories around Castro back to
   the pope, who then tried to use the land to settle accounts with the
   Duke's creditors. This marked the end of the second war of Castro, and
   the final demise of the city, as it was never rebuilt.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wars_of_Castro"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
