   #copyright

Warsaw Uprising (1794)

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: General history

   Warsaw Uprising of 1794
   Part of Kościuszko's Uprising
   Fights at Krakowskie Przedmieście, a contemporary sketch by Jan Piotr
   Norblin
   Fights at Krakowskie Przedmieście, a contemporary sketch by Jan Piotr
   Norblin.

     Date   April 17 to April 19, 1794
   Location Warsaw, Poland
    Result  Polish victory
   Combatants
   Poland Imperial Russia
   Commanders
   Stanisław Mokronowski,
   Jan Kiliński Iosif Igelström
   Strength
   3,500 soldiers,
   ~2,500 militia^ 7,000 soldiers^
   Casualties
   507 soldiers killed and 437 wounded,
   ~700 civilians killed 2,000-4,000,
   2000 captured
   Kościuszko Uprising
   Racławice – Warsaw – Wilno – Greater Poland – Szczekociny – Chełm –
   Krupczyce – Terespol – Maciejowice – Praga
   Centre of Warsaw as seen on a 1831 map
   Enlarge
   Centre of Warsaw as seen on a 1831 map

   The Warsaw Uprising of 1794 (otherwise called the Warsaw Insurrection,
   Polish: insurekcja warszawska) was an armed Polish insurrection at the
   onset of Kościuszko's Uprising by the people of the city. Supported by
   the Polish Army, it aimed to throw off Russian control of Warsaw, the
   capital of Poland. It started on April 17, 1794, soon after Tadeusz
   Kościuszko's victory at Racławice. Although the Russian forces were
   more numerous and better equipped, the Polish regular forces and
   militia, armed with rifles and sabres from the Warsaw Arsenal,
   nonetheless inflicted heavy losses on the surprised enemy garrison.
   Russian soldiers found themselves under crossfire, shot from all sides
   and buildings, and several units broke early and suffered heavy
   casualties during the retreat.

   Tomasz Maruszewski, Kościuszko's envoy, Ignacy Działyński, and others
   had been laying the groundwork for the uprising since the spring of
   1793. They succeeded in encouraging popular support: the National
   Militia was formed out of several thousands of volunteers and was led
   by Jan Kiliński, a master shoemaker by trade and one of the most
   notable burghers of the time. Apart from the militia, the most famous
   units to take part in the liberation of Warsaw were formed of Poles
   that had previously been forcibly conscripted into the Russian service.
   An eye-witness of the fights in Warsaw was Jan Piotr Norblin de la
   Gourdaine, a French-born Polish painter who created a set of sketches
   and paintings depicting the struggles.

   Within hours, the fighting spread from a single street at the western
   outskirts of Warsaw's Old Town to the entire city. A part of Russian
   garrison was able to retreat to Powązki under the cover of Prussian
   cavalry, but most of the garrison was trapped inside the city. The
   isolated Russian forces continued to resist in several parts of the
   city for two more days.

History

Prelude

   Following the Second Partition of Poland of 1793, the presence of
   Prussian and Imperial Russian garrisons on Polish soil was almost
   continuous. Although foreign influence at the Polish court, often in
   the form of Russian ambassador Nikolai Repnin, had been strong for many
   years, it was not until the partitions of Poland that it started to
   influence not only the Polish government and szlachta (nobility), but
   the entire people. The presence of foreign occupation forces
   contributed both to economic collapse of the already-weakened state and
   to growing radicalisation of the population of Warsaw.
   Poland after the Second Partition
   Enlarge
   Poland after the Second Partition
   Stanisław Mokronowski
   Enlarge
   Stanisław Mokronowski
   Portrait of General Igelström by Dmitry Levitsky.
   Enlarge
   Portrait of General Igelström by Dmitry Levitsky.

   Upon receiving news of Kościuszko's proclamation in Kraków (March 24)
   and his subsequent victory at Racławice (April 4), the tension in
   Warsaw grew rapidly. Polish king Stanisław August Poniatowski was
   opposed to the idea of Kościuszko's uprising, and together with the
   Permanent Council issued a declaration on April 2, condemning it. The
   king dispatched Hetman Piotr Ożarowski and marshal of the Permanent
   Council Józef Ankwicz to Iosif Igelström, the Russian ambassador and
   commander of all Russian occupation forces in Poland, with a proposal
   to evacuate both the Russian and Polish troops loyal to the king to a
   military encampment at Nowy Dwór Mazowiecki. There the king and his
   court, as well as the members of pro-Russian faction and the leaders of
   the Confederation of Targowica could safely await for the tensions to
   dissipate.

   However, Igelström disagreed with the plan and saw no need for Russians
   to evacuate Warsaw. He sent a corps under Gen. Aleksandr Khrushchev to
   intercept Kościuszko and prevent him from approaching Warsaw. He also
   ordered increased surveillance of suspected supporters of the uprising,
   and censorship of all mail passing through Warsaw. Finally, Igelström
   issued orders for the arrest of those whom he suspected of any
   connection with the insurrection. Among them were Gen. Ignacy
   Działyński, king's chamberlain Jan Walenty Węgierski and Stanisław
   Potocki, some of the more prominent political leaders of the time. At
   the same time Russian forces started preparations to disarm the weak
   Polish garrison of Warsaw under General Stanisław Mokronowski by
   seizing the Warsaw Arsenal at Miodowa Street. However, these orders
   only made the situation worse as they were leaked to the Poles.

   The Russian forces prepared a plan to seize the most important
   buildings in the city and secure it until further reinforcements could
   arrive from Russia. General Johann Jakob Pistor suggested that the
   barracks of "unsafe" Polish units be surrounded and the units disarmed,
   and the Warsaw Arsenal captured to prevent the revolutionaries from
   seizing arms. At the same time bishop Józef Kossakowski, known for his
   pro-Russian stance, suggested that on April 19, that is the Holy
   Saturday, the churches be surrounded with troops and all suspects
   attending the mass be arrested.

   On the Polish side, weakened by the arrests of some of its leaders,
   both the radical Polish Jacobins and the centrist supporters of King
   Stanisław August Poniatowski began preparing plans for an all-out
   attack on the Russian forces to drive them from Warsaw, still, in
   theory, the capital of an independent state. Kościuszko already had
   supporters in Warsaw, including Tomasz Maruszewski, his envoy who was
   sent to Warsaw with a specific mission to prepare the uprising.
   Maruszewski created the Revolution Association (Związek Rewolucyjny),
   organzing the previously independent anti-Russian factions. The
   Association included among its members various high-ranking officers
   from the Polish forces stationed in Warsaw. Among them were Michał
   Chomentowski, Gen. Krystian Godfryd Deybel de Hammerau, Józef Górski,
   Capt. Stanisław Kosmowski, Fryderyk Melfort, Dionizy Poniatowski, Lt.
   Grzegorz Ropp and Józef Zeydlitz. Among the most influential partisans
   of the uprising was General Jan August Cichowski, the military
   commander of the Warsaw's garrison. Together with General Stepan
   Stepanovich Apraksin he devised a plan of defence of the city against
   the revolutionaries, but managed to convince the Russians to leave the
   Arsenal, the Royal Castle and the Gunpowder Depot defended by the
   Polish units. Cichowski also managed to undermine the Russian plan to
   reduce the number of soldiers serving in the Polish units, which also
   added to the later Polish successes. Also, a prominent burgher,
   shoemaking master Jan Kiliński, started gathering support from other
   townsfolk. The king, however, remained passive, and subsequent events
   unfolded without any support - or opposition - from him.

Opposing forces

   Due to the fact that a large part of the Polish forces consisted of
   irregular militia, the exact number of the troops fighting on Polish
   side is hard to estimate. However, there are pay rolls of the Russian
   garrison preserved, which give a fairly accurate number of regular
   soldiers available to Igelström.

   The Polish force consisted of roughly 3000 men at arms and 150 horses,
   most of them from the 10th Regiment of Foot and the 4th Regiment of
   Front Guard. In addition, in the eastern borough of Praga there were
   680 men and 337 horses of the royal uhlan squadrons. The latter units
   crossed the Vistula and took part in the fights, but served as a
   standard infantry as their horses had to be left on the other side of
   the river.

   According to the Russian pay roll found after the uprising in the
   Russian embassy and published in the Gazeta Wolna Warszawska newspaper
   soon afterwards, the Russian garrison had 7948 men, 1041 horses and 34
   guns. In addition, Igelström could request assistance from a Prussian
   unit of Gen. Fiedrich von Wölcky stationed to the west of the city in
   the fields between Powązki and Marymont. The latter unit had roughly
   1500 men and 4 guns.

Opening moves

   After the Russian plan of surrounding the churches on Saturday was
   discovered by the Poles, it was decided that the uprising start
   immediately. On Holy Wednesday the Polish garrison was secretly
   provided with volleys and artillery charges and overnight was
   dispatched to various parts of the city. The Russians were conscious of
   the preparations for the uprising as their troops were also equipped
   with additional ammunition. Half past 3 o'clock some 20 Polish dragoons
   left the Mirów barracks and headed for the Saxon Garden. Encountered by
   a small Russian force equipped with two cannons guarding the Iron Gate,
   the squadron charged the Russian positions and captured the guns. Soon
   afterwards the remainder of the Royal Horse Guard regiment left the
   barracks on foot and headed in two directions: towards the outer gates
   of the city at Wola and towards the Warsaw Arsenal, where the Russian
   forces were preparing an assault. The latter force was also joined by a
   small troop of National Cavalry under Col. Gizler, who crossed the
   Vistula overnight.
   Warsaw Arsenal, on the left, was the scence of heavy fighting during
   the Uprising, as well as 35 years later, during the November Uprising
   (pictured).
   Enlarge
   Warsaw Arsenal, on the left, was the scence of heavy fighting during
   the Uprising, as well as 35 years later, during the November Uprising
   (pictured).

   At 5 o'clock the planned Russian assault on the Arsenal was indeed
   started, but was repelled by unexpected opposition from Polish forces.
   After the first shots, the crew of the Arsenal started giving out arms
   to the civilian volunteers, who quickly joined the fights. The arsenal
   was secured, but the Polish plan to catch most of the Russian soldiers
   on the streets rather than in buildings and barracks failed. One of
   such groups armed with a cannon broke through the Warsaw's Old Town to
   Krasiński Sq., two additional started marching along the Długa Street.
   Their action spread the uprising to all parts of the city. Until half
   past 6 o'clock the regular units and the militia clashed with the
   Russian outposts at Nalewki, Bonifraterska, Kłopot and Leszno streets.

   The initial clashes caused much confusion as not all forces involved
   had been notified of the plans of both sides. Among such units was the
   Royal Foot Guard unit, which broke through to the Castle Square, where
   it was to await further orders. The small troop pledged to defend the
   monarch as soon as he appeared at the Castle's courtyard, however, on
   hearing the sounds of a battle nearby, the unit left the king and
   joined the fights at Miodowa Street; The Russian forces, pushed back
   after their initial failure at the gates of the Arsenal, withdrew
   towards Miodowa Street, where they amassed in front of Igelström's
   palace. There they were shelled by a small Polish force stationed in
   the gardens of the Krasiński's Palace, but managed to destroy the
   Polish unit and successfully reorganize and rally. However, the chaos
   in the Russian ranks could not be eliminated as Igelström's
   headquarters had been cut out from the rest of the city and he could
   not send request for reinforcement to Russian units stationed outside
   of the city centre and the Russian chain of command had been
   practically paralysed. By 7 o'clock the confusion was partially cleared
   and heavy fights at Miodowa street turned into a regular battle in the
   vicinity of both the Arsenal and Igelström's headquarters, as both
   sides struggled to secure both buildings. Three Russian assault groups,
   each of them roughly battalion-strong, attacked the Arsenal from three
   sides: from Tłomackie, along Miodowa Street and from Franciszkańska
   Street. However, all the Russian assaults were repelled with heavy
   losses on both sides and the Poles started a counter-attack towards the
   Russian positions at Miodowa, Senatorska, Leszno and Podwale Streets,
   but with little success.

   The assault on Leszno street was aimed at the Russian battalion
   occupying positions in front of the Carmelite church. In the effect of
   the heavy, several hours long close quarters struggle, the Russian
   forces were forced to retreat to the church itself, where the fights
   continued. Finally the Russian soldiers surrendered and only a small
   detachment composed primarily of officers continued the fight inside
   the church, where most of them perished to the last man. Also the
   Russian battalion under Maj. Titov, stationed at Bonifraterska street,
   had been attacked around 7 o'clock by the Poles. In the effect of a
   four hours long fight the Russians retreated towards the western
   outskirts of the city.

   Meanwhile, at 6 o'clock the Polish 10th Regiment of Foot under Col.
   Filip Hauman left its barracks at Ujazdów to the south of the city
   centre, and started its march towards the Royal Castle. As an effect of
   the chaos in Russian ranks, it reached Nowy Świat and Świętokrzyska
   Streets unopposed by Russian units stationed there, as the Russian
   commanders did not know what to do. It was finally stopped by a Russian
   force at Krakowskie Przedmieście Street, consisting of no less than 600
   men and 5 pieces of artillery, and commanded by Gen. Miłaszewicz. The
   Russian force was strategically dislocated on both sides of the street,
   in both the Casimir's Palace (modern rectorate of the Warsaw
   University) and in front of the Church of the Holy Cross. Col. Hauman
   started lengthy negotiations with the Russian commander asking him to
   allow the Polish forces to pass. However, the negotiations were finally
   broken and at 8 o'clock the Polish regiment assaulted the Russian
   positions. After a skirmish that ensued the Polish unit was partially
   dispersed and had to retreat. Parts of the unit under Maj. Stanisław
   Lipnicki retreated to the Dominican Church, where the fights continued.
   Other troop under Lt. Sypniewski broke through to Branicki's Palace,
   yet others found their way further towards the Old Town, outflanking
   the Russians. Because of that, the Russian infantry under Gen.
   Miłaszewicz and a small cavalry force under Prince Gagarin, though
   victorious, found themselves under crossfire and surrounded. In
   addition, a small yet loud militia force under Jan Kiliński appeared on
   their rear and all of the Polish units in the area assaulted the
   Russians from all directions, which resulted in almost complete
   destruction of the Russian units. General Miłaszewicz himself was
   wounded as he was trying to retreat with the remnants of his force
   towards the Casimir's Palace, while Prince Gagarin retreated with some
   cavalrymen towards the Saxon Garden, where they were ambushed by the
   civilians and killed almost to the last man. The 10th Regiment then
   proceeded towards the Castle Square, where it took part in the fights
   against smaller Russian forces in the Old Town.

Fights in the city centre

   Fighting at Miodowa Street on Krakowskie Przedmieście, sketch by Jan
   Piotr Norblin.
   Enlarge
   Fighting at Miodowa Street on Krakowskie Przedmieście, sketch by Jan
   Piotr Norblin.

   The victory of the 10th Regiment marked a turning point of the
   uprising, as it broke the morale of the Russian forces. After noon the
   fights in front of Igelström's headquarters, at Miodowa street and for
   the Arsenal continued as both sides drew reinforcements from all parts
   of the town. Russian units there put up the strongest defense and
   although they were forced to retreat in the direction of the Franciscan
   church, they repelled Polish early attacks and captured Krasiński's
   Palace which Poles attempted to use to take them under crossfire. At
   the same time the palace's garden remained in Polish hands and heavy
   fights spread to that area as well. In other parts of the city smaller
   Russian forces defended themselves in isolated manors, as was the case
   of Szanowski's house at the Vistula in the borough of Powiśle, where a
   small Russian troop offered fierce resistance against the 10th Regiment
   until late afternoon. Nearby, a Russian force under Maj. Mayer,
   consisting of roughly two companies and armed with two cannons,
   fortified itself in the Kwieciński's Baths, where it defended itself
   for several hours. After repeated charges by the 10th Regiment, the
   Russian commander was left with no more than 80 men, with whom he
   retreated to the other side of the river.

   In the meantime, the king, together with some members of the Targowica
   Confederation took refuge in the Warsaw Castle (among them were Piotr
   Ożarowski, Józef Ankwicz, Great Crown Marshall Fryderyk Józef Moszyński
   and king's brother Kazimierz Poniatowski). From there they tried to
   restore peace, but without any success. Poniatowski nominated two
   trusted people to take command of the troops: Ignacy Wyssogota
   Zakrzewski became the mayor of Warsaw, and general Stanisław
   Mokronowski became the commander-in-chief of the Warsaw troops, but
   both quickly decided to support the uprising.
   Brühl's Palace on an old postcard
   Enlarge
   Brühl's Palace on an old postcard

   At the same time more than half of the Russian forces were amassed by
   Gen. Ivan Novitskiy at the western end of the Jerusalem Avenue. Roughly
   4000 men were withdrawn there without a single shot fired. Among the
   units rallied there were units that were to secure the entire southern
   part of Warsaw, including forces under Lt.Col. Kasztoliński and von
   Klugen, parts of Igelström's personal guard and the remnants of the
   force to take part in the battle against the 10th Regiment, commanded
   by Maj. Bago. Novitskiy, after several hours of wavering, finally
   organized a relief force of roughly 3000 men and 10 cannons, and
   started a march towards the city centre. The column crossed
   Marszałkowska Street unopposed and reached the Saxon Square. There it
   was met by a negligible unit of not more than 100 civilians armed with
   a single 6 pounder cannon, commanded by Captain of Artillery Jacek
   Drozdowski. The Polish unit opened fire from its' single cannon and
   started gradually retreating across the square towards the Brühl's
   Palace on its' northern edge, firing all the way. At the same time the
   Russian commander did not issue any orders and his column simply
   stopped under fire. Although much inferior in both numbers, training
   and equipment, Drozdowski's unit was not attacked by the Russian force,
   as Novitskiy finally lost control over his troops. The Russian soldiers
   broke their ranks and seized the undefended Saxon Palace, where they
   seized the cellars full of alcohol. The Poles continued to shell them
   with artillery fire for almost 3 hours, without being attacked.
   Finally, when a company of the 10th Regiment returning from Powiśle
   appeared at Królewska Street, the Russians started a disorganized
   retreat towards the Jerusalem Avenue, leaving Igelström to his own
   fate.
   Assault on the Russian Embassy, sketch by Jan Piotr Norblin.
   Enlarge
   Assault on the Russian Embassy, sketch by Jan Piotr Norblin.

   The retreat of the Russian unit allowed the Poles to repel other
   assaults of Russian forces as well, including the attack of roughly
   1000 men from the Warsaw's New Town towards the northern gate of the
   Old Town. Although the Russian force finally managed to break through
   to the Old Town, it lost all of its guns and more than 50% of men. Also
   the repeated assaults on the Arsenal from Miodowa Street, commanded by
   Gen. Tishchev, were repelled. The Russians, approaching in three
   columns, did not coordinate their manoeuvres, which allowed the Polish
   crew to deal with them separately, one by one. The first column under
   Tishchev approached the Arsenal at 3 o'clock from Miodowa street.
   Although one of the turrets of the building exploded, the Poles managed
   to repel the assault in half an hour, before the Russians gathered
   reinforcements. The second Russian column approached the Arsenal
   through the Krasińskis' Garden, but was stopped by a massed fire from
   several cannons, hidden in the bushes. The third Russian battalion
   commanded by Tishchev personally approached the Arsenal from the West,
   along the Leszno street, where it was stopped by the Royal Guard. After
   a fierce fight Tishchev was heavily wounded (a cannon ball ripped his
   leg off) and died of wounds soon afterwards, while the remainder of his
   force surrendered to the Poles.

   Under such circumstances the Poles started a counter-attack aimed at
   capturing Igelström's palace and the positions of the forces he managed
   to gather around him. Among them was a battalion of Johann Jakob
   Pistor, a battalion drawn from Marywil (commanded by Col. Parfyeniev),
   a battalion of the famed Siberian Regiment and some cavalry under
   Brigadier Baur. All but Parfyenev's men were previously involved in the
   failed assaults at the Arsenal and towards the Royal Castle, and all
   were already battle-hardened. However, as the Poles managed to seize
   several buildings along the Senatorska street (opposite the palace) and
   started firing at the Russians from the windows, the Russians could not
   reorganize their ranks and had to hide in the palace and the nearby
   Capuchin's Church. Before 4 o'clock the Działyński's Regiment reached
   Senatorska street and started a frontal assault on the palace, but as
   bloodily repelled by the Russian defenders. However, constant fire from
   the windows and roofs of nearby houses prevented them from mounting a
   counter-attack and both sides reached a stalemate. Because of that
   Igelström was left with little option but to await reinforcements from
   the outside, which however did not happen. After dark a small unit
   under Major Titov broke through to Igelström, but his force was not
   strong enough to break the stalemate.

   Unable to reach the palace, the Poles assaulted the Russian positions
   in front of the Capuchin's church and monastery. The Russians withdrew
   to the courtyard, from where the fights spread to the entire monastery.
   The Poles managed to secure the courtyard and place a single cannon
   there, which allowed them to storm the monastery, but fierce hand to
   hand fights, with heavy losses on both sides, continued until late
   evening. In the coming night, some of smaller Russian units lost
   cohesion and attempted to retreat on their own. Many soldiers engaged
   in looting at that time, and Krasiński's Palace was among the most
   prominent buildings looted by the soldiers during the Uprising. This
   marked the first day of the uprising.

Second day

   Document of accession of the city of Warsaw to Kościuszko Uprising,
   signed on April 19th
   Enlarge
   Document of accession of the city of Warsaw to Kościuszko Uprising,
   signed on April 19th

   Overnight the fights in various parts of the city continued. The
   isolated Russian units defended themselves in houses in various parts
   of the city. In the early morning of April 18, Mokronowski decided to
   concentrate on the main remaining Russian stronghold in the city - the
   embassy at Miodowa street. The Polish units, reinforced with the
   civilian volunteers, continued the repeated assaults on the building's
   courtyard. Although all were bloodily repelled, the Russians suffered
   significant losses as well, particularly from constant fire from
   buildings located to the other side of the street. The Russians managed
   to hold a small area delimited by Miodowa and Długa Streets, as well as
   the Krasińskis Square and palace. Believing further defence of his
   palace was futile, Igelström left there only a token force of roughly
   400 men and withdrew to the Krasiński Palace. He planned to prepare a
   sortie in order to break through from the city centre, but all
   surrounding streets were filled with Polish troops and cannons.

   Igelström, unable to command most his troops since the uprising
   started, requested permission to capitulate. After being granted a
   truce, he withdrew to the Prussian camp near Warsaw in Powązki, from
   were they retreated to Zakroczym. The exact number of troops that
   managed to retreat with Igelström is unknown and varies from source to
   source, but most estimates place it at between 300 and 400 men and 8
   cannons. As soon as Igelström's retreat was discovered, the assault on
   Russian positions was resumed. The remaining troops defending the
   embassy and covering Igelström's retreat eventually run out of
   ammunition and their positions were overran by 5 o'clock in the evening
   by the forces of the 10th Regiment under Kalinowski, aided by
   Kiliński's militia. Polish forces released political prisoners held by
   Russians in the basement and were able to secure most of the embassy's
   secret archive, covering all of Russian secret operations in Poland
   since 1763. Among the prominent captives taken during the final fights
   for the embassy was Colonel Parfyeniev. Among the captured documents
   were the lists of various Polish officials on Russian payroll; many of
   them were later executed. This Polish victory marked an end of the
   uprising, with the last Russian units either routed or in retreat. The
   last small spots of Russian resistance were eliminated or surrendered
   on that day.

Aftermath

   Several factors contributed to the Russian defeat and losses. Igelström
   had reduced the size of the garrison, sending some of units to deal
   with Kościuszko's main forces, and posted his remaining regiments so
   incompetently that they were easily cut off from each other and
   overwhelmed by the Polish forces. Finally, from the onset of the
   insurrection, the Polish forces were aided by the civilian population
   and had surprise on their side and, as the crowd captured the city
   Arsenal, Russian soldiers found themselves under attack throughout the
   city.

   The uprising in Warsaw marked a significant victory for the entire
   cause of Kościuszko, as it proved that the Russian forces could be
   beaten. The echoes of the victory in Warsaw spread across the country.
   Mokronowski became military commander in Warsaw and Ignacy Zakrzewski
   became the city's president. General Mokronowski repeatedly begged the
   King, who was at the same time his cousin, to support the uprising.
   However, the king refused and the power in the city was seized by the
   Provisional Supreme Council ( Polish: Rada Najwyższa Tymczasowa)
   composed of Zakrzewski, Mokronowski, Józef Wybicki and Kiliński.
   Mokronowski was soon removed from the council for his opposition to
   Kościuszko. On May 27 the council was dissolved and passed the power to
   Kościuszko's Supreme National Council ( Polish: Rada Najwyższa
   Narodowa). On 9 May four prominent supporters of the Targowica
   Confederation, including Józef Ankwicz, Józef Kossakowski, hetman Piotr
   Ożarowski and hetman Józef Zabiełło, were sentenced to death by the
   Insurrectionary Court and were hanged in Warsaw. A few weeks later, on
   28 June, an angry mob stormed the prisons and hanged other supporters
   of Targowica, including bishop Ignacy Jakub Massalski, prince Antoni
   Stanisław Czetwertyński-Światopełk, ambassador Karol Boscamp-Lasopolski
   and others. The National Militia of Warsaw grew to over 20,000 men at
   arms and constituted a large part of the Polish Army fighting against
   Russia.
   Hanging of traitors at Warsaw's Old Town Market, a contemporary
   painting by Jan Piotr Norblin. The supporters of the Targowica
   Confederation, responsible for the second partition of Poland, became
   public enemies. If they could not be captured, their portraits were
   hanged instead.
   Enlarge
   Hanging of traitors at Warsaw's Old Town Market, a contemporary
   painting by Jan Piotr Norblin. The supporters of the Targowica
   Confederation, responsible for the second partition of Poland, became
   public enemies. If they could not be captured, their portraits were
   hanged instead.

   The uprising was also openly commented upon in Russia. As a result of
   this defeat, Igelström was recalled in disgrace, although he would
   redeem himself in future fighting. In the 19th century the Uprising of
   1794 was presented in a bad light in Imperial Russian historiography,
   as the fights in Warsaw were referred to as a " massacre" of unarmed
   Russian soldiers by the Warsaw's mob. Russian historian Platon
   Zhukovich marked his relation of the events with many horrific, yet
   counter-factual descriptions of unarmed Russian soldiers being
   slaughtered in an Orthodox church during the Eucharist, even though
   there was no Orthodox church in Warsaw at that time, the participation
   of Kiliński's militia was seriously overrated and no other source
   confirms the thesis that the Russian garrison was unarmed. The defeat
   in this battle is sometimes seen as one of the reasons for the massacre
   of Praga, in which the Russian forces murdered between 10,000 and
   20,000 civilians of Warsaw upon their reconquest of the city later that
   year.
   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Warsaw_Uprising_%281794%29"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
