   #copyright

Water polo

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Sports

   Water polo is a team water sport, which can be best described as a
   combination of swimming, football (soccer), basketball, ice hockey,
   rugby and wrestling. A team consists of six field players and one
   goalkeeper. The goal of the game resembles that of football (soccer):
   to score as many goals as possible, each goal being worth one point.

   A perfect water polo athlete can be best described as having the
   over-arm accuracy of a baseball pitcher, the vertical leap of a
   volleyball player, the toughness of a rugby player, the endurance of a
   cross-country runner and the strategy of a chess player.
   Greece-Hungary in Naples, Italy
   Enlarge
   Greece-Hungary in Naples, Italy

Basic skills

     * Swimming: Water polo is a team water sport, so swimming is a
       necessary skill. Field players must swim end to end of a 30 meter
       pool non-stop many times during a game. The freestyle stroke used
       in water polo differs from the usual swimming style in that water
       polo players swim with the head out of water at all times to
       observe the field. Backstroke is also needed to see the ball and
       who has it if the players are behind you. the goalkeeper also uses
       backstroke as a way of keeping track of the ball after passing it.

   Goalie eggbeatering up to block a shot.
   Enlarge
   Goalie eggbeatering up to block a shot.
     * Ball handling skills: As all field players are only allowed to
       touch the ball with one hand at a time, they must develop the
       ability to catch and throw the ball with either hand. Experienced
       water polo players can catch and release a pass or shot with a
       single motion. The goalkeeper gets to use two hands on the ball.
       However, it is very important for them to know how to throw and
       catch with one hand.

     * Treading water: The most common form of water treading is generally
       referred to as the "egg-beater", named because the circular
       movement of the legs resembles the motion of an egg-beater. The
       advantage of the egg-beater is that it allows the player to
       maintain a constant position to the water level, as opposed to
       other forms of treading water such as the scissor kick, which
       result in the player bobbing up and down. Egg beater also uses less
       energy than the scissor kick does. Also, by kicking faster for a
       brief period the player can get high out of the water (as high as
       their suit—below their waistline) for a block, pass, or shot.

     * Reflexes and Awareness: At higher levels of the sport the pace of
       play rapidly increases and it is imperative that athletes keep up.
       Not only is swimming and fitness a necessity but mental preparation
       is a must. The most accomplished water polo players are constantly
       aware of their surroundings and can change tempo. Furthermore,
       awareness is a major advantage in scoring, even if a player lacks
       the speed of his opponent.

Overview

   Seven players from each team (six field players and a goalkeeper) are
   allowed in the playing area of the pool during game play. Visiting team
   field players wear numbered white caps, and home team field players
   wear dark caps; both goalies wear quartered red caps, numbered "1".
   Both teams may substitute players. During game play, players enter and
   exit in front of their team bench; when play is stopped, they may enter
   or exit anywhere.

   The game is divided into four periods; the length depends on the level
   of play:
          Level of play             Team level      Time each period Authority
   FINA Water Polo World League National            8 minutes        FINA
   Olympics                     National            8 minutes        IOC
   US College                   Varsity             8 minutes        NCAA
   US High School               Varsity             7 minutes        NFHS
   US High School               Junior Varsity      6 minutes        NFHS
   US High School               Freshman/ Sophomore 5 minutes        NFHS

   The game clock is stopped when the ball is not 'in play' e.g. between a
   foul being committed and the free throw being taken and between a goal
   being scored and the restart. This causes the average quarter to last
   around 12 minutes 'real time'. A team may not have possession of the
   ball for longer than 30 seconds (35 in high school level)without
   shooting for the goal or an opponent being ejected. After this time,
   possession passes to the other team. However, if a team shoots the ball
   within the allotted 30 seconds, and regains control of the ball, the
   shot clock is reset to 30 seconds. Each team may call two one minute
   timeouts in the four periods of regulation play, and one timeout if the
   game goes into overtime. During game play, only the team in possession
   of the ball may call a timeout.

   Dimensions of the water polo pool are not fixed and can vary between 20
   x 10 and 30 x 20 meters. Minimum water depth must be least 1.8 meters
   (6 feet), but this is often waived for age group or high school games
   if such a facility is unavailable. The goals are 3 meters wide and 90
   centimetres high. Water polo balls are generally yellow and of varying
   size and weight for juniors, women and men. The middle of the pool
   (analogous to the 50 yard line in football) is designated by a white
   line. In the past, the pool was divided by 7 and 4 meter lines
   (distance out from the goal line). This has been merged into one 5
   meter line since the 2005-2006 season. Along the side of the pool, the
   centre area between the 5 meter lines is marked by a green line. The
   "five meters" line is where penalties are shot and it is designated by
   a yellow line. The "two meters" line is designated with a red line and
   no player of the attacking team can be inside this line without the
   ball.

   One player on each team is designated the goalkeeper, assigned to
   deflect or catch any shots at goal. The goalkeeper is the only player
   who can touch the ball with both hands at any time, and, in a shallow
   pool, the only player allowed to stand on the bottom.

   Players can move the ball by throwing it to a teammate or swimming
   while pushing the ball in front of them. Players are not permitted to
   push the ball underwater when being tackled, or push or hold an
   opposition player unless that player is holding the ball. Fouls are
   very common, and result in a free throw during which the player cannot
   shoot at the goal unless beyond the "5 meter" line. Water polo players
   need remarkable stamina due to the considerable amount of holding and
   pushing that occurs during the game, some allowed, some unseen or
   ignored by the referees (usually underwater). Water polo is one of the
   most physically demanding of all sports; action is continuous, and
   players commonly swim 3 kilometers or more during four periods of play.

   Water polo is a game requiring excellent eye-hand coordination. The
   ability to handle and pass the ball flawlessly separates the good teams
   from the great teams. A pass thrown to a field position player is
   preferably a "dry pass" (meaning the ball does not touch the water) and
   allows for optimal speed when passing from player to player with fluid
   motion between catching and throwing. A "wet pass" is a deliberate pass
   into the water, just out of reach of the offensive player nearest the
   goal (the "hole set") and his defender. The hole-set can then lunge
   towards the ball and out of the water to make a shot or pass. A
   backhanded shot from the hole set is very common. This is a very
   effective offensive strategy if a team has a strong hole-set.

   Scoring in water polo can be quite unique compared to other sports. For
   example, a "skip" shot is fired intentionally at the water with
   considerable force so it will bounce back up. The ball usually hits the
   water within a metre of the net, where the goalie cannot anticipate and
   block the shot. Another shot, called a "lob" is thrown with a large
   vertical arc. Often these shots are more difficult to stop than a
   faster shot, as they are usually thrown across a net at such an angle
   the goalie must not only shift position from one side of the net to the
   other quickly, but also at the same time propel out of the water more
   than for other shots. Pump faking is effective when using any kind of
   shot. The player gets in the position to shoot but stops halfway
   through his motion, causing the defending goalkeeper to commit too
   early to block the subsequent shot.

   The referee's whistle for a foul is heard much more in water polo than
   in other sports. A defender will often foul the player with the ball as
   a tactic to disrupt the opponent's ball movement. Play continues
   uninterrupted in most cases, but the attacker must now pass the ball
   instead of advancing or taking a shot. However, as in ice hockey, a
   player caught committing a major foul, is sent out of the playing area
   with his team a man-down for 20 seconds, but may return sooner if a
   goal is scored or his team regains possession. If the foul is an
   unsportsmanlike act, however, the player is ejected for the remainder
   of the game with substitution by another teammate. A player can also be
   ejected for arguing with the referees. During a man up situation
   resulting from an ejection foul, the attacking team can expect to
   score, by adopting a 4-2 or 3-3 formation and passing around to move
   the goalkeeper out of position. A player that has been ejected three
   times must sit out the whole match with substitution.

Positions

   There are six field player positions and a goalkeeper on each team.
   Unlike most common team sports, there is no positional play; field
   players often will fill several positions throughout the game as
   situations demand. In high school most teams assign positions to
   certain players and it is less likely for the situations to switch due
   to the lower level of competitiveness. Players who are skilled at
   several offensive or defensive roles are called utility players.
   Utility players tend to come off of the bench, though this isn't
   absolute. An example is Thalia Munro, who played for UCLA and the US
   National Team, among the team leaders in goals, steals and assists.
   Certain body types are more suited for particular positions, and
   left-handed players are especially coveted, allowing teams to launch
   2-sided attacks.

Offense

   The offensive positions include: 1 center forward (a.k.a. hole set,
   2-meter offense or pit-man), 2 wings, 2 drivers (also called "flats"),
   and 1 "point" man. The point man directs the attack, and on defense is
   known as hole D or 2-meter defense, defending the opposing team's
   centre forward. The wings, drivers and point are often called the
   perimeter players. The most basic positional set up is known as a 3-3,
   due to the fact that there are two lines both containing 3 players.
   Another set up is known as a umbrella, or mushroom, because the
   perimeter players form the shape of an umbrella or mushroom around the
   goal with the center forward as the handle or stalk. The center
   forward, known by players as hole set or 2-meter is the centre player
   in the middle of the umbrella who is closest to the opposing teams
   goal. This player sets up in front of the opposing team's goalie and
   usually scores the most individually or contributes most often to
   initiating plays. The five perimeter players often swim the most and
   interchange their positions several times during a single offensive
   play. They contribute to the actual execution of plays, and
   cumulatively score the most points for the team. The point player's
   position provides opportunities to pass to teammates and communicate
   among the offense, like the point guard in basketball. The centre
   forward also plays a big role offensively because they sit closest to
   the goal and usually attempt "backhands" as frequently as possible.

Defense

   Defensive positions are often the same, but just switched from offense
   to defense. Defense can be played man-to-man or zone. The opposing
   center forward (hole set) is often double-teamed because of his
   position closest to the goal. From the centre forward position, a
   backhand shot is difficult to defend because these shots are explosive
   and directed into the corners of the goal. In zone defense, players
   defend an area of the pool. A strong shooter or good passer can be
   double-teamed by the defense, known as "sloughing".

Goalie

   The goalkeeper is given several privileges above those of the other
   players, but only if he or she is within the five meter area in front
   of his goal:

               o The ability to touch the ball with two hands.
               o The ability to strike the ball with a clenched fist.
               o The ability to touch the bottom of the pool. (pool depth
                 permitting)

   The goalkeeper also has one limitation that other players do not have:
   he or she cannot cross the half-distance line.

Offense strategy

Starting play

   At the start of each period, teams line up on their own goal line. At
   the referee's whistle, both teams swim to midpoint of the field (known
   as the sprint or the swim-off); the referee drops the ball near the
   side of the pool. The first team to recover the ball becomes the
   attacker until a goal is scored or the defenders recover the ball.
   After a goal is scored, the teams line up anywhere within their halves
   of play, but usually along the midpoint of the pool. Play resumes when
   the team not scoring the goal puts the ball in play by passing it to a
   teammate.

Advancing the ball

   When the offense takes possession of the ball, the strategy is to
   advance the ball down the field of play and to score a goal. Players
   can move the ball by throwing it to a teammate or swimming while
   pushing the ball in front of them (" dribbling"). If an attacker uses
   his arm to push away a defending player and free up space for a pass or
   shot, the referee will rule a turnover and the defense will take
   possession of the ball. If an attacker advances inside the 2-meter line
   without the ball or before the ball is inside the 2-meter area, he is
   ruled off side and the ball is turned over to the defense. This is
   often overlooked if the attacker is well to the side of the pool or
   when the ball is at the other side of the pool.

Setting the ball

   The key to the offense is to accurately pass (or "set") the ball into
   the centre forward or hole set, positioned directly in front of the
   goal (the hole). The point player normally starts with the ball and
   throws the hole set a ""wet pass"" that hits the water just outside of
   the hole set's reach. The hole set attempts to take possession of the
   ball, to shoot at the goal, or to draw a foul from his defender. A
   minor foul is called if his defender (called the "hole D") attempts to
   impede movement before the hole set has possession. The referee
   indicates the foul with one short whistle blow and points one hand to
   the spot of the foul and the other hand in the direction of the attack
   of the team to whom the free throw has been awarded. The hole set then
   has a "reasonable amount of time" (typically a three seconds) to
   re-commence play by making a free pass to one of the other players. The
   defensive team cannot hinder the hole set until the free throw has been
   taken, but the hole set cannot shoot a goal once the foul has been
   awarded until the ball has been played by at least one other player. If
   the hole set attempts a goal without the free throw, the goal is not
   counted and the defense takes possession of the ball, unless the shot
   is made outside the 5-meter line. As soon as the hole set has a free
   pass, the other attacking players attempt to swim or drive away from
   their defenders towards the goal. The players at the flat position will
   attempt to set a screen (also known as a pick) for the driver. If a
   driver gets free from a defender, the player calls for the pass from
   the hole set and attempts a shot at the goal.
   A classic 4-2 man-up situation. The attacking white team has 4 players
   positioned on 2 metres, and 2 players positioned on 4 metres. The 5
   outfield defending blue players try to block shots and prevent a goal
   being scored for the 20 seconds of man-down play. In the top left
   corner, the shot clock can be seen, showing 28 seconds remaining in the
   white attack.
   Enlarge
   A classic 4-2 man-up situation. The attacking white team has 4 players
   positioned on 2 metres, and 2 players positioned on 4 metres. The 5
   outfield defending blue players try to block shots and prevent a goal
   being scored for the 20 seconds of man-down play. In the top left
   corner, the shot clock can be seen, showing 28 seconds remaining in the
   white attack.

Man up (6 on 5)

   If a defender interferes with a free throw, holds or sinks an attacker
   who is not in possession or splashes water into the face of an
   opponent, the defensive player is excluded from the game for twenty
   seconds (informally called 'kicked out' or a major foul). The attacking
   team typically positions 4 players on the 2 meter line, and 2 players
   on 5 meter line (4-2), passing the ball around until an open player
   attempts a shot. The 5 defending players try to pressure the attackers,
   block shots and prevent a goal being scored for the 20 seconds while
   they are a player down. The other players can only block the ball with
   one hand to help the goalie. The defensive player is allowed to return
   immediately if the offense scores or if the defense recovers the ball
   before the twenty seconds expires.

Five meter penalty

   If a defender commits a foul within the five meter area that prevents a
   likely goal, the attacking team is awarded a penalty throw or shot. An
   attacking player lines up on the five meter line in front of the
   opposing goal. No other player may be in front of him or within 2
   meters of his position. The defending goalkeeper must be between the
   goal posts. The referee signals with a whistle and by lowering his arm,
   and the player taking the penalty shot must immediately throw the ball
   with an uninterrupted motion toward the goal. Penalty shots are often
   successful, but the goalkeeper who blocks a "five meter" can expect a
   chorus of cheers from the stands.

Scoring

   A shot is successful if the ball completely passes between the goal
   posts and underneath the crossbar. If a shot bounces off a goal post
   back into the field of play, the ball is rebounded by the players and
   the shot clock is reset. If the shot goes outside the goal and on to
   the deck (outside the field of play) then the ball is automatically
   recovered by the defense. If the goalie, however, is the last to touch
   the ball before it goes on to the deck then the offense receives the
   ball at the two meter line for a free throw much like a corner kick in
   soccer. The defense sometimes "counterattacks" when the goalie blocks a
   shot, gains control of the ball, and makes a long pass to a teammate at
   the opposite end of the pool. If a player stays on his offensive end of
   the pool when the rest of his team is defending, he is said to be
   cherry-picking or sea gulling.

Overtime

   If the score is tied at the end of regulation play, two overtime
   periods of three minutes each are played. If the tie is not broken
   after two overtime periods, a penalty shootout will determine the
   winner. Five players and a goalkeeper are chosen by the coaches of each
   team. Players shoot from the 5 meter line alternately at either end of
   the pool in turn until all five have taken a shot. If the score is
   still tied, the same players shoot alternately until one team misses
   and the other scores. Overtime periods are common in tournament play
   due to the high level of skill of these superior teams; Team USA
   defeated Hungary in the 2004 Women's Water Polo World League Super
   Final when US goalie Jackie Frank made 2 stops on penalty shots.

Defense strategy

   Water Polo Defense: A defender may only hold, block or pull an opponent
   who is touching or holding the ball.
   Enlarge
   Water Polo Defense: A defender may only hold, block or pull an opponent
   who is touching or holding the ball.

   On defense, the players work to regain possession of the ball and
   prevent a goal. The defense attempts to knock away or steal the ball
   from the offense or commit a foul in order to stop an offensive player
   from taking a goal shot. The defender attempts to stay between the
   attacker and the goal, a position known as inside water.

Fouls

   If an offensive player, such as the hole set (center forward), has
   possession of the ball in front of the goal, the defensive player tries
   to steal the ball or keep the centre from shooting or passing. If the
   defender cannot, he may intentionally commit a foul. The hole set then
   has a free throw but must pass the ball off to another offensive
   player, rather than making a shot at the goal. Defensive perimeter
   players may also intentionally cause a minor foul and then move toward
   the goal, away from their attacker, who must take a free throw. This
   technique, called sloughing, allows the defense an opportunity to
   double-team the hole set and possibly steal the inbound pass. The
   referee may refrain from declaring a foul, if in his judgment this
   would give the advantage to the offender's team. This is known as the
   Advantage Rule.

   Minor fouls (ordinary fouls) occur when a player impedes or otherwise
   prevents the free movement of an opponent who is not holding the ball,
   including swimming on the opponent’s shoulders, back or legs. The most
   common is when a player reaches over the shoulder of an opponent in
   order to knock the ball away while in the process hindering the
   opponent. Offensive players may be called for a foul by pushing off a
   defender to provide space for a pass or shot. The referee indicates the
   foul with one short whistle blow and points one hand to the spot of the
   foul and the other hand in the direction of the attacking team, who
   retain possession. The attacker must make a free pass without undue
   delay to another offensive player. If the foul has been committed
   outside the 5-meter line, the offensive player may also attempt a
   direct shot on goal, but the shot must be a clean one. If the offensive
   player fakes a shot and then shoots the ball, it is considered a
   turnover. If the same defender repetitively makes minor fouls, referees
   will exclude that player for 20 seconds. To avoid an ejection, the hole
   defender may foul twice, and then have a wing defender switch with him
   so that the defense can continue to foul the hole man without provoking
   an exclusion foul. The rule was altered to allow repeated fouls without
   exclusions, but is often still enforced by referees.

   Major fouls (exclusion fouls) are committed when the defensive player
   pulls the offensive player away from the ball before the offensive
   player has had a chance to take possession of the ball. This includes
   dunking (sinking in FINA rules), intentional splashing, pulling back,
   or otherwise preventing the offensive player from preserving his
   advantage. A referee signals a major foul by two short whistle bursts
   and indicates that the player must leave the field of play and move to
   the penalty area for twenty seconds. The referee will first point to
   the player who commits the foul and will blow the whistle. then they
   will point to the ejection corner and blow the whistle again. The
   player must move to the penalty area without impacting the natural game
   play. If the player does not leave the field of play, the player will
   be kicked out for the remaining time of the game with substitution. The
   remaining five defenders, to cover the six attackers on a man up
   situation, usually set up in a zone defense in front of their goal. The
   attacking team can expect to score, by adopting a 4-2 or 3-3 formation,
   and moving the goalkeeper out of position. A player that has been
   ejected three times must sit out the whole match with substitution,
   much like the six personal fouls in basketball.

   A misconduct foul is a unsportsmanlike act. For unacceptable language,
   violent or persistent fouls, taking part in the game after being
   excluded or showing disrespect, a player is ejected for the remainder
   of the game with substitution after 20 seconds have elapsed. This type
   of foul is often called a roll because the referee signals the foul by
   rolling his hands around one another. If a player commits a violent
   foul with intention to harm, the player is ejected from the game
   without substitution. The opponents are awarded a penalty shot, and the
   ejected player's team plays one man down for the next four minutes of
   game time. This type of foul is called a brutality and is signaled by
   the referee by crossing the arms in the form of an X.

   A penalty shot is awarded when a major foul is committed inside the
   5-meter line and the offensive player had an opportunity to score, or a
   goal was prevented by the foul. This usually means that the offensive
   player is in front of and facing the goal. The penalty shot is
   attempted from 5 meters. Any defenders flanking the player taking the
   shot must be no closer than 2 meters. The goalkeeper must be on the
   goal line. In high school rules, the goalie must keep their hips even
   with the goal line. They are allowed to lean their upper body over in
   order to kick up higher. the referee blows the whistle and the player
   must shoot immediately.

Goalkeeper

   Even with good backup from the rest of the defenders, stopping attacks
   can prove very difficult if the goalkeeper remains in the middle of the
   goal. The most defensible position is along a semicircular line
   connecting the goalposts and extending out in the centre. Depending on
   the ball carrier's location, the goalie is positioned along that
   semicircle roughly a meter out of the goal to reduce the attacker's
   shooting angle. The goalkeeper stops using his or her hands to tread
   water once the opponent enters the 7 metre mark and starts treading
   water much harder, elevating the body, arms ready for the block.
   Finally the goalie tries to block the ball down, which is often hard
   for the longer reaches, but prevents an offensive rebound and second
   shot. As is the case with other defensive players, a goalkeeper who
   aggressively fouls an attacker in position to score can be charged with
   a penalty shot for the other team. The goalkeeper can also be ejected
   for twenty seconds if a major foul is committed.

Ball handling skills

Passing

   There are two basic passes in waterpolo: the "dry" pass and the "wet"
   pass. When passing to a field position player, a dry pass (meaning the
   ball doesn't touch the water) is thrown a few inches above the head of
   the catching player and to the left or right side depending on the
   receiver's dominant hand. The dry pass allows for optimal speed when
   passing from player to player, who do not have to pick the ball up out
   of the water to throw. A fluid motion between catching and throwing is
   the goal. An expert thrower's hand creates no spin, making the ball
   easier to catch. In order for the player to catch the ball above their
   head, they must egg beater harder which brings their body higher out of
   the water.

   The wet pass is a deliberate pass into the water. This is usually done
   when making a pass into the hole set. To make a successful wet pass,
   the ball lands just out of reach of the offensive player and defensive
   team. The hole set can then lunge towards the ball and out of the water
   to make a shot or pass. This is a very effective offensive strategy if
   a team has a strong hole set. The only thing the passer must look out
   for is a possible double-team on the hole set. If that happens the
   player must look for an open player or pass the ball closer to the hole
   set to avoid a turnover.

Shooting

   The Lob Shot
   Enlarge
   The Lob Shot

   Shots usually succeed when the goalie is out of position. At long range
   from the goal, shots are easy for goalkeepers to stop, but closer ones
   are very difficult. Close-range shots tend to be harder to come by
   (since players close to the goalpost are usually under very great
   pressure), but in these situations usually a soft tap-in is enough to
   beat the goalkeeper. Close-range shots may come from the centre-forward
   in open play, utilizing either quick backhand-shots, sweep-shots,
   layout or other creative shooting positions.

   There are three basic outside water shooting techniques. The first is a
   straight forward power shot. Top level water polo players can generate
   ball speeds between 50-90 km/h (30-56 mph). The player propels his body
   out of the water and uses his momentum to shoot the ball into the net.
   Though very powerful, this shot requires the precise targeting. If the
   shot is off the mark, the ball will either be blocked by the goalie or
   rebound off the goal post. Another shooting technique is the bounce
   shot or skip shot. Instead of shooting directly into the net, the
   player throws the ball at an angle directly into the water. If done
   properly and with enough force, the ball will bounce off the water and
   into the goal. The bounce shot usually takes the goalie by surprise.
   But, if done from far enough away the goalie can plan to block the ball
   low on the water instead of bringing the hands up in the air. The lob
   shot is high arching shot intended to pass over the goalie's hands and
   under the crossbar. It is most effective taken from an angle on either
   side of the goal post; this provides a large area behind the goalie
   into which the lob can drop on its downward arc. This shot confuses the
   goalie and usually forces the goalie to kick up out of the water too
   early and miss the block.

   Outside water shots require a player to cease swimming, and usually
   occur outside the 2 meter zone. A player who has inside water and has a
   defender approaching may not want to pause and let his defender catch
   up. In these situations, which can often result from driving after a
   foul has been committed on the hole set or during a close fast break
   counterattack, players may perform an inside water shot. The t-shot or
   bat shot is executed by scooping the ball with the non-dominant hand,
   "loading" the ball to the dominant hand, and propelling the ball
   forward. The pop shot is a quick shot executed by cupping the ball with
   the dominant hand from underneath the ball and releasing it, usually
   into a corner of the goal. This shot is timed with a player's swimming
   stroke, and should flow comfortably from the dribble. Other inside
   water shots include the screw shot, which can likewise be executed
   directly from the stroke, and a spring shot where the player pushes the
   ball slightly into the water (but avoiding a "ball under" foul) and
   then allows a sudden release. While beginning players will have
   difficulty integrating these shots into their stroke, resulting in
   weaker shots as compared to outside water shots, inside water shots by
   experienced players have sufficient force to skip past the goalkeeper.
   One thing the shooter must watch is how close they get to the goalie
   because they can come out of the goal and take the ball.

   Baulking (a kind of pump fake) is effective when using an outside water
   shot. The player gets in the position to shoot but stops halfway
   through. This puts the defense on edge and partially immobilizes the
   goalie by wasting his blocking lunge. This can be repeated until the
   player decides to release the ball. A good baulk takes a great amount
   of hand strength to palm the ball while mimicking the movement of a
   shot.

Game variations

   Inner tube water polo is a style of water polo with the important
   difference that players, excluding the goalkeeper, are required to
   float in inner tubes. By floating in an inner tube players expend less
   energy than traditional water polo players, not having to tread water.
   This allows casual players to enjoy water polo without undertaking the
   intense conditioning required for conventional water polo. This sport
   is predominantly played at universities by intramural coed teams. The
   sport's rules resemble those of water polo, however, with no governing
   body the rules vary across different leagues. For example, while the
   winner is determined by the team which scores the most goals, some
   leagues award one point for a male goal, and two points for a female
   goal, while others award one for either.

   The game was invented in 1969 by now retired UC Davis associate
   athletic director of intramural sports and sport clubs, Gary Colberg.
   Noticing how much fun the water polo team was having, Mr. Colberg
   thought up the idea of using tubes so that people with no experience in
   water polo could still enjoy the game.

History

   The modern game originated as a form of rugby football played in rivers
   and lakes in England and Scotland with a ball constructed of Indian
   rubber. This "water rugby" came to be called "water polo" based on the
   English pronunciation of the Balti word for ball, pulu,

   Men's water polo at the Olympics was the among the first team sports
   introduced at the 1900 games (along with cricket, rugby, football
   (soccer), polo (with horses), rowing and tug of war). Women's water
   polo became an Olympic sport at the 2000 Sydney Olympic Games after
   political protests from the Australian women's team.

   Every 2 to 4 years since 1973, a men's Water Polo World Championship is
   played together with the World Swimming Championship, under the
   auspices of FINA. Women's water polo was added in 1986. A second
   tournament series, the FINA Water Polo World Cup, has been held every
   other year since 1979. In 2002, FINA organized the sport's first
   international league, the FINA Water Polo World League.

Water polo federations, teams, & clubs

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Water_polo"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
