   #copyright

Water Buffalo

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Mammals

                       iWater Buffalo
   A family of Water Buffalo bathing in a sinkhole, Taiwan
   A family of Water Buffalo bathing
   in a sinkhole, Taiwan
                  Scientific classification

   Kingdom:   Animalia
   Phylum:    Chordata
   Class:     Mammalia
   Order:     Artiodactyla
   Family:    Bovidae
   Subfamily: Bovinae
   Genus:     Bubalus
   Species:   B. bubalis

                                Binomial name

   Bubalus bubalis
   ( Kerr, 1792)

   The Water Buffalo is a very large ungulate and a member of the bovine
   subfamily. The Arni or Wild Buffalo survives in the wild in Pakistan,
   India, Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan, Vietnam, China, Philippines, Taiwan,
   Indonesia, and Thailand. The domestic Buffalo are very widespread in
   Asia, South America, North Africa and Europe. They are feral in
   northern Australia. Wild-living populations also exist in much of
   South-east Asia but their origins are uncertain. They may be
   descendants of wild Water Buffalo, formerly domesticated ferals or a
   mixture. In Asia, the population of wild Water Buffalo has become
   sparse, and there is fear that no pure-bred wild water buffalo exists.
   Adult Water Buffalo range in size from 300 kg to 600 kg for the
   domestic bred, but true wild water buffaloes can grow larger. Adult
   females typically weigh around 800 kg, and males up to 1200 kg. The
   average weight of an adult male is 900 kg, and the average height at
   the shoulder is about 1.7m. One distinction between wild buffaloes and
   domesticated version is that the wild species lacks the round belly
   found in domesticated buffalo. Due to interbreeding with feral and
   domestic species, weights can vary greatly even in populations which
   are in in close proximity. Interbreeding with domesticated buffaloes is
   the major cause of extinction of wild buffaloes. Buffaloes are believed
   to have originated in South Asia.

   The classification of the Water Buffalo is uncertain. Some authorities
   list a single species, Bubalus bubalis with three subspecies, the River
   Buffalo (B. bubalis bubalis) of South Asia and the Carabao or Swamp
   Buffalo (B. bubalis carabanesis) of the Philippines and Southeast Asia,
   and the Arni, or Wild Buffalo, (B. bubalis arnee). Others regard these
   as closely-related, but separate, species. The Swamp Buffalo is
   primarily found in the eastern half of Asia and has 48 chromosomes. The
   River Buffalo is mostly found in western half of Asia, and has 50
   chromosomes. Fertile offspring occur between the two. It does not
   readily hybridise with cattle which have 60 chromosomes.

   Milk from both of these animals is used by many human populations, and
   is the traditional raw material for mozzarella cheese and curd due to
   its higher fat content. The chief dairy breed of Buffalo is the Murrah
   breed. Buffalo meat, sometimes called "Carabeef", is often passed off
   as beef in certain regions and is also a major source of export revenue
   for India which has the largest population of buffaloes in the world.
   However, in many Asian regions, buffalo meat is less preferred due to
   its toughness. Water buffalo hide provides a tough and useful leather
   often used for shoes and motorcycle helmets.

Asia

   Water Buffalo in Indonesia
   Enlarge
   Water Buffalo in Indonesia

   Asia is the native home of the water buffalo, with 95% of the world
   population of water buffalo. Many Asian countries depend on the water
   buffalo as its primary bovine species. It is valuable for its meat and
   milk as well as the labour it performs. As of 1992 the Asian population
   was estimated at 141 million. The fat content of buffalo milk is the
   highest amongst farm animals and the butterfat is a major source of
   ghee in some Asian countries. Its success in Asia is evident by its
   extensive range. Both variants occur in Asia. River Buffalo are found
   in elevations of 2,800 m in Nepal, and Swamp Buffalo are found
   throughout the lowland tropics. Part of their success is due to their
   ability to thrive on poor foodstuffs and yet be valuable economically.
   Moreover they are much better suited to plough the muddy paddy fields
   as they are better adapted than common cattle ( Bos taurus) to move in
   swamps.

   In the wild, very few pockets of buffalo exist. The Indian wild buffalo
   is found in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan and Thailand.
   This buffalo has the largest horns of any living animal. The average
   spread is about 1 m (3 ft 3 in), but one bull shot in 1955 had horns
   measuring 4.24 m (13 ft 11 in) from tip to tip along the outside curve
   across the forehead. These massive battering rams protect the beast in
   the wild efficiently enough that even its predator seldom attacks a
   fully grown male. Tiger is their only predator, which can kill a
   full-grown male weighing 1000-1200kg, but only an experienced tiger
   will take them on, often by hamstringing their hind legs first. When
   faced by a tiger, they form a line facing the predator and charge with
   noses out and horns laid back. Like its other family members, the
   tamaraw and the anoa, the wild buffalo is a very dangerous animal known
   to charge without being provoked. Together with its large size, this
   bad temper makes wild water buffalo the most dangerous bovine on earth
   to humans. It is generally found in swamplands and grass jungles and
   moves in herds.

   Today, the estimated population of wild water buffaloes are about 4000,
   but, this number takes into account all wild population, including
   feral herds and hybrid buffaloes. In fact, it is possible that no true
   wild specimens exist anymore.

   The water buffalo, or " Carabao," is the national animal of the
   Philippines.

Australia

   Introduced into the Northern Territory early in the 19th century as a
   beast of burden, it quickly escaped and is now feral. As a result of
   its feral status it may be hunted. Melville Island is a popular hunting
   location, where a steady population of up to 4,000 individuals exist.
   Buffaloes are also found in Arnhem Land and the Top End. Safari outfits
   run out of Darwin to Melville Island and other locations in the Top End
   often with the use of bush pilots. The government has unsuccessfully
   attempted several eradication programs.

   The buffaloes live mainly in freshwater marshes and billabongs, and
   their range can be quite expansive during the Wet season. They have
   developed a different appearance from the Indonesian buffaloes from
   which they descend.

Europe and Middle East

   Introduced into North Africa and the Near East by 600 AD, the water
   buffalo was brought to Europe with returning Crusaders in the Middle
   Ages, and herds can be found in Bulgaria and Italy. As in Asia,
   buffaloes of the Middle East and Europe live on coarse vegetation on
   the marginal land traditionally available to peasants. They are an
   economic asset by serving as a protein source, draft animal, and
   storage of family or household wealth. In some areas, they also provide
   occasional recreation at annual racing festivals. These buffalo are
   mostly River Buffaloes; due to genetic isolation have adopted a
   distinct appearance. Buffalo milk is used in Italy and elsewhere for
   the production of cheese, including mozzarella.

Uses

   Buffaloes, apart from its use as draught and milch animals, are also
   used to pull bullock carts in developing world. Their dung is used as a
   fertilizer and as a fuel when dried. Sometimes, people will also race
   on buffaloes, though riding them can be very difficult. A few have also
   found use as pack animals carrying loads even for special forces.

Trivia

     * American bison are often called buffalo; however, this is
       technically incorrect as they are not true buffalo. The bison group
       includes both the American bison and the European bison or wisent.
       They are a related group of wild bovines, close to the yak and more
       distantly related to cattle, gaur, banteng, etc. The buffalo family
       includes water buffaloes, tamarau and anoas in Asia and the African
       buffalo (or Cape buffalo) in Africa.
     * Legend has it that the Chinese philosophical sage Lao Tzu left
       China through the Han Gu Pass riding a water buffalo.
     * According to Hindu mythology, the god of death Yama, rides on a
       buffalo.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Water_Buffalo"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
