   #copyright

Weakest Link

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Television

   Weakest Link (formerly titled The Weakest Link) is a television game
   show which first appeared in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on 14 August
   2000. It was devised by doctor and situation comedy writer Fintan Coyle
   and the comedian Cathy Dunning, and developed for television by the BBC
   Entertainment department. It has since been replicated around the
   world. It may also be called a "reality game show" because of
   competition similar to present-day reality shows and has been the basis
   of academic studies. The UK version, hosted by Anne Robinson, reached
   its 1,000th episode on 18 December 2006.

Format

   The original format featured a team of nine contestants who take turns
   answering general knowledge questions. The object of each round is to
   answer a chain of consecutive correct answers to earn an increasing
   amount for a single communal pot. However, just one incorrect answer
   wipes out any money earned in that chain. But, before their question is
   asked, a contestant can say "BANK" and the money earned thus far is
   safely stored and a new chain is initiated from scratch.

   Banking money is the safe option, however not banking, in anticipation
   that one will be able to correctly answer the upcoming question, allows
   the money to grow as each successive correct answer earns
   proportionally more money.

   When the allotted time for each round ends, any money not banked is
   lost, and if the host is in the middle of asking a question, or has
   asked a question but the contestant has yet to answer, the question is
   abandoned.

   Each player is then required to vote for which contestant they thought
   was the "weakest link," for whatever reason. Whoever gets the most
   votes at the end of the round is eliminated from the game, and leaves
   with no money. If there is a tie in the voting, the statistically
   strongest link gets to choose which of the tied players is eliminated.
   If they voted for one of the tied players, they are given the
   opportunity to change their mind.

   Whenever a contestant is eliminated, 10 seconds are taken away from the
   clock for the following round. On the eighth round, the clock is
   reduced to 90 seconds.

Voting

   At the end of each round, contestants must vote off one player whom
   they consider to be "The Weakest Link": the one they believe wasted the
   most time, failed to bank judiciously or gave too many wrong answers.
   Until the beginning of the next round, only the television audience
   knows (via an announcer's narration) exactly who the "strongest link"
   and "weakest link" are statistically. While the contestants work as a
   team, they are encouraged at this point to be ruthless to each other.
   Voting presents somewhat of a tactical challenge for canny players
   seeking to maximise their chances of winning, and maximizing the
   payoffs if they do. Voting off weaker players is likely to increase the
   payoff for the winner, but stronger players may be more difficult to
   beat in a playoff. The host usually questions the players as to who
   they are voting for , For example, if someone voted for John, the host
   would ask that person "Why John?" or, in the case that someone voted
   for Deloris, the host would say, "Why Deloris?" once the host has heard
   their opinions on who they voted for, she will say to the eliminated
   player, "You are the weakest link. Goodbye."

Strategies

   Some players may consider incorrectly answering some questions so as
   not to appear so much of a threat — however, such a strategy is risky.
   One study suggested that the optimal percentage of questions to answer
   correctly is 60%. If you do worse, you risk being voted off for being
   too weak; if you do better, you are perceived as a threat in the final
   showdown. Mathematical analysis of the expected payoffs provided by
   various banking strategies suggest that the optimum strategies are to
   either attempt to go for the highest payoff, or bank after every
   question. Few teams adopt either — most choose to bank after three or
   four questions.

End of the Game

Final Round

   When two contestants remain, they work together in one final round,
   identical to previous rounds in all but two details: First, all money
   banked at the end of the round is tripled (or doubled in some
   versions), before added to the current money pool to make the final
   total of the game. And second, there is no elimination. Instead, the
   game moves to the Head to Head Round.

Head to Head

   For the Head to Head round, the remaining two players will each be
   required to answer five questions each. The strongest link from the
   previous round chooses who goes first. Whoever has the most correct
   answers out of five at the end of the Head to Head wins the game.

   The winner of the game takes home all of the money accumulated in the
   prize pool for the game, and the loser goes home with nothing like all
   previous eliminated players.

   In the event of a tie, the game goes to Sudden Death. Each player is
   continued to be asked questions as usual, until one person gets a
   question right and the other wrong or both get it right or wrong.. This
   can go on for as long as it takes, though in some countries, the Sudden
   Death is edited to only one round for airtime reasons. If both get
   their answers right in the curent US verson 1st season only would share
   the money,if both get their answers wrong then the game ends in a draw.
   Later on if both get their answers right or wrong, a final sudden death
   question was played in which the players were asked a survey, the
   player who comes nearest without going over wins.

   In most episodes the maximum possible winnings in the British shows is
   £10,000; in special celebrity and charity episodes the maximum is
   £50,000.

Success

   Part of the show's success was due to the presenter, Anne Robinson.
   Already well-known in the UK for her sarcastic tone while presenting
   the BBC's consumer programme Watchdog, she found here a new outlet in
   her taunts to the contestants. Her sardonic summary to the "team",
   usually berating them for their lack of intelligence for not achieving
   the target, became a trademark of the show, and her call of "You are
   the weakest link — goodbye!" quickly became a catchphrase. (Originally,
   the devisors suggested the equally acerbic Jeremy Paxman, host of
   University Challenge.) The voice-over in the UK version is by Jon
   Briggs.

   With elements inspired by Big Brother and Who Wants To Be A
   Millionaire, the show differed from virtually all games shows before it
   by inviting open conflict between players, and using a host who is
   openly hostile to the competitors rather than a positive figure (though
   this feature of the show tends to be played for laughs, especially in
   the prime time version, where there is a studio audience for Robinson —
   and the contestants — to play to). Heavily criticised by the television
   press in some countries for its Hobbesian overtones, the show has
   nevertheless been a ratings success in most countries.

International versions

   Countries with their own version
   Countries with their own version

   The original British version of the show airs around the world on BBC
   Prime and BBC America. The format has been licensed across the world,
   with many countries producing their own series of Weakest Link.
   Internationally, the show has taken off airing in at least over 80
   countries world-wide, some with red haired, female presenters, some
   without, and some with male presenters such as the US syndicated
   edition as mentioned below. Others include the Irish version hosted by
   Eamon Dunphy, the Italian version presented by Enrico Papi, the Chilean
   version (broadcast on Canal 13) hosted by local actress Catalina
   Pulido, the South African (broadcast on SABC3) with Fiona Coyne, the
   Polish version with Kazimiera Szczuka on TVN, the Filipino version with
   Edu Manzano, the Hong Kong version hosted by Dodo Cheng, the Indian
   version hosted by Nina Gupta, the Japanese version with Shiro Ito and
   the Australian version hosted by Cornelia Frances broadcast on Seven
   Network. The version in Mexico, El Rival Mas Débil, has been a success
   for two years and is still running with its host Montserrat Ontiveros.
   The Norwegian version, hosted by Anne Grosvold, was aired by the
   state-owned NRK, but lasted only one season.

   There are also other (confirmed) versions from Belgium, China, Taiwan,
   the Middle East, Israel, Czech Republic, Greece, Finland, France,
   Hungary, Russia, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, Brazil, the Netherlands,
   Ireland and Denmark.

North America

United States

   The American version of Weakest Link (without the "the" in the title)
   premièred on 16 April 2001 on NBC, with Anne Robinson hosting. In this
   version, there was a team of eight contestants vying for a cash pot of
   up to US $1,000,000. Earning respectable ratings, even topping Who
   Wants to Be a Millionaire a few times, the show had garnered itself a
   place on the 2001-02 autumn schedule. After the 9/11 attacks, the
   ratings went down. In an effort to revive interest in the show,
   episodes now featured celebrities, rather than ordinary members of the
   public. There were a few episodes with ordinary people in between, but
   they usually had themes (such as Halloween costumes, Christmas
   costumes, or contestants that looked like Anne Robinson). The show
   aired its last episode on July 14, 2002. A set of unaired episodes was
   shown later that year on the PAX Network. The last set of taped
   episodes remained unaired until the show ended up on the GSN schedule
   in 2003.

   A syndicated version ran from January 2002 through September 2003. It
   was hosted by George Gray. In this version there was a team of only six
   contestants and each episode is only 30 minutes long. In the first
   syndicated season, the maximum pot was $75,000 and there were five
   rounds, while increasing to $100,000 (and the rounds decreased to only
   four all with a $25 000 top prize) in the final syndicated season. In
   contrast to Robinson's " dominatrix" tone, Gray was more playful and
   humorous to the contestants, although arguably more sarcastic. Also in
   contrast, the second season had no doubling round; the final two
   players headed straight to the Head to Head (with the Strongest Link
   from the last round, or the second Strongest Link starting off the
   round). The Head to Head consisted of only 3 questions each, rather
   than the usual 5. GSN began airing the syndicated version in January
   2006.

   Both U.S. versions were produced by The Gurin Company, BBC Worldwide
   and NBC Studios.

Mexico

   The Mexican version of the Weakest Link, called El Rival Más Débil,
   airs on the Mexican network TV Azteca The program premiered on August
   2, 2003, and is quite a success along with its hostess, Montserrat
   Ontiveros. In each episode, eight contestants have the chance to win
   200,000 Mexican pesos. The Mexican version remains on air after three
   years of success.

   External link (fan site): http://elrivalmasdebil.tripod.com

Australia

   An Australian version premiered in February 2001, on Seven Network.
   Presented by Cornelia Frances, the show featured 9 contestants vying
   for $100,000. It aired twice weekly in primetime. At the beginning, the
   show received a lot of feedback from angry people, complaining how rude
   Cornelia was, some even saying she was worse than Anne Robinson. After
   toning the show down, it continued to receive modest ratings until its
   cancellation in April 2002. There was even a special version where it
   was linked with the Mole where the Mole contestants were part of the
   show. In this episode, Bob Young won the playoff over Thao Nguyen and
   became the winner of this episode, where the prize was a free pass to
   the next episode on the Mole (aka immunity) and all money won went to
   the kitty. According to Cornelia Frances, they won $14,100, the lowest
   amount won in any Australian episode of the Weakest Link. However,
   Grant Bowler, the host of the Mole rounded up to $15,000 since all
   kitties of the Mole have been rounded by $1,000. In one episode, one
   contestant was so angry because he was "The Weakest Link", he threw his
   sign down on the floor where it bounced and hit Cornelia Frances in the
   leg. This scene was edited out before going to air.

Asia

China

   China also had its own version, hosted by Chen Lu Yu, then Shen Bing,
   and last Xia Qing. It has been reported that much of the cues been
   taken away during the Xia Qing years. The top prize was ¥200,000 (
   Chinese yuan). It aired on CCTV.

Hong Kong

   The Hong Kong version of the show was licensed and started quickly by
   TVB to air on TVB Jade, after rival ATV took the lion's share of
   ratings with the Chinese (Cantonese) language version of Who Wants to
   be a Millionaire. The top prize was HK$3,000,000. It premiered in
   August 2001. Per the licensing agreement, Carol "Dodo" Cheng initially
   had to act just like Anne Robinson — complete with the same "cold"
   style of voice and facial expressions. Since Chinese culture typically
   does not value this kind of attitude toward people, TVB received
   complaints about the show. Bowing to public pressure, the broadcaster
   changed the style of the show, softening Carol Cheng's "character". As
   a result, the show became more acceptable to the viewers and the
   ratings went up. Since TVB ordered 108 daily weekday shows, the series
   finale aired sometime in January 2002.

India

   Trying to follow up on the success of Who Wants to be A Millionaire,
   Star TV launched Kamzor Kadii Kaun, the Hindi version of Weakest Link.
   Hosted by soap opera actress Neena Gupta, it aired on STAR Plus weekly
   in primetime beginning in December 2001. The top prize was 2,500,000
   (25,00,000 [25 lakh] in Indian writing) rupees. Unfortunately, the show
   barely lasted a year before it was cancelled.

Israel

   Israel also had its own version hosted by Pnina Dvorin (2002-2004) and
   then Hana Laszlo. The show aired on Channel 10. It started out with 9
   players and then it went to an 8-player format later in the run. The
   top prize was ₪100,000.

Japan

   The show started in April 2002. It was hosted by Shiro Ito, who uses
   English phrases such as "Lets play Weakest Link", "Time's up" and
   "Welcome to Weakest Link". The top prize is ¥16,000,000, but because of
   Japanese laws prohibiting a single person to win more than ¥2,000,000,
   the winning contestant would be capped at ¥2,000,000, and share the
   rest of the money with a relative. It aired on Fuji TV. However, the
   show was quickly cancelled.

Lebanon

   The Lebanese version called Al-Halqa al-Ad'af was hosted by a former
   radio presenter Rita Khoury and drew contestants from many Arab
   speaking countries. It was soon cancelled; apparently due to its lack
   of popularity. It aired on Future TV.

Philippines

   The Philippine version of the show is produced by VIVA Entertainment
   and ECM Productions. The show premiered on September 2001 on the
   television network Intercontinental Broadcasting Corporation as a
   follow-up to the success of Who Wants To Be A Millionaire in the
   country. It was initially hosted by actor Edu Manzano. Known for his
   villainy roles and serious acting styles, Manzano made a good and
   fitting host of the show (contributing to its popularity). He was later
   replaced by comedian/singer Allan K. His humorous hosting stint (along
   with the fire that razed the original studio the show was taped) led
   its show to its demise on October 2002.

   The show followed the eight-player primetime format with the money tree
   as follows: P1,000, P2,000, P5,000, P10,000, P20,000, P50,000, P80,000,
   P125,000. If the highest amount was banked successfully in all seven
   rounds, the highest amount possible would be 1,000,000 Philippine
   pesos, which is close to the maximum price of £10,000 in BBC2's version
   of the game.

Singapore

   The show was first aired in May 2002 in Chinese, and was hosted by Cui
   Lixin. It aired on Channel 8. The top prize was SG$100,000.

   In October 2002, an English language version of the show hosted by Asha
   Gill premiered on Channel 5. The top prize was SG$1,000,000.

Taiwan

   Taiwan also had its own version, originally hosted by Belle Yu (first
   season), then Tseng Yang Qing (second season). Belle Yu later returned
   as celebrity contestant. This is probably the first Chinese version to
   have a male host. It aired on STAR Chinese Channel. The top prize was
   NT$1,000,000.

Thailand

   A Thai version called Kamchad Jud Orn was aired on the Thai Channel 3
   from February - December 2002. It was hosted by Krittika Kongsompong.
   It follows the eight-person format, with a possible payout of 1,000,000
   baht.

   This version was even criticized by the Thai government because it was
   said to promote traits that are "unbecoming and contradictory to Thai
   culture and morality", even to the point that it would be monitored.
   Like the Hong Kong version, the show was somewhat toned down.

Europe

Azerbaijan

   Weakest Link host Kamila Babayeva, Azerbaijan edition
   Weakest Link host Kamila Babayeva, Azerbaijan edition

   Azerbaijan has a version called Zəif Bənd that airs on Lider TV and is
   hosted by Kamila Babayeva. The premiere was in September 2004. The top
   prize was 100,000,000 Azerbaijani manat (=20,000 New Azerbaijani
   manat). Like many foreign versions, it only lasted for one series.

Belgium

   Belgium had its own version in 2001 called De Zwakste Schakel, hosted
   by Goedele Liekens, which aired on VTM. The top prize was 2,000,000
   Belgian francs. However, the show was quickly cancelled.

Croatia

   The Croatian version is called Najslabija karika, and it's hosted by
   Nina Violic Daniela Trbović - Vlajki. And Nina Violic(2004) The
   Croatian version is being shown on the channel HRT 1.

Czech Republic

   The Czech Republic also has its own version of The Weakest Link. Much
   like the Hong Kong version of the show, the hostess Zuzana Slavíková
   toned down similarities to Anne Robinson. The top prize was
   Kc1,000,000. It aired on TV Nova. Its called Nejslabší! Máte padáka!

Denmark

   Denmark had a version hosted by Trine Gregorius. The show aied on DR1
   with a top prize of 200,000KR. When this version was cancelled, they
   sent their set to Norway.

Finland

   The Finnish version started on September 6, 2002, and has aired every
   Friday on MTV3. It is called Heikoin Lenkki and the host is Kirsi Salo.
   Eight contestants compete for up to €18,000. The Finnish version was
   cancelled at the beginning of 2005.

France

   The show Le Maillon Faible, hosted by Laurence Boccolini, is aired on
   TF1. Nine contestants have a chance to win €50,000. Previously it was
   €20,000, and 150,000 French francs (before the Euro came into use).

Germany

   In German, The Weakest Link would be Das schwächste Glied, but this
   could also be read as The Weakest Member (in a sexual sense).
   Consequently, this may be the reason why the show was called Der
   Schwächste fliegt!, meaning The Weakest Gets Booted (literally The
   Weakest Flies).

   March 2001 saw the appearance of the first non-English version in
   Germany on RTL. The show premiered weekdays at 3pm and was hosted by
   Sonja Zietlow (who was already known for her tough-talking styles on
   her self-titled talk show from previous years). Just like the British
   version, the show pitted nine contestants against each other for a pot
   of DM 50,000. But by September of that year, the show was sinking fast
   in ratings, so in order to gain ratings, Sonja treated the contestants
   with more respect. Previously, Sonja bullied the contestants with
   insults such as "Da wollen wir doch mal sehen, wer unsere kostbare
   Studioluft lang genug weggeatmet hat!" (Let's take a look, who breathed
   our valuable studio air too long!)

   However the change in Sonja's behaviour did not sufficiently revive the
   show, and it was cancelled in December. However, in February 2002, the
   show was given another chance in the late-night Saturday slot, this
   time with a newly revamped studio, that now featured an audience, and a
   higher prize of € 50,000. But there have been rumours that after the
   first few episodes actors were paid to be contestants on the show, in
   order to attract more viewers. These changes were unsuccessful in
   boosting the show's ratings, and was cancelled for good in March.

Greece

   Greece also created its own version O pio adinamos krikos (Ο ΠΙΟ
   ΑΔΥΝΑΜΟΣ ΚΡΙΚΟΣ), hosted by Elena Akrita. According to its viewers,
   Akrita was a nicer host than those of foreign versions-- instead of
   saying a terse, "You are the Weakest Link-- goodbye," like her foreign
   counterparts, she would dismiss a player who receives the most votes by
   saying, "λυπάμαι πολύ," which means "I am very sorry". The show is not
   airing anymore but it was a huge success with high ratings. The top
   prize was €15,000. It was broadcasted by major Greek TV station Mega
   Channel.

Hungary

   In Hungary the show debuted on August 12, 2001 at 7 p.m. on TV2 under
   the name of Nincs Kegyelem - A Leggyengébb Láncszem (which means No
   Mercy - The Weakest Link) and was aired three times a week, on Monday,
   Tuesday Thursday respectively, with a maximum prize of 3 million
   forints (approx. $12 000 at that time). It was hosted by Krisztina
   Máté, a News at Night presenter, who took a very extreme turn with
   accepting this new role. She was probably chosen because of the
   similarities between her and her American counterpart. The whole show
   instantly became the most controversial program on TV that time, but
   couldn't profited with the sudden attention, because of the rude style
   and manner that the whole game-play was built upon, it shocked people
   and the hostess' reputation quickly changed into irritating and
   arrogant. Another wrong decision of TV2 was modifying the airing time
   to compete with another other quiz show shown on rival channel RTL Klub
   (namely the Millionaire show and host István Vágó [who is often
   referred as the "Quiz Professor" by Hungarians]). The popularity of
   Weakest Link began to fade, and so the management decreased the number
   of players from 8 to 5, but it didn't help, and finally the show was
   cancelled on May, 2002. Though she returned to news, Krisztina Máté's
   reputation was "tarnished" because of her meanness displayed in the
   Weakest Link.

Republic of Ireland

   The independent television station TV3 aired a version of the show in
   Ireland, presented by radio and TV personality Eamon Dunphy, the first
   male to host the quiz. The show lasted only one season, due to a lack
   of sponsor for the second season. The top prize was €10,000 despite the
   fact that the Irish pound was still in use at the time.

Italy

   Italy had its own version (called Anello Debole) hosted by Enrico Papi.
   It aired on Italia 1. The top prize was €15,000. The show did not last
   long, because of low audience.

The Netherlands

   In the Netherlands it is called De Zwakste Schakel and hosted by Chazia
   Mourali on RTL 4. It had a maximum prize of €10,000 (previously 10,000
   Dutch gulden) and nine contestants. Until the summer of 2004, it was
   the longest running version after the UK. RTL put it out of the
   schedule in 2004 though, making France the longest running
   international version. After a couple of years without the show, De
   Zwakste Schakel will return soon though (and with a new host).

Norway

   Norway had a version called Det svakeste ledd, hosted by Anne Grosvold.
   The show started around 2003 and it used the Danish set.

Poland

   The show is aired in Poland as well, 4 days a week (Monday-Thursday) on
   Polish network TVN. The local version is titled Najsłabsze ogniwo and
   features Kazimiera Szczuka as the host. Eight contestants compete to
   win 27,000 złoty. The money tree goes: 3000, 2400, 1800, 1300, 900,
   600, 300, 100 złoty.

Portugal

   The Portuguese version is called O Elo Mais Fraco, and started on June
   11, 2002 on RTP 1. It was first hosted by Júlia Pinheiro and then by
   Luísa Castel-Branco. Nine contestants competed for the €10,000 pot and
   the money tree was €20, €50, €100, €200, €300, €450, €600, €800, €1000.

Romania

   The Weakest Link (Lanţul slăbiciunilor) was produced by ProTV, being
   hosted by Andrei Gheorghe.

Russia

   Russia has a version called Slaboe Zveno hosted by Maria Kiselyova. It
   airs on ORT. The top prize is 400,000 rubles. The show ended in 2005.

Serbia

   The show aired on BKTV as Najslabija karika from 2002 until April 2006
   when the station's terrestrial licence got revoked by Serbian
   authorities. It was hosted by Sandra Lalatović. The top prize was RSD3
   million, which according to the exchange rate fluctuations in that
   period came in the range between €37,500 and €50,000. The show may
   return to the airwaves this year on either B92 or RTV Pink.

Slovenia

   The Slovenian version is called Najšibkejši člen, and it's hosted by
   Violeta Tomič. Like many other game shows in Slovenia, it airs on RTV
   Slovenija.

Spain

   The Spanish version was called El Rival Más Débil and was hosted by
   Nuria González (2002-2003) on TVE 1 and Karmele Anaburu (2003-2004) on
   La 2( TVE). The show premiered in May 2002. The top prize, at least in
   the first version, was €7,200.

Ukraine

   Its called Слабое звено nothing is known about this version it airs on
   INTER network. Host is unknown.

Moldova

   Its called Veriga Slabă and its hosted by Andrei Gheorghe, who also
   hosts the Romania version. It airs on Kanal 1, a Moldovan TV station.
   Top prize is unknown.

Turkey

   Turkey also had a version called En Zayif Halka hosted by Hülya Uğur
   Tanrıöver. However, it only lasted one season. It aired on Show TV.

Oceania

New Zealand

   The show was produced by TVNZ and aired on TV ONE in 2001 and hosted by
   Louise Wallace. She was a blond-haired news anchor who specially dyed
   her hair Robinson-red for the host part. The show finished in 2002. It
   had a top prize of NZ$100,000.

South America

Brazil

   Brazilian TV Globo bought The Weakest Link from the BBC in October
   2001. It was decided that Fausto Silva would host the two pilots.
   However, after the pilots were made, the show never made it to the air,
   and was replaced by the more popular Big Brother. The host was supposed
   to be Pedro Bial.

Chile

   Chile also had its own version (El Rival Más Débil) for a 6 month run
   in 2003 hosted by local actress Catalina Pulido on Canal 13. The top
   prize was 10,000,000 Chilean pesos.

Africa

South Africa

   South Africa has a version called The Weakest Link hosted by Fiona
   Coyne. The show airs weekly on SABC 3. As of season 4, the top prize is
   now R100,000 (it was previously R50,000).

Countries with licenses

     * Argentina
     * Brazil
     * Bulgaria (airs the Russian version on the NTV network)
     * Canada (aired the NBC USA version on CTV)
     * Colombia
     * Puerto Rico (Aired the USA version)
     * United Kingdom (aired the NBC USA version on BBC first, later on
       Challenge)
     * United States (airs the British version on BBC America)

Trivia

     * Anne Robinson appears as the voice of the "Anne-Droid" in the
       Doctor Who episode " Bad Wolf", which hosts a version of the show
       in the year 200,100 that has deadly consequences for its
       contestants if they are eliminated...or try to quit the game.
       "Anne-Droid" also appeared in the Doctor Who special of the quiz,
       recorded on November 21, 2006 at Pinewood Studios, which was
       broadcast on the March 30, 2007.
     * The 1000th UK daytime edition was recorded at Pinewood on 1
       November 2006 in front of an invited audience of past contestants,
       and broadcast on 18 December the same year, followed by a half-hour
       documentary going behind the scenes of the show. The contestants
       for the 1000th edition included the winner of the very first
       episode and memorable celebrities who have appeared on previous
       editions. The show began with Anne bursting from a giant cake to
       deliver her opening spiel. After a disappointing final with not a
       single correct answer whatsoever until Sudden Death, eventually the
       strongest link became Miss Evans, who won £2,710. At her request,
       the prize money was shared between her and co-finalist Basil Brush,
       who each donated their respective half of the money to charity - at
       which point Anne announced that since it was the 1000th edition,
       £1000 was added to the total prize money.
     * Familiar face on TV game shows Mark Gardiner (TV) was once a
       winning contestant.
     * There has been a pantomime special in which pantomime actors were
       questioned, including Basil Brush. Basil Brush has since become the
       only puppet to win Weakest Link.
     * Dead Ringers (a satire produced by the BBC) also made a spoof of
       the Weakest Link, calling it The Weakest Disciple. The contestants
       were all disciples of Jesus (with Judas banking the most money - 30
       pieces of silver). There has also been the Weakest Trappist Monk,
       they are all Trappist monks, they bank nothing and are silent when
       Anne Robinson insults them (due to their vow of silence), although
       that doesn't stop them from writing profanic insults to her (the
       weakest Trappist monk has written on his card "F*** you" as he was
       doing the walk of shame).
     * Music is played throughout the show, uninterrupted, from the
       opening theme to the closing credits.
     * All of the hosts wear black clothing (or sometimes dark colours
       with black).
     * Most versions have disciplinarian female hosts.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weakest_Link"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
