   #copyright

Westport Country Playhouse

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Theatre

   The Westport Country Playhouse is a theatre in Westport, Connecticut,
   founded in 1930 by Lawrence Langner and his wife Armina Marshall. It is
   a non-profit theatre currently run by Tazewell Thompson, Anne Keefe,
   and Joanne Woodward. It recently underwent a $30.6 million renovation,
   and now has a 578-seat theatre space. The Playhouse is one of the
   best-known regional theatres in Connecticut, having been described as a
   "mecca" for apprentices and interns.

History

   The building that is now the Westport Country Playhouse was originally
   constructed in 1835 as a tannery by R&H Haight, owned by Henry Haight.
   After Haight's death in 1860, the plant was purchased by Charles H.
   Kemper.

   In 1930, the former tannery, which had been unused since the 1920s, was
   purchased for $14,000 by Lawrence Langner. Cleon Throckmorten, a
   Broadway designer, was commissioned to renovate the interior of the
   building.

   In 1931, the curtain went up on the first production at the Westport
   Country Playhouse. In order to more easily transfer Playhouse
   productions to Broadway, the stage was built to match the
   specifications of Broadway’s Times Square Theatre on 42nd Street. The
   idea proved immediately useful when the playhouse's first production,
   The Streets of New York (starring Dorothy Gish), transferred to
   Broadway. Dozens of new works followed suit over the years.

   When it came to casting, Langner turned to well-known actor
   acquaintances and friends such as Eugene O'Neill and George Bernard
   Shaw when he needed new plays. The Playhouse's strong launch enhanced
   its reputation among the acting community. Wealthy theatre patrons and
   supporters in nearby Fairfield County towns helped it survive and
   thrive.

   In the 1940s, the Playhouse began its apprentice program for young
   theatre professionals. Over the years, Playhouse apprentices have
   included composer/lyricist Stephen Sondheim, screenwriter Frank Perry,
   television host Sally Jesse Raphael, composer Mary Rodgers, actor Carey
   Elwes, and actress Tammy Grimes. The educational apprenticeship
   programs are still running.

   The Playhouse closed due to World War II from 1942 to 1945. In the late
   1940s and 1950s, the playhouse's successes included world premieres of
   William Inge's Come Back, Little Sheba and Horton Foote's The Trip to
   Bountiful, both of which went on to Broadway.

   Since the Langners stepped down in 1959, the administration has
   included James B. McKenzie from 1959 to 2000 and actress Joanne
   Woodward, Paul Newman's wife, who took over as artistic director in
   2000. Newman is now part-owner of a restaurant next to the theatre.

   By 2000, more than 700 plays had been produced and almost four million
   people had attended the theatre.

   In 2002 the playhouse transferred its first production to Broadway
   after more than 35 years.

   Woodward and Alison Harris, executive director, led a $30.6 million
   renovation, transforming the old barn into a modern, year-round theatre
   facility. The renovated theatre reopened in 2005. Woodward stepped down
   from her job in January 2006, and was followed by actor, opera and
   theatre director, and playwright Tazewell Thompson. However, Woodward
   and Newman have both continued to contribute to the Playhouse's
   "Campaign for a New Era".

   Harris, executive director since 2000, announced in 2005 that she would
   not be renewing her contract when it expired in 2006, and in the summer
   of 2006 she resigned.

   The Playhouse has provided a stage for many new playwrights over the
   years. David Wiltse is the current playwright in residence, writing one
   play for the playhouse to produce each year.

Campaign for a New Era

   The Campaign for a New Era is the fundraising effort by the Westport
   Country Playhouse to help pay for its $30.6 million, 18-month
   renovation. Donations of more than $1,000 are recognized within the
   Playhouse's lobby and programs. Some of the largest donations came from
   the state of Connecticut, the Devlin Foundation, the Lucille Lortel
   foundation, Elizabeth & Stanley Morten, and Joanne Woodward & Paul
   Newman.

Technical

Seating

   The Playhouse currently has a total of 578 seats. This is lower seating
   capacity than before the renovation, but the seats are now individual
   and cushioned, as opposed to the former wooden pews, while retaining
   the historic look of the former pews. Further, fewer of the current
   seats are considered "limited view" since the renovations.

   The 578 seats are distributed as follows:
     * 424 orchestra
          + 234 centre orchestra
          + 93 house left orchestra
          + 97 house right orchestra
     * 154 mezzanine
          + 118 centre mezzanine
          + 18 left mezzanine boxes
          + 18 right mezzanine boxes

   Several seats in both the orchestra and mezzanine can be removed or
   modified to be wheelchair accessible.

Stage

     * Stage:
          + Height: 3 feet 2 inches (.97m) above house floor
          + Depth: 26 feet 2 inches (7.98m) deep from plaster line to back
            wall, 2 feet 1 inch (.64m) apron below plaster line, 28 feet 3
            inches (8.61m) total depth
          + Wing Space: 13 feet 6 inches (4.11m) clear stage right, 24
            feet 6 inches (7.47m) clear stage left
     * Proscenium:
          + Height: 15 feet 3 inches (4.65m) above stage floor
          + Width: 32 feet 9 inches (9.98m) wide
     * Orchestra pit:
          + Depth: 9 feet 3 inches (2.82m) below stage floor

   The Playhouse's fly gallery
   Enlarge
   The Playhouse's fly gallery

Fly system

   The Playhouse has a counterweight fly system currently employing 22
   battens, with space for future installations. The height from the stage
   to the grid is 40 feet (12.19m), with an effective fly range from 3
   feet 10 inches (1.17m) to 38 feet (11.58m). Each arbor is 6 feet tall
   with a capacity for 1200 pounds (544 kg). The locking rail is on the
   stage right wall, and the loading bridge is 32 feet 3 inches (9.83m)
   above the stage floor.

   Although the fly system and grid are designed for loads to be hung
   parallel to the proscenium, smaller loads can be hung perpendicular
   using cables independent of the actual arbor system. These have to be
   flown in and out manually from the grid, so perpendicularly hung loads
   are generally stationary during performances.
   Some lighting instruments of the Playhouse
   Enlarge
   Some lighting instruments of the Playhouse

Lighting

   Lighting is controlled from a Strand 520 console in a control booth at
   the back of the house. For technical rehearsals, a control position can
   be set up in the centre of the theatre.

   The Playhouse's stage lighting instruments include:
     * 2 - ETC Source Four 19° ERS
     * 61 - ETC Source Four 26° ERS
     * 58 - ETC Source Four 36° ERS
     * 24 - ETC Source Four 50° ERS
     * 18 - Altman 6 inch 500w Fresnels
     * 7 - Altman 1 kw triple unit far cycs
     * 42 - PAR 64
     * 7 - T-6 six cell, three circuit, 4 foot 6 inches
     * 6 - Birdies

   Colour scrollers, irises, top hats, and barn doors (all lighting
   instrument attachments) are also available. On-stage film and
   projection equipment are only available through special arrangement.

Education

   Of the hundreds of interns and apprentices who have passed through the
   Playhouse's educational programs, several have gone on to attain
   notoriety. Some graudates include Stephen Sondheim, Frank Perry, Tammy
   Grimes, Sally Jessy Raphael, Mary Rodgers and Christina Crawford.
   Others have been related to notable performers. The 1959 alumni alone
   include Jon de Vries (son of Westport playwright Peter de Vries), Tim
   Sinnemann (son of Hollywood director Fred Sinnemann), and Lisa Whitman
   (granddaughter of Cornelia Otis Skinner). A large number of Playhouse
   interns and apprentices have made careers in the theatre or in related
   activities.

Woodward Internship Program

   The Westport Country Playhouse provides summer and school year
   internships to students ages 19 and older from around the country. The
   interns are entrusted with considerable responsibilities and treated as
   staff members while they engage in an intensive learning experience.
   Each intern is hired for a specific position, but interns are expected
   to work as a team and pitch in where necessary, including, but not
   limited to, running crew, ushering, concessions and parking.

   The program is named in honour of Joanne Woodward, the current Artistic
   Director Emeritus. Accepted applicants must be serious minded, highly
   motivated and able to commit a minimum of twelve weeks, with long
   working hours as many as 7 days a week. Applicants should be a college
   students, graduate students or recent graduates, with basic training
   and experience in theatre already completed, prepared to take the next
   step towards a professional theatre career.

Woodward Apprenticeship Program

   The Westport Country Playhouse also has a summer apprenticeship program
   for students aged 15 to 18. Each year, approximately 10 apprentices are
   selected from those who apply. The program lasts approximately eight
   weeks, usually starting in June and ending in August. The
   apprenticeship is 7 to 12 hours per day, often 7 days per week, and,
   with rare exceptions, there is little time off. Many of the apprentices
   live in Westport and neighboring towns, but some come from other
   states.

   The program is designed to give the apprentices experience in every
   aspect of working in a professional theatre. Each apprentice is part of
   the running crew for one show during the summer season. Alternately,
   apprentices can volunteer to work on a show before or after the
   apprenticeship. During performances, those who are not on the current
   running crew do front of house work, including ushering, parking cars,
   and managing concessions.

   Before and after performances, time is divided into classes, work
   rotations, and artist hours. The classes cover a range of subjects,
   including script analysis, acting, directing, auditioning, and
   dialects. During work rotations, apprentices help the Playhouse crews
   complete tasks in areas including props, set construction, and scenic
   painting as well as taining in the box office. Artist hours are open
   discussions with professionals from all fields of theatre; past artists
   have included actors Gene Wilder and Paul Newman, producer Bill Haber,
   and the casts and crews of current shows.

   The program culminates with the Apprentice Showcase, with the
   apprentices writing, designing, and performing a play. All apprentices
   are encouraged to take part in the writing process, which takes place
   throughout the second half of the program. Once the script has been
   finalized, the roles and technical positions are assigned among the
   apprentices. There is one week of rehearsal, and one free admission
   performance. The schedule is designed to simulate that of a traditional
   summer stock theatre.

Current administration

   The rehearsal room of the Playhouse
   Enlarge
   The rehearsal room of the Playhouse

   The current administration of the Playhouse includes:

Board of Directors

     * Chairman: Elisabeth Morton
     * President: John A. Vaccaro
     * Vice Presidents: Harold Baily, Jr. and Sharon Sullivan
     * Treasurer: Steven Wolff
     * Secretary: Ann Sheffer

Staff

     * Artistic Director: Tazewell Thompson
     * Executive Director: Position currently vacant
     * Associate Artistic Director:
     * Artistic Director Emeritus: Joanne Woodward

Production

     * Production Coordinator: Liz Liles
     * Technical Director: John Mosele
     * Master Electrician: Janie Flowers
     * Company Manager: Bruce Miller

Notable performers

   Many notable performers have enhanced the Westport Country Playhouse
   stage from 1930 to the present, including such well-known names as
   Kitty Carlisle, Henry Fonda, Olivia de Havilland, Eva Gabor, Michael
   Allinson and Jane Fonda.
   Retrieved from "
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Westport_Country_Playhouse"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
