   #copyright

Wikispecies

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Websites and the Internet

   CAPTION: Wikispecies

   The current Wikispecies logo
       URL      http://species.wikimedia.org/
   Commercial?  No
   Type of site Species directory
   Registration Optional
      Owner     Wikimedia Foundation
    Created by  Jimmy Wales and the Wikimedia Community

   Wikispecies is a project supported by the Wikimedia Foundation that
   anybody can edit. It is an open, free directory of species.

Typical species page

   A typical species page would have sections called taxonavigation,
   vernacular names, alternative classifications, references, notes, and
   maybe a description of the species. Vernacular names are links to
   Wikipedia articles in many languages.

Community Portal

   The Wikispecies Community Portal has many links to things which one
   would need in order to increase his knowledge about the Wikispecies
   procedures.

   The Wikispecies Village Pump is an area of Wikispecies that discusses
   the project. It is like a Wikipedia article's talk page. Currently it
   is the largest page on Wikispecies.

   The Wikispecies Charter is the basis of Wikispecies. The Charter was
   written by Jimbo Wales.

   The Charter says:

   "Note from Jimbo Wales...

          As you know, the creation of this project was somewhat
          controversial in some quarters, and so I propose an early
          development of a strong non-forking policy guideline here,
          illustrating how wikispecies significantly differs from articles
          that would appear in a general encyclopedia.
          Here are some of the key points that the board put forward when
          we approved this project:
          We set up the WikiSpecies wiki for biologists to begin
          organizing the project.
          We propose that as the software is developed, it should work to
          strongly support integration with wikipedia, to help avoid
          duplication of effort, i.e. to avoid forking.
          We ask the participants on wikispecies to think particularly
          about how their work should differ from a generalist
          encyclopedia."

Other languages

   Wikispecies is available in 131 different languages which are also
   licensed under the GNU Free Documentation License.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikispecies"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
