   #copyright

Winston Churchill

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: British History Post
1900; Political People

   The Rt Hon. Sir Winston Churchill
   Winston Churchill
     __________________________________________________________________

   Prime Minister of the United Kingdom
   In office
   10 May 1940 –  27 July 1945
   26 October 1951 – 7 April 1955
   Deputy Clement Attlee (1942-1945)
   Anthony Eden (1951-1955)
   Preceded by Neville Chamberlain
   Clement Attlee
   Succeeded by Clement Attlee
   Sir Anthony Eden
     __________________________________________________________________

   Chancellor of the Exchequer
   In office
   6 November 1924 –  4 June 1929
   Preceded by Philip Snowden
   Succeeded by Philip Snowden
     __________________________________________________________________

   Born 30 November 1874
   Blenheim Palace, Woodstock,
   Oxfordshire, England
   Died 24 January 1965
   Hyde Park Gate, London, England
   Political party Conservative and Liberal
   Spouse Clementine Churchill, Baroness Spencer-Churchill

   Winston Churchill ( 30 November 1874 – 24 January 1965) was an English
   statesman and author, best known as Prime Minister of the United
   Kingdom during the Second World War. Well-known as an orator,
   strategist, and politician, Churchill was one of the most important
   leaders in modern British and world history. He won the 1953 Nobel
   Prize in Literature for his many books on English and world history.
   Sir Winston Churchill was voted the greatest-ever Briton in the 2002
   BBC poll the 100 Greatest Britons.

   His full name, including various titles conferred upon him by a variety
   of governments, is Sir Winston Leonard Spencer-Churchill KG OM CH TD
   FRS PC (Can).

Early life

   Churchill's legal surname was Spencer-Churchill (he was related to the
   Spencer family), but starting with his father, Lord Randolph Churchill,
   his branch of the family used the name Churchill in their public life.

   Winston Churchill was a descendant of the first famous member of the
   Churchill family, John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough. Winston's
   politician father, Lord Randolph Churchill, was the third son of the
   7th Duke of Marlborough; Winston's mother was Lady Randolph Churchill
   (née Jennie Jerome), daughter of American millionaire Leonard Jerome.

   Winston Churchill was born in Blenheim Palace in Woodstock, Oxfordshire
   on 30th November 1874.

   As was typical for upper-class boys at that time, he spent much of his
   childhood at boarding schools. At Harrow School, he had an independent
   and rebellious nature and generally did poorly, for which he was
   punished. However, he did well in English and history. He was also the
   school's fencing champion. He was rarely visited by his mother (then
   known as Lady Randolph), whom he loved very dearly, and wrote letters
   begging her to either come or let his father permit him to come home.
   As an adult, Winston developed a closer, sibling-like relationship with
   his mother.

   He followed his father's career keenly but had a distant relationship
   with him. His desolate, lonely childhood stayed with him throughout his
   life. On the other hand, as a child he was very close to his nanny,
   Elizabeth Anne Everest.

The Army

   After three attempts, Churchill was finally accepted at and attended
   the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst. Upon his graduation at age 20,
   Churchill joined the army as a Subaltern of the IV (Queen's Own)
   Hussars Cavalry regiment. He dislocated and injured his shoulder while
   disembarking upon his arrival in India for his first posting, an injury
   that would cause him problems in later years.

   In India, the main preoccupation of Churchill's regiment was polo, a
   situation which did not appeal to the young man, hungry for more
   military action. He devoted his time to educating himself from books
   which he had sent out to him.

   In 1895, he traveled to Cuba to observe the Spanish battles against
   Cuban guerrillas. Churchill obtained a commission to write about the
   conflict from the Daily Graphic newspaper. To Churchill's delight , he
   came under fire for the first time on his twenty-first birthday. In
   1897, Churchill attempted to travel to the Greco-Turkish War, but this
   conflict effectively ended before he could arrive. He went on to
   England on leave before rushing back to India to help put down the
   Pathan revolt on the North West Frontier.

   During the campaign, he wrote articles for the newspapers The Pioneer
   and The Daily Telegraph. By October 1897, Churchill was back in Britain
   and his first book, The Story of the Malakand Field Force, on that
   campaign, was published in December.

   While in India, Churchill used his family connections to get himself
   assigned to the army being put together and commanded by Lord Kitchener
   and intended to achieve the reconquest of the Sudan. While in the
   Sudan, Churchill participated in what has been described as the last
   meaningful British cavalry charge at the battle of Omdurman. He also
   served as a war correspondent for the Morning Post. By October 1898, he
   had returned to Britain and begun work on the two-volume The River War,
   published the following year.

   In 1899, Churchill left the army and decided upon a parliamentary
   career. He stood as a Conservative candidate in Oldham in a by-election
   of that year. He came in third (Oldham was at that time a two-seat
   borough), failing to be elected.

   On 12 October 1899, the war between Britain and the Afrikaners broke
   out in South Africa. Churchill went to South Africa as a war
   correspondent to cover second Anglo-Boer war in 1899. Caught in an
   ambush while riding a train, Churchill helped clear the track and get
   the train moving again with the wounded. Churchill himself, however,
   was captured and held in a POW camp in Pretoria. His actions during the
   ambush led to speculation that he would be awarded the Victoria Cross,
   Britain's highest award for gallantry in the face of the enemy, but
   this did not occur. Churchill would later claim that he had been
   captured by General Louis Botha, subsequently prime minister of the
   then Union of South Africa, but this claim has been challenged, notably
   by Churchill's grand-daughter Celia Sandys in her book Churchill Wanted
   Dead or Alive.

   Churchill escaped from his prison camp and travelled almost 300 miles
   (480 km) to Portuguese Lourenço Marques in Delagoa Bay, with the
   assistance of an English mine manager. His escape made him a minor
   national hero for a time in Britain, though instead of returning home,
   he rejoined General Redvers Buller's army on its march to relieve
   Ladysmith and take Pretoria. This time, although continuing as a war
   correspondent, Churchill gained a commission in the South African Light
   Horse Regiment. He was one of the first British troops into Ladysmith
   and Pretoria; in fact, he and the Duke of Marlborough, his cousin, were
   able to get ahead of the rest of the troops in Pretoria, where they
   demanded and received the surrender of 52 Boer guards of the prison
   camp there.

   Churchill's two books on the Boer war, London to Ladysmith via Pretoria
   and Ian Hamilton's March, were published in May and October 1900
   respectively.

Parliament

   After returning from South Africa, Churchill again stood as a
   Conservative party candidate in Oldham, this time in the 1900 general
   election, or Khaki election.

   He was duly elected, but rather than attending the opening of
   Parliament, he embarked on a speaking tour throughout Britain and the
   United States, by means of which he raised ten thousand pounds for
   himself. ( Members of Parliament were unpaid in those days and
   Churchill was not rich by the standards of other MPs at that time.)
   While in the United States, one of his speeches was introduced by Mark
   Twain. He dined with Theodore Roosevelt, however, they did not talk to
   each other.

   In February 1901, Churchill arrived back in Britain to enter
   Parliament, and became associated with a group of Tory dissidents led
   by Lord Hugh Cecil and referred to as the Hughligans, a play on "
   Hooligans". During his first parliamentary session, Churchill provoked
   controversy by opposing the government's army estimates, arguing
   against extravagant military expenditure. By 1903, he was drawing away
   from Lord Hugh's views. He also opposed the Liberal Unionist leader
   Joseph Chamberlain, whose party was in coalition with the
   Conservatives. Chamberlain proposed extensive tariff reforms intended
   to protect the economic preeminence of Britain behind tariff barriers.
   This earned Churchill the detestation of his own supporters — indeed,
   Conservative backbenchers staged a walkout once while he was speaking.
   His own constituency effectively deselected him, although he continued
   to sit for Oldham until the next general election.

   In 1904, Churchill's dissatisfaction with the Conservatives and the
   appeal of the Liberals had grown so strong that, on returning from the
   Whitsun recess, he crossed the floor to sit as a member of the Liberal
   Party. As a Liberal, he continued to campaign for free trade. He won
   the seat of Manchester North West (carefully selected for him) in the
   1906 general election.
   Churchill as a young man
   Enlarge
   Churchill as a young man

   From 1903 until 1905, Churchill was also engaged in writing Lord
   Randolph Churchill, a two-volume biography of his father which came out
   in 1906 and was received as a masterpiece. However, filial devotion
   caused him to soften some of his father's less attractive aspects.

Ministerial office

   When the Liberals took office, with Henry Campbell-Bannerman as Prime
   Minister, in December 1905, Churchill became Under-Secretary of State
   for the Colonies. Serving under the Secretary of State for the
   Colonies, Victor Bruce, 9th Earl of Elgin, Churchill dealt with the
   adoption of constitutions for the defeated Boer republics of the
   Transvaal and Orange River Colony and with the issue of 'Chinese
   slavery' in South African mines. He also became a prominent spokesman
   on free trade. Churchill soon became the most prominent member of the
   Government outside the Cabinet, and when Campbell-Bannerman was
   succeeded by Herbert Henry Asquith in 1908, it came as little surprise
   when Churchill was promoted to the Cabinet as President of the Board of
   Trade. Under the law at the time, a newly appointed Cabinet Minister
   was obliged to seek re-election at a by-election. Churchill lost his
   Manchester seat to the Conservative William Joynson-Hicks but was soon
   elected in another by-election at Dundee constituency. As President of
   the Board of Trade, he pursued radical social reforms in conjunction
   with David Lloyd George, the new Chancellor of the Exchequer.

   In 1910, Churchill was promoted to Home Secretary, where he was to
   prove somewhat controversial. A famous photograph from the time shows
   the impetuous Churchill taking personal charge of the January 1911
   Sidney Street Siege, peering around a corner to view a gun battle
   between cornered anarchists and Scots Guards. His role attracted much
   criticism. The building under siege caught fire. Churchill denied the
   fire brigade access, forcing the criminals to choose surrender or
   death. Arthur Balfour asked, "He [Churchill] and a photographer were
   both risking valuable lives. I understand what the photographer was
   doing but what was the Right Honourable gentleman doing?"

   1910 also saw Churchill preventing the army being used to deal with a
   dispute at the Cambrian Colliery mine in Tonypandy. Initially,
   Churchill blocked the use of troops fearing a repeat of the 1887
   'bloody Sunday' in Trafalgar Square. Nevertheless, troops were deployed
   to protect the mines and to avoid riots when thirteen strikers were
   tried for minor offences, an action that broke the tradition of not
   involving the military in civil affairs and led to lingering dislike
   for Churchill in Wales.

   In 1911, Churchill became First Lord of the Admiralty, a post he would
   hold into World War I. He gave impetus to reform efforts, including
   development of naval aviation, tanks, and the switch in fuel from coal
   to oil, a massive engineering task, also reliant on securing
   Mesopotamia's oil rights, bought circa 1907 through the secret service
   using the Royal Burmah Oil Company as a front company.

   The development of the battle tank was financed from naval research
   funds via the Landships Committee, and, although a decade later
   development of the battle tank would be seen as a stroke of genius, at
   the time it was seen as misappropriation of funds. The tank was
   deployed too early and in too few numbers, much to Churchill's
   annoyance. He wanted a fleet of tanks used to surprise the Germans
   under cover of smoke, and to open a large section of the trenches by
   crushing barbed wire and creating a breakthrough sector.

   In 1915, Churchill was one of the political and military engineers of
   the disastrous Gallipoli landings on the Dardanelles during World War
   I. Churchill took much of the blame for the fiasco, and, when Prime
   Minister Asquith formed an all-party coalition government, the
   Conservatives demanded Churchill's demotion as the price for entry. For
   several months Churchill served in the sinecure of Chancellor of the
   Duchy of Lancaster, before resigning from the government, feeling his
   energies were not being used. He rejoined the army, though remaining an
   MP, and served for several months on the Western Front commanding a
   battalion of the Royal Scots Fusiliers. During this period, his second
   in command was a young Archibald Sinclair who would later lead the
   Liberal Party.

Return to power

   In December 1916, Asquith resigned as Prime Minister and was replaced
   by David Lloyd George. The time was thought not yet right to risk the
   Conservatives' wrath by bringing Churchill back into government.
   However, in July 1917, Churchill was appointed Minister of Munitions.
   He was the main architect of the Ten Year Rule, but the major
   preoccupation of his tenure in the War Office was the Allied
   intervention in the Russian Civil War. Churchill was a staunch advocate
   of foreign intervention, declaring that Bolshevism must be "strangled
   in its cradle". He secured, from a divided and loosely organised
   Cabinet, intensification and prolongation of the British involvement
   beyond the wishes of any major group in Parliament or the nation — and
   in the face of the bitter hostility of Labour. In 1920, after the last
   British forces had been withdrawn, Churchill was instrumental in having
   arms sent to the Poles when they invaded Ukraine. He became Secretary
   of State for the Colonies in 1921 and was a signatory of the
   Anglo-Irish Treaty of 1921, which established the Irish Free State.
   Churchill always disliked Éamon de Valera, the Sinn Féin leader.
   Churchill, to protect British maritime interests engineered the Irish
   Free State agreement to include three Treaty Ports - Queenstown (
   Cobh), Berehaven and Lough Swilly which could be used as Atlantic bases
   by the Royal Navy. Under cuts instituted by Churchill as Chancellor of
   the Exchequer and others, the bases were neglected. Under the terms of
   the Anglo-Irish Trade Agreement the bases were returned to the newly
   constituted Republic of Ireland in 1938.

Career between the wars

   In 1920, as Secretary for War and Air, Churchill had responsibility for
   quelling the rebellion of Kurds and Arabs in British-occupied Iraq,
   which he achieved by authorising the use of poison gas. At the time he
   wrote, "I am strongly in favour of using poison gas against uncivilised
   tribes" - although Churchill's intention was 'to cause disablement of
   some kind but not death'. If it occurred, this is the first recorded
   use of poison gas against a civilian population.

   However, while there is evidence that British commanders requested
   supplies of poison gas, the evidence for its actual use is lacking.
   Since the British relied primarily on air power to attack the Iraqis,
   and since air delivery of gas was not perfected until the 1930s, many
   historians doubt that gas was actually employed.

   In October 1922, Churchill underwent an operation to remove his
   appendix. Upon his return, he learned that the government had fallen
   and a General Election was looming. The Liberal Party was now beset by
   internal division and Churchill's campaign was weak. Even the local
   Dundonian newspapers contained vitriolic rhetoric with regards to his
   political status in the city. At one meeting, he was only able to speak
   for 40 minutes when he was barracked by a section of the audience. He
   came only fourth in the poll and lost his seat at Dundee to
   prohibitionist, Edwin Scrymgeour, quipping later that he left Dundee
   "without an office, without a seat, without a party and without an
   appendix".

   Churchill stood for the Liberals again in the 1923 general election,
   losing in Leicester, but over the next few months he moved towards the
   Conservative Party in all but name. His first electoral contest as an
   Independent candidate, fought under the label of "Independent
   Anti-Socialist," was narrowly lost in a by-election in a London
   constituency -- his third electoral defeat in less than two years.
   However, he stood for election yet again several months later in the
   General Election of 1924, again as an Independent candidate, this time
   under the label of "Constitutionalist" although with Conservative
   backing, and was finally elected to represent Epping (a statue in his
   honour in Woodford Green was erected when Woodford Green was part of
   the Epping constituency). The following year, he formally rejoined the
   Conservative Party, commenting wryly that "Anyone can rat [change
   parties], but it takes a certain ingenuity to re-rat."

   He was appointed Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1924 under Stanley
   Baldwin and oversaw Britain's disastrous return to the Gold Standard,
   which resulted in deflation, unemployment, and the miners' strike that
   led to the General Strike of 1926. This decision prompted the economist
   John Maynard Keynes to write The Economic Consequences of Mr.
   Churchill, arguing that the return to the gold standard would lead to a
   world depression. Churchill later regarded this as one of the worst
   decisions of his life; he was not an economist and that he acted on the
   advice of the Governor of the Bank of England, Montagu Norman.

   During the General Strike of 1926, Churchill was reported to have
   suggested that machine guns be used on the striking miners. Churchill
   edited the Government's newspaper, the British Gazette, and, during the
   dispute, he argued that "either the country will break the General
   Strike, or the General Strike will break the country." Furthermore, he
   controversially claimed that the Fascism of Benito Mussolini had
   "rendered a service to the whole world," showing, as it had, "a way to
   combat subversive forces" — that is, he considered the regime to be a
   bulwark against the perceived threat of Communist revolution. At one
   point, Churchill went as far as to call Mussolini the "Roman genius ...
   the greatest lawgiver among men."

   The Conservative government was defeated in the 1929 General Election.
   In the next two years, Churchill became estranged from the Conservative
   leadership over the issues of protective tariffs and Indian Home Rule,
   which he bitterly opposed. He denigrated the father of the Indian
   independence movement, Mahatma Gandhi, as "a half-naked fakir" who
   "ought to be laid, bound hand and foot, at the gates of Delhi and then
   trampled on by an enormous elephant with the new viceroy seated on its
   back". When Ramsay MacDonald formed the National Government in 1931,
   Churchill was not invited to join the Cabinet. He was now at the lowest
   point in his career, in a period known as "the wilderness years". He
   spent much of the next few years concentrating on his writing,
   including Marlborough: His Life and Times — a biography of his ancestor
   John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough — and A History of the English
   Speaking Peoples (which was not published until well after World War
   II). He became most notable for his outspoken opposition towards the
   granting of independence to India (see Simon Commission and Government
   of India Act 1935).

   Soon, though, his attention was drawn to the rise of Adolf Hitler and
   the dangers of Germany's rearmament. For a time, he was a lone voice
   calling on Britain to strengthen itself to counter the belligerence of
   Germany. Churchill was a fierce critic of Neville Chamberlain's
   appeasement of Hitler, leading the wing of the Conservative Party that
   opposed the Munich Agreement which Chamberlain famously declared to
   mean "peace in our time". He was also an outspoken supporter of King
   Edward VIII during the Abdication Crisis, leading to some speculation
   that he might be appointed Prime Minister if the King refused to take
   Baldwin's advice and consequently the government resigned. However,
   this did not happen, and Churchill found himself politically isolated
   and bruised for some time after this.

Role as wartime Prime Minister

   At the outbreak of the Second World War Churchill--after a brief offer
   by Chamberlain to appoint him as a minister without portfolio--was
   appointed First Lord of the Admiralty and a member of the War Cabinet,
   just as he was in the first part of the First World War. The Navy
   immediately sent out the signal: "Winston is back!"

   In this job, he proved to be one of the highest-profile ministers
   during the so-called " Phony War", when the only noticeable action was
   at sea. Churchill advocated the pre-emptive occupation of the neutral
   Norwegian iron-ore port of Narvik and the iron mines in Kiruna, Sweden,
   early in the War. However, Chamberlain and the rest of the War Cabinet
   disagreed, and the operation was delayed until the German invasion of
   Norway, which was successful despite British efforts.

   On 10 May 1940, hours before the German invasion of France by a
   surprising lightning advance through the Low Countries, it became clear
   that, following failure in Norway and general incompetence, the country
   had no confidence in Chamberlain's prosecution of the war and so
   Chamberlain resigned. The commonly accepted version of events states
   that Lord Halifax turned down the post of Prime Minister because he
   believed he could not govern effectively as a member of the House of
   Lords instead of the House of Commons. Although traditionally, the
   Prime Minister does not advise the King on the former's successor,
   Chamberlain wanted someone who would command the support of all three
   major parties in the House of Commons. A meeting with the other two
   party leaders led to the recommendation of Churchill, and, as a
   constitutional monarch, George VI asked Churchill to be Prime Minister
   and to form an all-party government. Churchill, breaking with
   tradition, did not send Chamberlain a message expressing regret over
   his resignation.

   Churchill's greatest achievement was that he refused to capitulate when
   defeat by Germany was a strong possibility and he remained a strong
   opponent of any negotiations with Germany. Few others in the Cabinet
   had this degree of resolve. By adopting this policy, Churchill
   maintained Britain as a base from which the Allies could attack
   Germany, thereby ensuring that the Soviet sphere of influence did not
   also extend over Western Europe at the end of the war.

   In response to previous criticisms that there had been no clear single
   minister in charge of the prosecution of the war, Churchill created and
   took the additional position of Minister of Defence. He immediately put
   his friend and confidant, the industrialist and newspaper baron Lord
   Beaverbrook, in charge of aircraft production. It was Beaverbrook's
   astounding business acumen that allowed Britain to quickly gear up
   aircraft production and engineering that eventually made the difference
   in the war.

   Churchill's speeches were a great inspiration to the embattled British.
   His first speech as Prime Minister was the famous "I have nothing to
   offer but blood, toil, tears, and sweat" speech. He followed that
   closely with two other equally famous ones, given just before the
   Battle of Britain. One included the immortal line, "We shall defend our
   island, whatever the cost may be, we shall fight on the beaches, we
   shall fight on the landing grounds, we shall fight in the fields and in
   the streets, we shall fight in the hills; we shall never surrender."
   The other included the equally famous "Let us therefore brace ourselves
   to our duties, and so bear ourselves that, if the British Empire and
   its Commonwealth last for a thousand years, men will still say, ' This
   was their finest hour.' " At the height of the Battle of Britain, his
   bracing survey of the situation included the memorable line "Never in
   the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few",
   which engendered the enduring nickname " The Few" for the Allied
   fighter pilots who won it. One of his most memorable war speeches came
   on 10 November 1942 at the Lord Mayor's Luncheon at Mansion House in
   London. That day, word had come that American and British troops had
   surrounded the port of Casablanca in Africa. As most people were saying
   it was the beginning of the end, Churchill famously said

   "This is not the end. It is not even the beginning of the end. But it
   is, perhaps, the end of the beginning"
   Chiang Kai-shek, Franklin D. Roosevelt, and Churchill at the Cairo
   Conference in 1943
   Enlarge
   Chiang Kai-shek, Franklin D. Roosevelt, and Churchill at the Cairo
   Conference in 1943

   His good relationship with Franklin D. Roosevelt secured vital food,
   oil and munitions via the North Atlantic shipping routes. It was for
   this reason that Churchill was relieved when Roosevelt was re-elected
   in 1940. Upon re-election, Roosevelt immediately set about implementing
   a new method of not only providing military hardware to Britain without
   the need for monetary payment, but also of providing, free of financial
   charge, much of the shipping that transported the supplies. Put simply,
   Roosevelt persuaded Congress that repayment for this immensely costly
   service would take the form of defending the USA; and so Lend-lease was
   born. Churchill had 12 strategic conferences with Roosevelt which
   covered the Atlantic Charter, Europe first strategy, the Declaration by
   the United Nations and other war policies. Churchill initiated the
   Special Operations Executive (SOE) under Hugh Dalton's Ministry of
   Economic Warfare, which established, conducted and fostered covert,
   subversive and partisan operations in occupied territories with notable
   success; and also the Commandos which established the pattern for most
   of the world's current Special Forces. The Russians referred to him as
   the "British Bulldog".

   Churchill's health suffered, as shown by a mild heart attack he
   suffered in December 1941 at the White House and also in December 1943
   when he contracted pneumonia.

   Churchill was party to treaties that would redraw post-World War II
   European and Asian boundaries. These were discussed as early as 1943.
   Proposals for European boundaries and settlements were officially
   agreed to by Harry S. Truman, Churchill, and Stalin at Potsdam. At the
   second Quebec Conference in 1944 he drafted and together with U.S.
   President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed a toned down version of the
   original Morgenthau Plan, where they pledged to convert Germany after
   its unconditional surrender "into a country primarily agricultural and
   pastoral in its character."

   The settlement concerning the borders of Poland, that is, the boundary
   between Poland and the Soviet Union and between Germany and Poland, was
   viewed as a betrayal in Poland during the post-war years, as it was
   established against the views of the Polish government in exile.
   Churchill was convinced that the only way to alleviate tensions between
   the two populations was the transfer of people, to match the national
   borders. As he expounded in the House of Commons in 1944, "Expulsion is
   the method which, insofar as we have been able to see, will be the most
   satisfactory and lasting. There will be no mixture of populations to
   cause endless trouble... A clean sweep will be made. I am not alarmed
   by these transferences, which are more possible in modern conditions."
   However the resulting expulsions of Germans was carried out by the
   Soviet Union in a way which resulted in much hardship and, according to
   amongst others a 1966 report by the West German Ministry of Refugees
   and Displaced Persons, the death of over 2,100,000. Churchill opposed
   the effective annexation of Poland by the Soviet Union and wrote
   bitterly about it in his books, but he was unable to prevent it at the
   conferences.

   On 9 October 1944, he and Eden were in Moscow, and that night they met
   Joseph Stalin in the Kremlin, without the Americans. Bargaining went on
   throughout the night. Churchill wrote on a scrap of paper that Stalin
   had a 90 percent "interest" in Romania, Britain a 90 percent "interest"
   in Greece, both Russia and Britain a 50 percent interest in Yugoslavia.
   When they got to Italy, Stalin ceded that country to Churchill. The
   crucial questions arose when the Ministers of Foreign Affairs discussed
   "percentages" in Eastern Europe. Molotov's proposals were that Russia
   should have a 75 percent interest in Hungary, 75 percent in Bulgaria,
   and 60 percent in Yugoslavia. This was Stalin's price for ceding Italy
   and Greece. Eden tried to haggle: Hungary 75/25, Bulgaria 80/20, but
   Yugoslavia 50/50. After lengthy bargaining they settled on an 80/20
   division of interest between Russia and Britain in Bulgaria and
   Hungary, and a 50/50 division in Yugoslavia. U.S. Ambassador Harriman
   was informed only after the bargain was struck. This gentleman's
   agreement was sealed with a handshake.

After World War II

   Although the importance of Churchill's role in World War II was
   undeniable, he had many enemies in his own country. His expressed
   contempt for a number of popular ideas, in particular public health
   care and better education for the majority of the population, produced
   much dissatisfaction amongst the population, particularly those who had
   fought in the war. Immediately following the close of the war in
   Europe, Churchill was heavily defeated in the 1945 election by Clement
   Attlee and the Labour Party. Some historians think that many British
   voters believed that the man who had led the nation so well in war was
   not the best man to lead it in peace. Others see the election result as
   a reaction not against Churchill personally, but against the
   Conservative Party's record in the 1930s under Baldwin and Chamberlain.

   Winston Churchill was an early supporter of the pan-Europeanism that
   eventually led to the formation of the European Common Market and later
   the European Union (for which one of the three main buildings of the
   European Parliament is named in his honour). Churchill was also
   instrumental in giving France a permanent seat on the United Nations
   Security Council (which provided another European power to
   counterbalance the Soviet Union's permanent seat). Churchill also
   occasionally made comments supportive of world government. For
   instance, he once said (see ):

          Unless some effective world supergovernment for the purpose of
          preventing war can be set up… the prospects for peace and human
          progress are dark… If… it is found possible to build a world
          organization of irresistible force and inviolable authority for
          the purpose of securing peace, there are no limits to the
          blessings which all men enjoy and share.

   At the beginning of the Cold War, he famously popularised the term "The
   Iron Curtain", which had been used before by Nazi leaders Hitler and
   Goebbels. The term entered the public consciousness after a speech
   given on 5 March 1946 at Westminster College in Fulton, Missouri, when
   Churchill, a guest of Harry S. Truman, famously declared:

          From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic, an Iron
          Curtain has descended across the continent. Behind that line lie
          all the capitals of the ancient states of Central and Eastern
          Europe. Warsaw, Berlin, Prague, Vienna, Budapest, Belgrade,
          Bucharest and Sofia, all these famous cities and the populations
          around them lie in what I must call the Soviet sphere.

Second term

   Churchill was restless and bored as leader of the Conservative
   opposition in the immediate post-war years. After Labour's defeat in
   the General Election of 1951, Churchill again became Prime Minister.
   His third government — after the wartime national government and the
   brief caretaker government of 1945 — would last until his resignation
   in 1955. During this period, he renewed what he called the " special
   relationship" between Britain and the United States, and engaged
   himself in the formation of the post-war order.
   Churchill with Canadian Prime Minister Louis St. Laurent in 1954
   Enlarge
   Churchill with Canadian Prime Minister Louis St. Laurent in 1954

   His domestic priorities were, however, overshadowed by a series of
   foreign policy crises, which were partly the result of the continued
   decline of British military and imperial prestige and power. Being a
   strong proponent of Britain as an international power, Churchill would
   often meet such moments with direct action.

The Mau Mau Rebellion

   In 1951, grievances against the colonial distribution of land came to a
   head with the Kenya Africa Union demanding greater representation and
   land reform. When these demands were rejected, more radical elements
   came forward, launching the Mau Mau rebellion in 1952. On 17 August
   1952, a state of emergency was declared, and British troops were flown
   to Kenya to deal with the rebellion. As both sides increased the
   ferocity of their attacks, the country moved to full-scale civil war.

   In 1953, the Lari massacre, perpetrated by Mau-Mau insurgents against
   Kikuyu loyal to the British, changed the political complexion of the
   rebellion and gave the public-relations advantage to the British.
   Churchill's strategy was to use a military stick combined with
   implementing many of the concessions that Attlee's government had
   blocked in 1951. He ordered an increased military presence and
   appointed General Sir George Erskine, who would implement Operation
   Anvil in 1954 that broke the back of the rebellion in the city of
   Nairobi. Operation Hammer, in turn, was designed to root out rebels in
   the countryside. Churchill ordered peace talks opened, but these
   collapsed shortly after his leaving office.

Malayan Emergency

   In Malaya, a rebellion against British rule had been in progress since
   1948. Once again, Churchill's government inherited a crisis, and once
   again Churchill chose to use direct military action against those in
   rebellion while attempting to build an alliance with those who were
   not. He stepped up the implementation of a " hearts and minds" campaign
   and approved the creation of fortified villages, a tactic that would
   become a recurring part of Western military strategy in Southeast Asia.
   (See Vietnam War).

   The Malayan Emergency was a more direct case of a guerrilla movement,
   centred in an ethnic group, but backed by the Soviet Union. As such,
   Britain's policy of direct confrontation and military victory had a
   great deal more support than in Iran or in Kenya. At the highpoint of
   the conflict, over 35,500 British troops were stationed in Malaya. As
   the rebellion lost ground, it began to lose favour with the local
   population.

   While the rebellion was slowly being defeated, it was equally clear
   that colonial rule from Britain was no longer plausible. In 1953, plans
   were drawn up for independence for Singapore and the other crown
   colonies in the region. The first elections were held in 1955, just
   days before Churchill's own resignation, and in 1957, under Prime
   Minister Anthony Eden, Malaya became independent.

Family and personal life

   A young Winston Churchill and fiancée Clementine Hozier shortly before
   their marriage in 1908.
   Enlarge
   A young Winston Churchill and fiancée Clementine Hozier shortly before
   their marriage in 1908.

   On 12 September 1908 at the socially desirable St. Margaret's,
   Westminster, Churchill married Clementine Hozier, a woman whom he met
   at a dinner party that March (he had proposed to actress Ethel
   Barrymore but was turned down). They had five children: Diana;
   Randolph; Sarah, who co-starred with Fred Astaire in Royal Wedding;
   Marigold (1918 - 1921), who died in early childhood; and Mary, who has
   written a book about her parents. Churchill's son Randolph and his
   grandsons Nicholas Soames and Winston all followed him into Parliament.
   The daughters tended to marry politicians and support their careers.

   Clementine's mother was Lady Blanche Henrietta Ogilvy, second wife of
   Sir Henry Montague Hozier and a daughter of the 7th Earl of Airlie.
   Clementine's paternity, however, is open to debate. Lady Blanche was
   well known for sharing her favours and was eventually divorced as a
   result. She maintained that Clementine's father was Capt. William
   George "Bay" Middleton, a noted horseman. But Clementine's biographer
   Joan Hardwick has surmised, due to Sir Henry Hozier's reputed
   sterility, that all Lady Blanche's "Hozier" children were actually
   fathered by her sister's husband, Algernon Bertram Freeman-Mitford,
   better known as a grandfather of the infamous Mitford sisters of the
   1920s.

   When not in London on government business, Churchill usually lived at
   his beloved Chartwell House in Kent, two miles south of Westerham. He
   and his wife bought the house in 1922 and lived there until his death
   in 1965. During his Chartwell stays, he enjoyed writing as well as
   painting, bricklaying, and admiring the estate's famous black swans.

   As a painter he was prolific, with over 570 paintings and two
   sculptures, he received a Diploma from the Royal Academy, London. His
   paintings were catalogued after his death by historian David Coombs
   with the support of the Churchill family. Coombs has published two
   books on the subject. The modern archive of Churchill's art work is
   managed by designer, Tony Malone who oversees the administration and
   management of digital catalogue. Anthea Morton Saner and the Churchill
   Heritage Trust are responsible for all copyrights.

   Like many politicians of his age, Churchill was also a member of
   several English gentlemen's clubs - the Reform Club and the National
   Liberal Club whilst he was a Liberal MP, and later the Athenaeum,
   Boodle's, Bucks, and the Carlton Club when he was a Conservative.
   Despite his multiple memberships, Churchill was not a habitual clubman;
   he spent relatively little time in each of these, and preferred to
   conduct any lunchtime or dinner meetings at the Savoy Grill or the
   Ritz, or else in the Members' Dining Room of the House of Commons when
   meeting other MPs.

   Churchill's fondness for alcoholic beverages was well-documented. While
   in India and South Africa, he got in the habit of adding small amounts
   of whisky to the water he drank in order to prevent disease. He was
   quoted on the subject as saying that "by dint of careful application I
   learned to like it." He consumed alcoholic drinks on a near-daily basis
   for long periods in his life, and frequently imbibed before, after, and
   during mealtimes. He is not generally considered by historians to have
   been an alcoholic, however, since his drinking produced few, if any,
   noticeable negative effects on either his ability to govern or his
   personal life. The Churchill Centre states that Churchill made a bet
   with a man with the last name of Rothermere (possibly one of the
   Viscounts Rothermere) in 1936 that Churchill would be able to
   successfully abstain from drinking hard liquor for a year; Churchill
   apparently won the bet. According to William Manchester in The Last
   Lion, Churchill's favorite whisky was Johnnie Walker Red.

   For much of his life, Churchill battled with depression (or perhaps a
   sub-type of manic-depression), which he called his black dog .

Last days

   Aware that he was slowing down both physically and mentally, Churchill
   retired as Prime Minister in 1955 and was succeeded by Anthony Eden,
   who had long been his ambitious protégé. (Three years earlier, Eden had
   married Churchill's niece, Anne Clarissa Spencer-Churchill, his second
   marriage.) Churchill spent most of his retirement at Chartwell House in
   Kent, two miles south of Westerham.

   In 1963, U.S. President John F. Kennedy acting under authorization
   granted by an Act of Congress, proclaimed Churchill the first Honorary
   Citizen of the United States. Churchill was too ill to attend the White
   House ceremony, so his son and grandson accepted the award for him.

   On 15 January 1965, Churchill suffered another stroke — a severe
   cerebral thrombosis — that left him gravely ill. He died nine days
   later, aged 90, on 24 January 1965, 70 years to the day after his
   father's death.

   By decree of the Queen, his body lay in State in Westminster Hall for
   three days and a state funeral service was held at St Paul's Cathedral.
   This was the first state funeral for a non-royal family member since
   1914, and no other of its kind has been held since.

   As his coffin passed down the Thames on the Havengore, the cranes of
   London's docklands bowed in salute. The Royal Artillery fired a 19-gun
   salute (as head of government), and the RAF staged a fly-by of sixteen
   English Electric Lightning fighters. The state funeral was the largest
   gathering of dignitaries in Britain as representatives from over 100
   countries attended, including French President Charles de Gaulle,
   Canadian Prime Minister Lester Pearson, Prime Minister of Rhodesia Ian
   Smith, other heads of state and government, and members of royalty. The
   cortege left London from Waterloo station, as Churchill had requested
   should he predecease De Gaulle. It also saw the largest assemblage of
   statesmen in the world until the funeral of Pope John Paul II in 2005.

   At Churchill's request, he was buried in the family plot at St Martin
   Church, Bladon, near Woodstock, not far from his birthplace at
   Blenheim.

   Because the funeral took place on 30 January, people in the United
   States marked it by paying tribute to his friendship with Franklin D.
   Roosevelt because it was the anniversary of FDR's birth. The tributes
   were led by Roosevelt's children.

   On 9 February 1965, Churchill's estate was probated at 304,044 pounds
   sterling (equivalent to about £3.8m in 2004).

   One of four specially made sets of false teeth, designed to retain
   Churchill's distinctive style of speech, which Churchill wore
   throughout his life is now kept in the Hunterian Museum at the Royal
   College of Surgeons of England.

Honours

   From 1941 to his death, he was the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, a
   ceremonial office. In 1941 Canadian Prime Minister William Lyon
   Mackenzie King swore him into the Queen's Privy Council for Canada.
   Although this allowed him to use the honorific title " The Honourable"
   and the post-nominal letters "P.C." both of these were trumped by his
   membership in the Imperial Privy Council which allowed him the use of
   The Right Honourable.

   In 1953, he was awarded two major honours: he was invested as a Knight
   of the Garter (becoming Sir Winston Churchill, KG) and he was awarded
   the Nobel Prize for Literature "for his mastery of historical and
   biographical description as well as for brilliant oratory in defending
   exalted human values".

   A stroke in June of that year led to him being paralysed down his left
   side. He retired as Prime Minister on 5 April 1955 because of his
   health, but retained his post as Chancellor of the University of
   Bristol, and remained a member of parliament until 1964. In 1959, he
   became Father of the House, the MP with the longest continuous service.

   In 1955, after retiring as Prime Minister, Churchill was offered
   elevation to the peerage in the rank of duke. He considered the offer,
   and even chose the name "Duke of London". However, he then declined the
   title after being persuaded by his son Randolph not to accept it, since
   Randolph wished to pursue a political career in the House of Commons,
   which would be impossible if he inherited a peerage, since, at that
   time, there was no procedure for disclaiming a title. Since then, only
   British royals have been made dukes.

   In 1956, Churchill received the Karlspreis (known in English as the
   Charlemagne Award), an award by the German city of Aachen to those who
   most contribute to the European idea and European peace.

   In 1960, Churchill College, Cambridge was established as the national
   and Commonwealth memorial to Churchill.

   In 1963, he became the first person to become an Honorary Citizen of
   the United States.

   Churchill is the tenth most admired person by Americans in the 20th
   century, according to Gallup.

   Eight schools in Canada are named in his honour, one each in Vancouver,
   Winnipeg, Hamilton, Kingston, St. Catharines, Lethbridge, Calgary, and
   Ottawa. Churchill Auditorium at the Technion is named after him.

Famous quotations

     * "All great things are simple, and many can be expressed in single
       words: freedom, justice, honour, duty, mercy, hope."

     * "Courage is what it takes to stand up and speak; courage is also
       what it takes to sit down and listen."

     * "Never, never, never, never give up."

     * "Democracy is the worst form of government, except for all those
       other forms that have been tried from time to time."

     * " We shall fight on the beaches, we shall fight on the landing
       grounds, we shall fight in the fields and in the streets, we shall
       fight in the hills; we shall never surrender."

Churchill as historian

   See major article: Winston Churchill as historian

Churchill's Cabinets

Churchill's war cabinet, May 1940 – May 1945

     * Winston Churchill — Prime Minister, Minister of Defence and Leader
       of the House of Commons.
     * Neville Chamberlain — Lord President of the Council
     * Clement Attlee — Lord Privy Seal and effective Deputy Leader of the
       House of Commons.
     * Lord Halifax — Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
     * Arthur Greenwood — Minister without Portfolio

Changes

     * August 1940: Lord Beaverbrook (a Canadian-British citizen),
       Minister of Aircraft Production, joins the War Cabinet
     * October 1940: Sir John Anderson succeeds Neville Chamberlain as
       Lord President. Sir Kingsley Wood, the Chancellor of the Exchequer,
       and Ernest Bevin, the Minister of Labour, enter the War Cabinet.
       Lord Halifax assumes the additional job of Leader of the House of
       Lords.
     * December 1940: Anthony Eden succeeds Lord Halifax as Foreign
       Secretary. Halifax remains nominally in the Cabinet as Ambassador
       to the United States. His successor as Leader of the House of Lords
       is not in the War Cabinet.
     * May 1941: Lord Beaverbrook ceased to be Minister of Aircraft
       Production, but remains in the Cabinet as Minister of State. His
       successor was not in the War Cabinet.
     * June 1941: Lord Beaverbrook becomes Minister of Supply, remaining
       in the War Cabinet.
     * 1941: Oliver Lyttelton enters the Cabinet as Minister Resident in
       the Middle East.
     * 4 February 1942: Lord Beaverbrook becomes Minister of War
       Production, his successor as Minister of Supply is not in the War
       Cabinet.
     * 19 February 1942: Beaverbrook resigns and no replacement Minister
       of War Production is appointed for the moment. Clement Attlee
       becomes Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs and Deputy Prime
       Minister. Sir Stafford Cripps succeeds Attlee as Lord Privy Seal
       and takes over the position of Leader of the House of Commons from
       Churchill. Sir Kingsley Wood leaves the War Cabinet, though
       remaining Chancellor of the Exchequer.
     * 22 February 1942: Arthur Greenwood resigns from the War Cabinet.
     * March 1942: Oliver Lyttelton fills the vacant position of Minister
       of Production ("War" was dropped from the title). Richard Gardiner
       Casey (a member of the Australian Parliament) succeeds Oliver
       Lyttelton as Minister Resident in the Middle East.
     * October 1942: Sir Stafford Cripps retires as Lord Privy Seal and
       Leader of the House of Commons and leaves the War Cabinet. His
       successor as Lord Privy Seal is not in the Cabinet, Anthony Eden
       takes the additional position of Leader of the House of Commons.
       The Home Secretary, Herbert Morrison, enters the Cabinet.
     * September 1943: Sir John Anderson succeeds Sir Kingsley Wood
       (deceased) as Chancellor of the Exchequer, remaining in the War
       Cabinet. Clement Attlee succeeds Anderson as Lord President,
       remaining also Deputy Prime Minister. Attlee's successor as
       Dominions Secretary is not in the Cabinet.
     * November 1943: Lord Woolton enters the Cabinet as Minister of
       Reconstruction.
     * January to November 1944: Lord Moyne replaces Richard Gardiner
       Casey as Minister Resident in the Middle East.

Winston Churchill's caretaker cabinet, May – July 1945

     * Winston Churchill — Prime Minister and Minister of Defence
     * Lord Woolton – Lord President of the Council
     * Lord Beaverbrook — Lord Privy Seal
     * Sir John Anderson — Chancellor of the Exchequer
     * Sir Donald Bradley Somervell — Secretary of State for the Home
       Department
     * Anthony Eden — Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Leader of
       the House of Commons
     * Oliver Stanley — Secretary of State for the Colonies
     * Lord Cranborne — Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs and Leader
       of the House of Lords
     * Sir P.J. Grigg — Secretary of State for War
     * Leo Amery — Secretary of State for India and Burma
     * Lord Rosebery — Secretary of State for Scotland
     * Harold Macmillan — Secretary of State for Air
     * Brendan Bracken — First Lord of the Admiralty
     * Oliver Lyttelton — President of the Board of Trade and Minister of
       Production
     * Robert Hudson — Minister of Agriculture
     * Rab Butler — Minister of Labour

Winston Churchill's third cabinet, October 1951 – April 1955

     * Winston Churchill — Prime Minister and Minister of Defence
     * Lord Simonds — Lord Chancellor
     * Lord Woolton — Lord President of the Council
     * Lord Salisbury — Lord Privy Seal and Leader of the House of Lords
     * Rab Butler — Chancellor of the Exchequer
     * Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe — Secretary of State for the Home Department
     * Anthony Eden — Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
     * Oliver Lyttelton — Secretary of State for the Colonies
     * Lord Ismay — Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations
     * James Stuart — Secretary of State for Scotland
     * Peter Thorneycroft — President of the Board of Trade
     * Lord Cherwell — Paymaster-General
     * Sir Walter Monckton — Minister of Labour
     * Harry Crookshank — Minister of Health and Leader of the House of
       Commons
     * Harold Macmillan — Minister of Housing and Local Government
     * Lord Leathers — Minister for the Co-ordination of Transport, Fuel,
       and Power

Changes

     * March 1952: Lord Salisbury succeeds Lord Ismay as Commonwealth
       Relations Secretary. Salisbury remains also Lord Privy Seal and
       Leader of the House of Lords. Lord Alexander of Tunis succeeds
       Churchill as Minister of Defence.
     * May 1952: Harry Crookshank succeeds Lord Salisbury as Lord Privy
       Seal, remaining Leader of the House of Commons. Salisbury remains
       Commonwealth Relations Secretary and Leader of the House of Lords.
       Crookshank's successor as Minister of Health is not in the Cabinet.
     * November 1952: Lord Woolton becomes Chancellor of the Duchy of
       Lancaster. Lord Salisbury succeeds Lord Woolton as Lord President.
       Lord Swinton succeeds Lord Salisbury as Commonwealth Relations
       Secretary.
     * September 1953: Florence Horsbrugh, the Minister of Education, Sir
       Thomas Dugdale, the Minister of Agriculture, and Gwilym Lloyd
       George, the Minister of Food, enter the cabinet. The Ministry for
       the Co-ordination of Transport, Fuel, and Power, is abolished, and
       Lord Leathers leaves the Cabinet.
     * October 1953: Lord Cherwell resigns as Paymaster General. His
       successor is not in the Cabinet.
     * July 1954: Alan Lennox-Boyd succeeds Oliver Lyttelton as Colonial
       Secretary. Derick Heathcoat Amory succeeds Sir Thomas Dugdale as
       Minister of Agriculture.
     * October 1954: Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe, now Lord Kilmuir, succeeds
       Lord Simonds as Lord Chancellor. Gwilym Lloyd George succeeds him
       as Home Secretary. The Food Ministry is merged into the Ministry of
       Agriculture. Sir David Eccles succeeds Florence Horsbrugh as
       Minister of Education. Harold Macmillan succeeds Lord Alexander of
       Tunis as Minister of Defence. Duncan Sandys succeeds Macmillan as
       Minister of Housing and Local Government. Osbert Peake, the
       Minister of Pensions and National Insurance, enters the Cabinet.

Offices

   Parliament of the United Kingdom
   Preceded by:
   Walter Runciman Member for Oldham
   1900–1906 Succeeded by:
   John Albert Bright
   Preceded by:
   Sir William Houldsworth Member for Manchester North-West
   1906–1908 Succeeded by:
   William Joynson-Hicks
   Preceded by:
   Alexander Wilkie Member for Dundee
   1908–1922 Succeeded by:
   Edmund Morel
   Preceded by:
   Sir Charles Lyle Member for Epping
   1924–1945 Succeeded by:
   Leah Manning
   Preceded by:
   – Member for Woodford
   1945–1964 Succeeded by:
   Patrick Jenkin
   Political offices
   Preceded by:
   David Lloyd George President of the Board of Trade
   1908–1910 Succeeded by:
   Sydney Buxton
   Preceded by:
   Herbert Gladstone Home Secretary
   1910–1911 Succeeded by:
   Reginald McKenna
   Preceded by:
   Reginald McKenna First Lord of the Admiralty
   1911–1915 Succeeded by:
   Arthur Balfour
   Preceded by:
   Edwin Samuel Montagu Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster
   1915 Succeeded by:
   Herbert Samuel
   Preceded by:
   Christopher Addison Minister of Munitions
   1917–1919 Succeeded by:
   The Lord Inverforth
   Preceded by:
   The Viscount Milner Secretary of State for War
   1919–1921 Succeeded by:
   Sir Laming Worthington-Evans
   Preceded by:
   The Lord Weir Secretary of State for Air
   1919–1921 Succeeded by:
   Frederick Edward Guest
   Preceded by:
   The Viscount Milner Secretary of State for the Colonies
   1921–1922 Succeeded by:
   The Duke of Devonshire
   Preceded by:
   Philip Snowden Chancellor of the Exchequer
   1924–1929 Succeeded by:
   Philip Snowden
   Preceded by:
   The Earl Stanhope First Lord of the Admiralty
   1939–1940 Succeeded by:
   A. V. Alexander
   Preceded by:
   Neville Chamberlain Leader of the House of Commons
   1940–1942 Succeeded by:
   Sir Stafford Cripps
   Prime Minister of the United Kingdom
   1940–1945 Succeeded by:
   Clement Attlee
   Preceded by:
   — Minister of Defence
   1940–1945
   Preceded by:
   Neville Chamberlain Leader of the British Conservative Party
   1940–1955 Succeeded by:
   Sir Anthony Eden
   Preceded by:
   Clement Attlee Leader of the Opposition
   1945–1951 Succeeded by:
   Clement Attlee
   Preceded by:
   Clement Attlee Prime Minister of the United Kingdom
   1951–1955 Succeeded by:
   Sir Anthony Eden
   Preceded by:
   Emanuel Shinwell Minister of Defence
   1951–1952 Succeeded by:
   The Earl Alexander of Tunis
   Preceded by:
   David Grenfell Father of the House
   1959–1964 Succeeded by:
   Rab Butler
   Honorary Titles
   Preceded by:
   The Marquess of Willingdon Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports
   1941–1965 Succeeded by:
   Sir Robert Menzies
   Academic Offices
   Preceded by:
   The Viscount Haldane of Cloan Chancellor of the University of Bristol
   Succeeded by:
   The Duke of Beaufort

   Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom Flag of the United Kingdom
   Walpole, Wilmington, Pelham, Newcastle, Devonshire, Newcastle, Bute, G
   Grenville, Rockingham, Chatham (Pitt the Elder), Grafton, North,
   Rockingham, Shelburne, Portland, Pitt the Younger, Addington, Pitt the
   Younger, W Grenville, Portland, Perceval, Liverpool, Canning, Goderich,
   Wellington, Grey, Melbourne, Peel, Melbourne, Peel, Russell, Derby,
   Aberdeen, Palmerston, Derby, Palmerston, Russell, Derby, Disraeli,
   Gladstone, Disraeli, Gladstone, Salisbury, Gladstone, Salisbury,
   Gladstone, Rosebery, Salisbury, Balfour, Campbell-Bannerman, Asquith,
   Lloyd George, Bonar Law, Baldwin, MacDonald, Baldwin, MacDonald,
   Baldwin, Chamberlain, Churchill, Attlee, Churchill, Eden, Macmillan,
   Douglas-Home, Wilson, Heath, Wilson, Callaghan, Thatcher, Major, Blair

                        Chancellors of the Exchequer
   Baker, Mildmay, Fortescue, Home, Caesar, Greville, Portland, Newburgh,
   Cottington, Colepeper, Clarendon, Shaftesbury, Duncombe, Ernle, Booth,
   Hampden, Montagu, Smith, Boyle, Smith, Harley, Benson, Wyndham, Onslow,
   Walpole, Stanhope, Aislabie, Pratt, Walpole, Sandys, Pelham, Lee,
   Bilson Legge, Lyttelton, Bilson Legge, Mansfield, Bilson Legge,
   Barrington, Dashwood, Grenville, Dowdeswell, Townshend, North,
   Cavendish, Pitt, Cavendish, Pitt, Addington, Pitt, Petty, Perceval,
   Vansittart, Robinson, Canning, Abbott, Herries, Goulburn, Althorp,
   Denman, Peel, Monteagle, Baring, Goulburn, C Wood, Disraeli, Gladstone,
   Lewis, Disraeli, Gladstone, Disraeli, Hunt, Lowe, Gladstone, Northcote,
   Gladstone, Childers, Hicks Beach, Harcourt, R Churchill, Goschen,
   Harcourt, Hicks Beach, Ritchie, A Chamberlain, Asquith, Lloyd George,
   McKenna, Bonar Law, A Chamberlain, Horne, Baldwin, N Chamberlain,
   Snowden, W Churchill, Snowden, N Chamberlain, Simon, K Wood, Anderson,
   Dalton, Cripps, Gaitskell, Butler, Macmillan, Thorneycroft,
   Heathcoat-Amory, Lloyd, Maudling, Callaghan, Jenkins, Macleod, Barber,
   Healey, Howe, Lawson, Major, Lamont, Clarke, Brown
                      Leaders of the Conservative Party
   The Duke of Wellington, Sir Robert Peel, The Earl of Derby, Benjamin
   Disraeli, The Marquess of Salisbury, Arthur Balfour, Andrew Bonar Law,
   Stanley Baldwin, Neville Chamberlain, Winston Churchill, Anthony Eden,
   Harold Macmillan, Sir Alec Douglas-Home, Edward Heath, Margaret
   Thatcher, John Major, William Hague, Iain Duncan Smith, Michael Howard,
   David Cameron
   Cold War
   Main events (1945–1961) Main events (1962–1991) Specific articles
   Primary participants and other events

   General timeline:
     * Timeline of events

   1940s:
     * Yalta Conference
     * Potsdam Conference
     * Gouzenko Affair
     * Iran Crisis
     * Chinese Civil War
     * Greek Civil War
     * Marshall Plan
     * Berlin Blockade

   1950s:
     * Korean War
     * First Indochina War
     * Iranian Coup
     * Guatemalan Coup
     * East German Uprising
     * First Taiwan Strait Crisis
     * Hungarian Revolution
     * Suez Crisis
     * Sputnik Crisis
     * Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
     * Cuban Revolution

   1960s:
     * Vietnam War
     * Congo Crisis
     * Sino-Soviet Split
     * U-2 Crisis of 1960
     * Bay of Pigs Invasion

   1960s (continued):
     * Cuban Missile Crisis
     * Erection of the Berlin Wall
     * Overthrow of Sukarno
     * Secret War in Laos
     * Regime of the Colonels in Greece
     * Prague Spring
     * Détente
     * Sino-Soviet Border Conflict

   1970s:
     * Cambodian Civil War
     * Ping Pong Diplomacy
     * 1972 Nixon Visit to China
     * Overthrow of Allende
     * SALT I
     * Angolan Civil War
     * Mozambican Civil War
     * Third Indochina War
     * SALT II
     * Iranian Revolution

   1980s:
     * Soviet-Afghan War
     * Salvadoran Civil War
     * Polish Solidarity Movement
     * Invasion of Grenada
     * Fall of the Berlin Wall
     * Revolutions of 1989

   1990s:
     * Dissolution of the USSR

   Concepts:
     * Communism
     * Capitalism
     * Iron Curtain
     * Containment
     * Truman Doctrine
     * Maoism
     * Revisionism
     * Peaceful coexistence
     * Domino Theory
     * Eisenhower Doctrine
     * Rollback
     * Arms race
     * Nuclear arms race
     * McCarthyism
     * Space Race
     * Kennedy Doctrine
     * Johnson Doctrine
     * Brezhnev Doctrine
     * Ostpolitik
     * Nixon Doctrine
     * Wars of national liberation
     * Carter Doctrine
     * Reagan Doctrine
     * Glasnost
     * Perestroika

   Contemporaneous conflicts:
     * Nicaragua
     * Arab-Israeli Conflict

     * NATO
     * Warsaw Pact
     * Non-Aligned Movement
     * People's Republic of China

   Other specific articles:
     * Red Scare
     * Bricker Amendment
     * Operation Condor
     * Soviet espionage in US
     * CIA
     * Operation Gladio
     * KGB
     * Stasi
     * European Community
     * Comecon
     * Portal:Cold War

              Nobel Prize in Literature: Laureates (1951-1975)

   1951:  Lagerkvist | 1952:  Mauriac | 1953: Churchill | 1954: Hemingway
   | 1955:  Laxness | 1956:  Jiménez | 1957:  Camus | 1958:  Pasternak |
   1959:  Quasimodo | 1960:  Perse | 1961:  Andrić | 1962:  Steinbeck |
   1963:  Seferis | 1964:  Sartre | 1965:  Sholokhov | 1966:  Agnon,
   Sachs | 1967:  Asturias | 1968:  Kawabata | 1969: Beckett | 1970:
   Solzhenitsyn | 1971:  Neruda | 1972:  Böll | 1973:  White | 1974:
   Johnson,  Martinson | 1975:  Montale
     __________________________________________________________________

       Complete List | Laureates (1901-1925) | Laureates (1926-1950) |
                 Laureates (1976-2000) | Laureates (2001- )

                               Persondata
   NAME              Churchill, Winston
   ALTERNATIVE NAMES Sir Winston Leonard Spencer-Churchill, The Rt Hon.
                     Sir Winston Churchill
   SHORT DESCRIPTION English statesman and author, best known as Prime
                     Minister of the United Kingdom
   DATE OF BIRTH     30 November 1874
   PLACE OF BIRTH    Blenheim Palace, Woodstock,
                     Oxfordshire, England
   DATE OF DEATH     24 January 1965
   PLACE OF DEATH    Hyde Park Gate, London, England

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Winston_Churchill"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
