   #copyright

Wolf Brother

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Novels

   (first in series) | Spirit Walker >>

   CAPTION: Title Wolf Brother

   ‎
   First Britain edition cover
     Author    Michelle Paver
   Illustrator Geoff Taylor
     Country   United Kingdom
    Language   English
     Series    Chronicles of Ancient Darkness
    Genre(s)   Children's Adventure, Fantasy novel
    Publisher  Orion Children's Books
    Released   30 September 2004
   Media type  Print ( Hardback & Paperback) & Audio book (CD & Cassette)
      Pages    224 pp (first edition, hardback)
      ISBN     ISBN 1-84255-170-1 (first edition, hardback)
   Preceded by (none)
   Followed by Spirit Walker

   'Wolf Brother' is the first book in the series Chronicles of Ancient
   Darkness by Michelle Paver. There will be six in total.

Plot introduction

   This book is set in the Europe thousands of years ago. At that time the
   ice age has ended and the people live in Clans. They live in a vast
   forest and are all excellent hunters as the concept of farming has not
   yet arrived.

Plot summary

   Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.

   Torak and his father lived alone in a forest, far from their clans.
   When Torak was 12 summers old, his father was killed by a bear
   possessed by a demon. Before Torak's father died, he made Torak to
   swear an oath to head north find the mountain of World spirit and
   destroy the bear. "Your guide will find you," he said to Torak.

   So Torak headed north and soon found an orphaned wolf cub (who's family
   was drowned in a flood). When trying to communicate with the wolf,
   Torak realised that he could talk in wolf language (or as he called it,
   wolf talk). He then realised that wolf was the guide that his father
   has told him of, so he set off with the wolf guiding him.

   Unfortunately, Torak and Wolf were soon captured by three people from
   the Raven Clan - Renn, Hord and Oslak. They claim that Torak was
   stealing their Roe Buck. Torak was taken to the Raven Camp for the clan
   leader, a man call Fin-Kedinn.

   In the Raven camp Torak fought Hord in a combat to prove that he was
   innocent. He won by blinding Hord with steam from a stew. But
   Fin-Kedinn and the Raven mage Saeunn told him that there is a prophecy
   in the Raven Clan about a boy who can talk to the wolf and fights with
   air.They say that the boy will offer his heart's blood to the mountain
   of world spirit to kill the bear. Torak refused to believe that he is
   the One and escapes. He was later found by Renn who forced him to go to
   the mountain. Renn also mentioned that Torak would have to find 3 parts
   of the Nanuak, the brightest soul, to please the World Spirit. Torak
   found the first part of the Nanuak when he fell into a river. He found
   the next one in a cave connecting to the Otherworld, and the last one
   when he was crossing an ice river. When at last, Renn and Torak reached
   the high mountains (a group of mountains in which the mountain of the
   world spirit is said to be in) they are captured by Hord and Oslak.
   When Torak was escorted to the newly established Raven camp, Fin-Kedinn
   released Torak and told him that he has passed his test of courage and
   that he believes Torak is the right person to go to the mountain. At
   dinner that night, Fin-Kedinn told Torak that Torak's Father was killed
   by a group of mages called the Soul Eaters. He told Torak that his
   Father was also a soul eater but he quit and caused the group's
   destruction. But the soul eaters were not defeated as many of them
   still lived, and Torak is destined to destroy them.

   The next day, Torak and Wolf left for the mountain without Renn. They
   follow a path which lead to the mountain. When they reached it, the
   bear arrived too. When Torak prayed to the World Spirit, it did
   nothing. Torak was then attack by Hord, who claimed that he will kill
   Torak and offer the World Spirit his blood. Then Torak realised that
   his "heart's blood" is the thing he cares for most,and he sent Wolf
   towards the mountain. At this, the World Spirit heard his plea and
   buried the bear and Hord as well, under a huge pile of snow. Wolf then
   left Torak and joined a wolf pack so Torak returned to the Raven camp
   alone.

Characters in Wolf Brother

     * Torak Wolf - Main Character of the book wolf was his last name
     * Wolf - Torak's guide and pack brother
     * Renn - a Raven Clan Trainee who helped Torak
     * Hord - Renn's brother
     * Oslak - A Raven clan member
     * Fa - Torak's Father. Killed in the begining of the book. An ex-soul
       eater.
     * Fin-Kedinn - Leader of the Raven clan

   Spoilers end here.

Literary significance & criticism

   "The stark, primitive setting provides an innovative contrast to most
   fantasies…This fast–moving story with engaging characters will appeal."

   Voice of Youth Advocates (VOYA)

   "Torak’s coming-of-age tale will keep the pages turning."

   Publishers Weekly

   "The story…glides on lines of smooth prose"

   Bulletin of the Centre for Children’s Books

   "Paver’s depth of research…makes this impressive British
   import…intriguing and believable."

   School Library Journal

Awards and nominations

   Shortlisted for the Manchester Book Award in 2006

Film, TV or theatrical adaptations

   20th Century Fox has bought the right of Wolf brother and Ridley Scott
   is going to direct it. It will be out in 2007.

See other

   Chronicles of Ancient Darkness

   Spirit Walker

   Soul Eater

   Michelle Paver
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wolf_Brother"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
