   #copyright

Wyndham Robertson

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Historical figures

   Wyndham Robertson
   Governor of Virginia
   State Representative
   Portait of Wyndham Robertson ca. 1880 by L.M.D. Guillaume
                       Governor of Virginia
                             In office
   1836 – 1837
        Born       January 26, 1803
                   near Manchester, Chesterfield County, Virginia
        Died       February 11, 1888
                   Abingdon, Virginia
      Residence    Richmond, Virginia
                   Abingdon, Virginia
                    Virginia House of Delegates
                             In office
   1838 – 1841
    Constituency   Richmond, Virginia
                    Virginia House of Delegates
                             In office
   1859 – 1865
    Constituency   Richmond, Virginia
   Political party Whig
       Spouse      Mary Trigg Smith

   Wyndham Robertson ( January 26, 1803 – February 11, 1888) was Governor
   of the U.S. state of Virginia from 1836 to 1837. He also served twice
   in the Virginia House of Delegates, the second time during the American
   Civil War.

   Robertson was a Whig, and was a advocate for Union during the secession
   crisis that precipitated the Civil War. However, after Lincoln's call
   for troops, he advocated secession. After the war, he was a member of
   the Committee of Nine that helped usher Virginia back into the Union.

   Robertson, a descendant of Pocahontas, published a book near the end of
   his life in her defence.

Biography

Early life and family

   Robertson was born near Manchester, in Chesterfield County, Virginia,
   the son of William Robertson and Elizabeth Bolling, a descendant of
   Pocahontas and John Rolfe. His father was a member of the Virginia
   Council of State. Robertson attended private schools in Richmond and
   was graduated from William and Mary College in 1821. He then married
   Mary Trigg Smith, daughter of Captain Francis Smith. Robertson's
   brother was Thomas B. Robertson, a Governor of Louisiana, and John
   Robertson, a U.S. Congressman.

   Robertson studied law and was admitted to the bar in 1824. In 1827, he
   made a short trip to Paris and London, and in 1830 he was made
   Counciller of State.

Career

   Robertson was re-elected to the Council of State in 1833, and on March
   31, 1836, he became the senior member of this body, and therefore
   Lieutenant-Governor of Virginia. When Governor Littleton Waller
   Tazewell resigned that same day, Robertson became Governor. Since the
   Virginia Legislature, which elected the Governor, was Democratic, and
   he, being a Whig, was not, Robertson was not elected when his term was
   up in 1837, and he was replaced by David Campbell.

   Robertson was then elected to the Virginia House of Delegates for the
   1838 session. He was then re-elected for three successive sessions,
   ending his service in 1841.

   He moved to his wife's home south of Abingdon, in southwest Virginia in
   1841. He was made a Justice of Washington County on July 25, 1842, and
   was appointed a trustee of Abingdon Academy in 1843. In 1850, he leased
   the King Saltworks for five years. In 1858, he returned to Richmond. In
   1859, he was elected to the Virginia House of Delegates for the
   1859-1861 session. When Virginia was struggling with the idea of
   seceding from the United States, Robertson was a staunch Unionist and
   tried to prevent its secession. He later wrote of himself as a "friend
   to peace and the Union" and that he had actively opposed South
   Carolina's call for a Southern Convention in 1859. In fact, he was
   present at the Henry Clay banquet in April of 1860, at which former
   President John Tyler was present, and Robertson was called on to give
   "The Union" toast, which he did, followed by a short speech. He then
   proposed the following toast:

     "The Constitutional Union of the States" - The Union of the States
     is the harmony of the spheres. While obedient to the laws of their
     creation, they sing ever as they go 'glad tidings of great joy' to
     all the world. Rebelling against them, light and joy are swallowed
     up in darkness, and order falls back into primordial chaos.

   After South Carolina and several other states started seceding in the
   winter of 1860-61, he still advocated that Virginia not follow suit. On
   January 7, 1861, he presented a resolution known as the Anti-Coercion
   Resolution, which rejected secession, but stated that if the Federal
   government used coercion against the seceded states, Virginia would
   fight, which was duly adopted. However, when President Abraham Lincoln
   made his call for troops on April 15, 1861, he was "from that time
   forth zealously active in all measures for the defence of his State."
   The call for troops was precisely the scenario detailed in their
   Anti-Coercion Resolution and Virginia seceded.
   "And now, after twenty years' experience of yet unripened results, I
   have no regrets, nor repent a single act of my State, or myself, in
   these unhappy affairs - welcoming the end of slavery, but still
   believing it would have been reached without the horrors of war."
   Wyndham Robertson

   Robertson was re-elected to the House of Delegates for the next two
   sessions, ending in 1865. In 1863, he opposed and helped to defeat a
   bill to fix the prices of food, which he believed was "fraught with the
   direst mischief". When a committee of citizens presented a resolution
   asking their representatives to support a similar bill or resign,
   Robertson refused. When he found that his colleagues had already
   acquiesced, he resigned so as not to misrepresent his constituents. The
   House, however, requested that his resignation be withdrawn until the
   wishes of his constituents could be determined. A formal poll was held
   and it was determined that a majority did not support the bill and
   Robertson retained his seat.

   After the war, he moved back to Abingdon. During Reconstruction,
   Robertson was a member of the Committee of Nine, led by Alexander H. H.
   Stuart, that sought Virginia's readmission to the Union. At issue was
   the new state constitution, which included disenfranchisement of many
   white males. The committee successfully negotiated with the Federal
   government to have that clause voted on separately, so that Virginians
   would accept and ratify the new constitution and so rejoin the Union.

   He died on February 11, 1888, and was buried at Cobbs, Chesterfield
   County.

Legacy and writings

   Robertson was an early donor to Emory and Henry College, the interest
   of which furnished the Robertson prize medal for "encouraging oratory".

   After the American Civil War, Northern writers began questioning the
   validity of the rescue story of Captain John Smith and Pocahontas,
   attacking the accounts of the historical role played by both, as well
   as that of her husband John Rolfe. The movement was led by Henry Adams,
   a descendant of John Adams whose rival was John Randolph of Roanoke,
   was a descendant of Pocahontas. Several Virginians replied, one of whom
   was Robertson. "Northern attacks disturbed him so much that he prepared
   a detailed study" and wrote Pocahontas alias Matoaka and Her
   Descendants through Her Marriage with John Rolfe. He traced her
   descendants, who included the Bollings, Branches, Lewises, Randolphs,
   and Pages, as well as him. His argument was that since her descendants
   were notable, so was she. "History, poetry, and art," wrote Robertson,
   "have vied with one another in investing her name from that day to the
   present with a halo of surpassing brightness."
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wyndham_Robertson"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
