   #copyright

X-Men: The Last Stand

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Films

          X-Men: The Last Stand
     Directed by   Brett Ratner
     Produced by   Lauren Shuler Donner
                   Ralph Winter
     Written by    Simon Kinberg
                   Zak Penn
      Starring     Hugh Jackman
                   Halle Berry
                   Ian McKellen
                   Famke Janssen
                   Anna Paquin
                   Kelsey Grammer
                   James Marsden
                   Rebecca Romijn
                   Shawn Ashmore
                   Aaron Stanford
                   Vinnie Jones
                   Patrick Stewart
      Music by     John Powell
   Cinematography  Dante Spinotti
     Editing by    Mark Helfrich
                   Mark Goldblatt
                   Julia Wong
   Distributed by  20th Century Fox
   Release date(s) Theatrical:
                   May 26, 2006
                   DVD:
                   October 3, 2006
    Running time   104 min.
      Language     English
       Budget      $210 million
     Preceded by   X2
         All Movie Guide profile
              IMDb profile

   X-Men: The Last Stand is the third film adaptation of the Marvel
   Comics' X-Men superhero comic books. It was directed by Brett Ratner
   and written by Simon Kinberg and Zak Penn. The previous two movies were
   X-Men (2000) and X2 (2003). The movie revolves around a "mutant cure"
   that causes serious repercussions among mutants and humans, and on the
   mysterious resurrection of Jean Grey, who appeared to have died in X2.
   The film is based on two X-Men comic book story arcs: writer Chris
   Claremont's and artist John Byrne's " Dark Phoenix Saga" in The Uncanny
   X-Men (1980), and writer Joss Whedon's six-issue "Gifted" arc in
   Astonishing X-Men (2004).

   The film was released May 26, 2006 in the United States and Canada, and
   one or two days earlier in approximately 22 other countries. Despite
   mixed reviews from critics, the film has done extremely well at the box
   office. Its opening-day gross of $45.5 million is the third-highest on
   record while its opening weekend gross of $102.75 million is the fifth
   highest ever. Currently it holds the record for highest grossing movie
   during Memorial Day weekend totaling nearly $122.9 million in its first
   four days. It is the highest-grossing of the series, earning over
   $458.7 million worldwide.

   The film is sometimes colloquially referred to as X3 or X-Men 3.

Plot

   Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.

   A pharmaceutical company called Worthington Labs announces that it has
   developed an inoculation to suppress the X-gene that gives mutants
   their powers and makes them different from humans, offering the "cure"
   to any mutant who wants it. While some mutants are interested in the
   "cure", including the X-Men's Rogue, many others are horrified by the
   announcement. In response to the news, the X-Men's adversary Magneto
   raises an army, warning his followers that the "cure" will be
   forcefully used to exterminate the mutant race.

   Cyclops, still depressed about the loss of Jean Grey, returns to Alkali
   Lake, where Jean sacrificed herself to save the X-Men. Jean appears to
   Cyclops, and as the two kiss, Jean changes and appears to kill Cyclops.
   Sensing trouble, Professor Charles Xavier sends Wolverine and Storm to
   investigate. When they arrive, the two X-Men encounter telekinetically
   floating rocks, Cyclops' glasses, and an unconscious Jean.

   Xavier explains that when Jean sacrificed herself, she unleashed the
   powerful alternate personality she calls " Phoenix". Wolverine is
   disgusted to learn that Xavier has kept Jean in check telepathically,
   but when Jean awakens, he realizes she is not the Jean Grey he knew.
   Jean pleads with Wolverine to kill her, but when he refuses, the
   Phoenix surfaces and telekinetically slams Wolverine into a wall. She
   then escapes to her childhood home.

   Magneto, also aware that Jean is now a powerful mutant, meets Xavier at
   Jean's house. The two men vie for Jean's loyalty until the Phoenix
   resurfaces, unleashing her devastating power. She destroys her family's
   house, disintegrates Xavier, and leaves with an uneasy Magneto.

   Following the loss of Xavier, the X-Men regroup and confront Magneto's
   army, which is attacking the pharmaceutical company's laboratory on
   Alcatraz Island. During the fight, Beast injects Magneto with the
   "cure", nullifying his mutant powers. After the battle, the Phoenix
   emerges and begins to destroy everything and everyone around her.
   Momentarily gaining control, Jean begs Wolverine to save her. Telling
   Jean he loves her, Wolverine reluctantly kills her with his claws.

   Despite the X-Men's losses, life goes on. Magneto, now an ordinary man,
   sits at a chessboard and reaches out toward a metal chess piece that
   trembles slightly, hinting that the "cure" may not be as permanent as
   thought. Following the end credits, Dr. Moira MacTaggert checks on a
   comatose patient who greets her with Xavier's voice. Startled, she
   replies, "Charles?"

Cast

X-Men

   The X-Men is a special ops team from the Xavier Institute, charged with
   protecting both humans and mutants and trying to prevent a war between
   the two.
     * Hugh Jackman as Logan / Wolverine: Logan can heal quickly, a talent
       which allowed the painful implantation of a metal coating on his
       bones and metal claws that emerge from each hand. He mourns Jean
       Grey, whom he misses.

     * Halle Berry as Ororo Munroe / Storm: She can control the weather
       and fly. Halle Berry stated during interviews for X2 that she would
       not return as Storm in the third film unless the character had a
       significant presence comparable to the comic-book version. Brett
       Ratner also felt Storm required a larger role and there was little
       difficulty reaching an agreement.

     * Patrick Stewart as Professor Charles Xavier: The founder of the
       Xavier Institute, with powerful telepathic powers.

     * Anna Paquin as Marie / Rogue: A runaway mutant who has found a home
       at Xavier's school and love with Bobby Drake. When she touches
       someone she absorbs their life force, their powers if they're a
       mutant, and, if not careful, their life.

     * Kelsey Grammer as Dr. Henry "Hank" McCoy / Beast: A former student
       of Xavier's School who is now the Secretary of Mutant Affairs in
       the U.S. government. The Beast is covered in blue fur and has a
       genius level I.Q., and heightened strength and agility. Filmmakers
       considered using the Beast character since the first X-Men movie,
       but budget constraints ruled him out; however, Steve Bacic is
       identified as Hank McCoy when he appears on a television screen in
       a cameo role in X2.

     * James Marsden as Scott Summers / Cyclops: The X-Men's field leader,
       who is devastated by the death of Jean Grey. He emits powerful
       energy blasts from his eyes.

     * Shawn Ashmore as Bobby Drake / Iceman: He can control the
       temperature of the moisture in the air around him to create
       constructs of ice or blasts of cold. Under extreme conditions, his
       body may take on many of the characteristics of ice in addition to
       those of a human.

     * Ben Foster as Warren Worthington III / Angel: He has angelic wings
       which allow him to fly. Cayden Boyd plays Warren as a child.

     * Ellen Page as Kitty Pryde: She can "phase" through objects, which
       allows her to walk through walls and float through floors.

     * Daniel Cudmore as Peter Rasputin / Colossus: He can transform his
       skin into metal, granting increased strength and a resistance to
       damage.

Brotherhood of Mutants

     * Ian McKellen as Erik Lehnsherr / Magneto: Master of magnetism,
       Holocaust survivor, and would-be conqueror, Magneto wages war
       against humanity in the name of mutant superiority, a goal that
       often pits him against his old friend Charles Xavier.

     * Famke Janssen as Jean Grey / Phoenix: A former member of the X-Men
       who sacrificed herself to save her comrades. She possesses great
       telekinetic and telepathic powers. After being revived, her powers
       consume her and she joins the Brotherhood.

     * Rebecca Romijn as Raven Darkholme / Mystique: Magneto's
       blue-skinned right-hand woman can shapeshift to appear as anyone
       and can fight with incredible agility and strength.

     * Aaron Stanford as John Allerdyce / Pyro: Former Xavier Institute
       student Pyro can manipulate fire but cannot create it. He holds a
       grudge against his former friend Bobby Drake.

     * Vinnie Jones as Cain Marko / Juggernaut: The Juggernaut is a new
       recruit to the Brotherhood. When he starts moving, it is nearly
       impossible to stop him.

     * Dania Ramirez as Callisto: She possesses superhuman speed and can
       sense the power levels of mutants.

     * Eric Dane as Jamie Madrox / Multiple Man: Multiple Man can split
       himself into multiple copies. He is a criminal who joins the
       Brotherhood upon their releasing him.

     * Omahyra Mota as Philippa Sontag / Arclight: Arclight can generate
       seismic energies that cause shockwaves and earth tremors.

     * Ken Leung as Quill (incorrectly credited as Kid Omega): Has
       porcupine-like spikes which he can extend or retract at will.

     * Mei Melançon as Elisabeth Braddock / Psylocke: Psylocke is a ninja
       assassin that has the ability to teleport herself through shadows.

Other characters

     * Michael Murphy as Warren Worthington II: The Head of Worthington
       Labs, the corporation developing the "cure". He is also Angel's
       father and wants to rid his son of his mutant abilities.

     * Cameron Bright as Jimmy / Leech: A mutant boy whose power
       neutralizes the powers of nearby mutants. His DNA is the basis for
       the "cure". After being rescued, he is admitted to the Xavier
       Institute.

     * Shohreh Aghdashloo as Dr. Kavita Rao: Rao is the inventor of the
       mutant cure, which she created with the DNA of Leech.

   The sergeant directing defensive preparations before the Brotherhood
   assaults Alcatraz Island is played by Gunnery Sergeant R. Lee Ermey, a
   former U.S. Marine Corps non-commissioned officer who became a military
   adviser for films and frequent military character actor. X-Men
   co-creator Stan Lee and writer Chris Claremont have cameos in the
   film's opening scene as neighbors in Jean Grey's old neighbourhood.
   Respectively, they are credited as "Waterhose man" and "Lawnmower man".

   Despite playing a key role in the secret ending and portrayed as having
   close personal ties to Professor Xavier, Moira MacTaggert, portrayed by
   Olivia Williams, was not listed in the official press notes' cast list
   and goes uncredited in the finished film.

   Alan Cumming was reportedly uncomfortable with the long hours he had to
   take with the Nightcrawler makeup, but still planned to return for
   X-Men: The Last Stand. The part for Nightcrawler was so minimal,
   however, that the studio felt it was not worthwhile to go through the
   long and costly makeup process, and the character was cut.
   Nightcrawler's absence was explained in the tie-in game.

Production

   Bryan Singer, the director of the first two X-Men films, left the
   project during preproduction in order to direct the film Superman
   Returns. He was joined by X2 screenwriters Dan Harris and Michael
   Dougherty and composer / editor John Ottman. Though Singer, Harris and
   Dougherty had yet to complete a script, the director has revealed that
   at the time of his departure they had partially completed a story
   treatment for the film which would have focused exclusively on Jean
   Grey's resurrection with the new villain Emma Frost, a role intended
   for Sigourney Weaver.

   Simon Kinberg was hired as writer soon after Singer's departure, and
   speculation arose to Joss Whedon directing the film. Rob Bowman and
   Alex Proyas were also rumoured, though the latter personally turned it
   down. Despite the controversy over Singer's departure, the cast and
   producers were still clearly keen to return.

   Matthew Vaughn was hired as the new director for the project. He cast
   Kelsey Grammer as Beast and Vinnie Jones as Juggernaut, but family
   issues reportedly led him to withdraw before shooting began. Vaughn was
   replaced by Singer's friend Brett Ratner, who was among those
   originally considered to direct the first film — and coincidentally was
   considered by Warner Brothers to direct the 2006 Superman project
   before it evolved into Superman Returns.

   On June 13, 2005, a review of an incomplete early draft of the
   screenplay posted by Drew McWeeny from Ain't It Cool News sparked
   controversy from fans, due to certain main characters' storylines;
   however, that draft was the very first of over two-dozen drafts the
   film went through and has had numerous changes happen to the
   storylines. Most notably the Golden Gate Bridge was originally in the
   middle of the film, but Ratner decided it would create a more dramatic
   climax if moved to the end., where the climax was originally to take
   place at Washington D.C..

   X-Men: The Last Stand began shooting in August 2005 and ended in
   January 2006. Much of X-Men: The Last Stand was filmed in Vancouver,
   Canada. According to associate producer Dave Gordon, "This is the
   biggest production ever filmed in Canada. It used to be X2, now it's
   X3."

   Senior actors Patrick Stewart and Ian McKellen had their faces
   completely "de-aged" by complex keyframing, in which no CGI elements
   were used. A technique called "digital skin-grafting" was employed to
   make them look 20 years younger in the first-scene flashback.

   The film has extensive wirework, where many of the actors performed
   some of their own stunts. The whirlwind wire-stunt performed by Halle
   Berry during one fight scene reportedly caused Berry to become so
   nauseated that she vomited. The crew actually had to bring in buckets
   for her before shooting her scenes. Angel's wings were initially too
   heavy for Ben Foster, and were remade from foam. Despite his fear of
   heights, Foster performed a single second unit stunt where he escapes
   Worthington's facility.

Reception

   X-Men: The Last Stand grossed $45.5 million domestically for the
   third-highest opening day after Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's
   Chest ($55 million) and Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith ($50
   million). It is ranked fourth among film debuts having generated an
   estimated $122.9 million domestically during its four-day Memorial Day
   opening weekend and the number one Memorial Day movie of all time. The
   website The Numbers notes that the film's weekend gross "equals the
   record for the fewest number of days taken to earn $100 million,
   joining four other movies that achieved the feat in three days."
   However, the film suffered a significant drop of 66.9% in its second
   weekend, when its box office take fell to $34.0 million. Nevertheless,
   the film has grossed over $234 million in North America (third-highest
   of 2006) and over $458.7 million globally (fourth-highest of 2006). It
   is the fifth-highest-grossing comic book adaptation, and the highest
   grossing of the X-Men series. It became the first film of 2006, and the
   67th film on record, to pass the $200 million mark at the North
   American box office, which it accomplished on the weekend of June 9,
   2006. It is the first X-Men movie to surpass $200 million outside the
   United States. X-Men: The Last Stand is one of the few third
   installments in a series to outgross its predecessors, The Return of
   the King being another example.

   Reviews of the film have generally been mixed, with the film-review
   website Rotten Tomatoes giving the film a 57% approval rating. The film
   review aggregate site Metacritic also reported mixed reviews with a
   score of 58/100. It holds a 7.0/10 in the movie site IMDb. Ebert &
   Roeper gave the film two thumbs up, with Ebert stating "I liked the
   action, I liked the absurdity, I liked the incongruous use and misuse
   of mutant powers, and I especially liked the way it introduces all of
   those political issues and lets them fight it out with the special
   effects." Some film critics, however, considered the third film to be
   of lesser quality than the previous two. Justin Chang from Variety said
   the film is "a wham-bam sequel noticeably lacking in the pop gravitas,
   moody atmospherics and emotional weight that made the first two Marvel
   comicbook adaptations so rousingly successful." Frank Lovece of Film
   Journal International said, "A risk-taking script with genuine
   consequences elevates this ... above the lackluster direction of Brett
   Ratner, whose competent mechanics move the story efficiently but with
   very little soul." Lawrence Toppman of The Charlotte Observer, said,
   "Director Brett Ratner can't make chicken a la king out of chicken
   droppings, and that's what writers Simon Kinberg ( XXX: State of the
   Union and Mr. & Mrs. Smith) and Zak Penn ( Elektra) supply."

Possible sequels and spin-offs

   Fox Films Entertainment Chairman Tom Rothman stated The Last Stand is
   the end of a trilogy, but not necessarily the end of the X-Men film
   series: "These three movies work as a trilogy. These characters in this
   relationship, it's the culmination of that saga. It's the culmination
   and the resolution of those relationships laid out in the first two
   movies". Earlier, in a February 14, 2006 interview, Ratner said, "We
   wanted to make sure the audiences knew that this was a trilogy. Even
   though they weren't made together like Lord of the Rings, this is
   really closure for the X-Men series...This is the last stand for sure".
   In the same interview, a 20th Century Fox spokesperson confirmed The
   Last Stand is the final foreseeable installment for the X-Men team, but
   there are possibilites for X-Men 4. Brett Ratner has stated he would
   like to return for a sequel.

   Executive producer Avi Arad stated in an interview that Marvel would
   take its time to decide what to do with future X-Men films, but is
   focusing on the spin-offs. A Wolverine spin-off and a Magneto spin-off
   have been announced and are in the scripting stages. Another possible
   movie based on the character of Emma Frost is also being developed.
   Three Kings director David O. Russell was contacted about creating a
   story for the character. A possible film based on the students at the
   school has also been mentioned.

   In an in early November 2006 interview, Bryan Singer, the director who
   started the franchise, confirmed that two more direct sequels are in
   development, and though he had been approached to direct one or both of
   the films, he would not be able to do so until after completing
   production on a sequel to Superman Returns. Singer also confirmed
   production on the Wolverine spin-off, expressing interest in directing
   the film. Actor Hugh Jackman confirmed that Singer was also the first
   choice to direct, barring any major scheduling conflicts with the
   Superman sequel.

Comparison with other depictions

   Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.

   X-Men: The Last Stand draws much of its plot and characters from the
   source comic books; however, while some of the X-Men characters and
   details remain similar, a number of comic book elements are altered for
   the adaptation.

   The film's plot concerning the emergence of the Phoenix draws from
   Chris Claremont's 1980 "Dark Phoenix Saga" in The Uncanny X-Men. In
   both the film and Claremont's original story, the Phoenix is Jean
   Grey's evil "split personality", a being of unrestrained emotion which
   Jean eventually allows herself to be killed to stop. The comic story
   was later retconned, however, recasting the Phoenix as a fiery,
   Phoenix-like alien entity and force of nature that bonds with Jean.
   However, the focus on Wolverine and Magneto means the story is more
   similiar to the 2003 Planet X story.

   The "cure" for mutant powers, its creator Kavita Rao and the ethical
   problems associated with it appear in comic book form in Joss Whedon's
   2004 "Gifted" story arc in Astonishing X-Men. A 1993 episode of the
   X-Men animated series entitled " The Cure", written by Mark Edward
   Edens, features a similar story, which resembles that of the movie more
   closely than "Gifted" in some respects, particularly regarding its use
   of Rogue and Warren Worthington. In the 2005 "Decimation" X-Men
   storyline, a vast majority of the mutants, including Magneto, lose
   their powers, the result of Scarlet Witch's actions, but that storyline
   was being published while the movie was being shot. Since the X-Men
   first appeared, there have been many stories dealing with mutant cures
   of various types, as Joss Whedon himself acknowledged in a published
   discussion with Mark Millar.

   X-Men: The Last Stand is the first X-Men adaptation to feature the five
   original X-Men -- Cyclops, Iceman, Beast, Angel and Jean Grey; however,
   the characters' backstories and positions within the team are altered.
   The mutants Siryn, Jubilee and the Stepford Cuckoos have cameo roles in
   the film and are correctly portrayed as students at the school. Other
   characters are translated more loosely. For instance, many of the
   Brotherhood shown in the film, including Spike, Phat, Psylocke and
   Multiple Man, are not villains in the comics. The mutant Arclight is
   depicted more faithfully as a super villain, but her power to create
   shockwaves is more focused. The filmmakers chose to use the name Kid
   Omega for a mutant similar to the comics' Quill. Psylocke has a red
   dagger tattooed above her left eye, and she is able to hide in shadows;
   this is a reference to a period during which Psylocke was connected to
   a substance called the " Crimson Dawn", which gives her powers beyond
   her innate mutant abilities of telepathy and telekinesis that manifests
   as a psionic knife / katana. Brotherhood member Callisto is depicted
   with superhuman speed and the ability to sense mutants' power levels.
   In the comics, Callisto is the leader of the Morlocks and has neither
   ability, instead possessing acute senses. Her ability to sense other
   mutants' powers was based on the comic book character Caliban. In the
   comics, Juggernaut is Xavier's human step-brother who acquires power
   when he finds a mystical stone; in X-Men: The Last Stand, however,
   Juggernaut is a mutant, and there is no mention of a relationship with
   the professor. Whereas he is usually gruff and violent in the comics,
   his line "Don't you know who I am? I'm the Juggernaut, bitch!" alludes
   not to the comics, but to a parody video ( The Juggernaut Bitch!!) in
   which the video's creators dubbed over footage from the X-Men animated
   series.

   Familiar details from the X-Men mythos permeate the film. The X-Men are
   shown training in the trademark Danger Room, a training complex within
   the X-Mansion. A giant, mutant-hunting Sentinel robot appears as a
   hologram inside the Danger Room. The fastball special, in which
   Colossus throws Wolverine toward an opponent, appears in the film
   twice, the targets being Magneto and a Sentinel. Beast's line "Oh my
   stars and garters!" appears frequently in the comics. One of the
   president's advisers is named Trask, an allusion to Bolivar Trask,
   creator of the Sentinels. Iceman transforms his body into ice, just as
   he does in the comic books. Kitty Pryde's run through the
   pharmaceutical complex while being chased by the Juggernaut mirrors the
   character's similar flight from an alien in Uncanny X-Men #143.
   Finally, Wolverine's killing Jean Grey bears some similarity to his
   killing love interest Mariko Yashida to spare her a painful death from
   poison in Wolverine #57, as well as a scene in the New X-Men story arc
   " Planet X" in which he kills Jean to spare her from a more painful
   death burning up in the Sun.

   During the post-credits scene, the mind of Professor X is shown to be
   inhabiting the body of a formerly brain dead patient under the care of
   Moira MacTaggert. On the DVD commentary it is explained that this
   patient is in fact Charles Xavier's twin brother, whose mind was erased
   by his brother's considerable psychic powers when they were still in
   the womb together. In the comics Professor X never had a twin brother
   and this story arc never happened. However, according to the film's
   creators, there is at least some precedent for the idea since Professor
   X in the comics had a twin sister, Cassandra Nova.

Adaptations

Novelization

   The novelization of the film, written by comic book writer Chris
   Claremont, was released on May 16, 2006.
   Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.

   The novelization of the movie differs significantly from the film. In
   the novel, young Jean Grey discovers her powers after an accident that
   takes her best friend's life. Angel officially joins the X-Men and
   travels with them to Alcatraz Island instead of going on his own. Storm
   spares Callisto's life, which is more in line with Professor Xavier's
   views on violence. Rogue decides to keep her powers in the end, and
   Beast stays at the school as a teacher. Iceman takes an unconscious
   Pyro away from Alcatraz. The attack on Alcatraz is referred to as
   M-Day, a reference to the " Decimation of mutantkind" storyline in the
   comic books. Moira MacTaggert visits Magneto in the park, presumably
   offering an antidote to the "cure", which he refuses because as the
   book says: "He couldn't go back. That path had brought nothing but
   grief, to those he cared for, those who trusted him, to himself. This
   was better." This suggests that in the novel Magneto turns over a new
   leaf before discovering a slight return of his powers. Unlike the film,
   the novel does not allude to Xavier's resurrection. In the end of the
   novel Wolverine is in the basement of the Institute training the new
   X-Men, which includes Gambit, Sage, Danielle Moonstar and Cannonball.

   The novel also makes a reference to X3 scriptwriter Zak Penn, whose
   name is given to a sergeant in the middle of the novel, and possibly to
   X-Men writer Stan Lee as Mr. Lee, one of Jean's neighbours portrayed by
   Stan Lee in the film. The president's name in the novelization is David
   Cockrum, a reference to comics writer Dave Cockrum. McCoy asks the
   president about his wife Paty, who in real life is David Cockrum's wife
   who used to work at Marvel. Two other references are made towards the
   end of the book, the first is Hollywood planning a film about the
   Battle of Alcatraz (a possible reference to the actual movie) along
   with a British Shakespearean actor, who is also a Knight playing
   Magneto (a possible reference to Sir Ian McKellen who played Magneto in
   all three films).
   Spoilers end here.

Video game

   Games publisher Activision released X-Men: The Official Game, the
   official video game tie-in to the film across all major videogame
   platforms on May 16, 2006. The various editions of the game bridge the
   events of the films X2 and X-Men: The Last Stand and feature many of
   both films' prominent characters. Hugh Jackman, Patrick Stewart, Alan
   Cumming, Eric Dane, Shawn Ashmore and Tyler Mane reprise their film
   roles in this game. Sentinels, Lady Deathstrike, Sabretooth and Silver
   Samurai also appear in the game. It also provides an explanation of
   Nightcrawler's absence from the film.

DVD (NTSC Region 1 Version)

   X-Men 3: The Last Stand (Collector's Edition)

   X-Men: The Last Stand was released in the United States and Canada on
   DVD in both standard and collector's edition formats on October 3,
   2006. The single-disc standard DVD, in either widescreen or fullscreen,
   features two menu settings: "Join The Brotherhood" and "Take A Stand".
   The choice of either simply changes the menu's design, it doesn't alter
   the movie content. The DVD also features commentaries featuring the
   director, writers, and producers; 10 deleted scenes; three alternate
   endings; and two easter eggs. On the first day of its release errors
   were reported with the DVD. About 60% of the DVD currently have errors
   in them. Some DVD's come with only 10 deleted scenes while others come
   with 21, amongst other errors.

   The "Stan Lee Collector's Edition" DVD is a widescreen standard DVD
   that was packaged in a slipcase with a 100-page booklet featuring a
   completely new X-Men comic by Stan Lee. The Hollywood Reporter
   announced that 20th Century Fox will make films available to buy online
   the same day as the DVD, through Direct2Drive, with X-Men: The Last
   Stand among the first such available. Also, Wal-Mart stores included a
   special exclusive DVD titled "X-Men Revealed" with 50 minutes of
   behind-the-scenes look at the evolution of the " X-Men" franchise. The
   Wal-Mart exclusive DVD disc is not what it seems however. From the
   information of the exclusive DVD front and back cover, it is supposed
   to be a behind-the-scenes look of the X-Men movie franchise but instead
   it is a brief history of the X-Men comics. Target also has an exclusive
   that comes in a tin case with the one disc dvd plus a reprint of X-men
   annual #1 and four collectible cards from the movie.

   The DVD sold 5 million copies in its first week in stores. In other
   countries, such as the United Kingdom, the DVD package has a bonus disc
   containing three documentaries (Brett Ratner's Production Diary (40
   minutes), X-Men: Evolution Of A Trilogy (40 minutes), and X-Men: The
   Excitement Continues (20 minutes)) as well as various featurettes,
   character guides and pre-visualisation sequences. This version is
   planned for a later region 1 release.

Soundtrack

   X-Men: The Last Stand Soundtrack has been very successful and has
   received many positive reviews.

Tracklisting

    1. "20 Years Ago" (1:10)
    2. "Bathroom Titles" (1:09)
    3. "The Church of Magneto, Raven Is My Slave Name" (2:40)
    4. "Meet Leech, Then off to the Lake" (2:37)
    5. "Whirlpool Of Love" (2:04)
    6. "Examining Jean" (1:12)
    7. "Dark Phoenix" (1:28)
    8. "Angel's Cure" (2:34)
    9. "Jean and Logan" (1:39)
   10. "Dark Phoenix Awakes" (1:45)
   11. "Rejection Is Never Easy" (1:09)
   12. "Magneto Plots" (2:05)
   13. "Entering the House" (1:18)
   14. "Dark Phoenix's Tragedy" (3:18)
   15. "Farewell to X" (0:30)
   16. "The Funeral" (2:52)
   17. "Skating on the Pond" (1:12)
   18. "Cure Wars" (2:57)
   19. "Fight in the Woods" (3:06)
   20. "St Lupus Day" (3:03)
   21. "Building Bridges" (1:16)
   22. "Shock and No Oars" (1:15)
   23. "Attack on Alcatraz" (4:36)
   24. "Massacre" (0:31)
   25. "The Battle of the Cure" (4:21)
   26. "Phoenix Rises" (4:21)
   27. "The Last Stand" (5:29)

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X-Men:_The_Last_Stand"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
