   #copyright

Yellow fever

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: Health and medicine

   CAPTION: Yellow fever
   Classifications and external resources

    ICD- 10   A 95.
     ICD- 9   060
   DiseasesDB 14203
                                   ?
   Yellow fever virus
   TEM micrograph showing multiple virions of the yellow fever virus
   (234,000x magnification).
                         Virus classification

   Group:   Group IV ( (+)ssRNA)
   Family:  Flaviviridae
   Genus:   Flavivirus
   Species: Yellow Fever virus

   Yellow fever (also called yellow jack, black vomit or vomito negro in
   Spanish, or sometimes American Plague) is an acute viral disease. It is
   an important cause of hemorrhagic illness in many African and South
   American countries despite existence of an effective vaccine. The
   yellow in the disease name refers to the jaundice that affects some
   patients .

   Yellow fever has been a source of several devastating epidemics. During
   one of Napoleon's campaigns to Haiti in 1802, the troops were attacked
   by yellow fever. More than half of the army perished due to the
   disease. Outbreaks followed by thousands of fatalities occurred
   periodically in other Western Hemisphere locations until research which
   included human volunteers (some of whom died) led to an understanding
   of the method of transmission to humans (primarily by mosquitos) and
   development of a vaccine and other preventative efforts in the early
   20th century.

   Despite the costly and sacrificial breakthrough research by Cuban
   physician Carlos Finlay, American physician Walter Reed and many
   others, over 100 years later, unvaccinated populations in many
   developing nations in Africa and Central and South America continue to
   be at risk. As of 2001, the World Health Organization (WHO) estimates
   that yellow fever causes 200,000 illnesses and 30,000 deaths every year
   in unvaccinated populations.

Cause

   The female Aedes aegypti mosquito on a human host, about to obtain a
   blood meal
   Enlarge
   The female Aedes aegypti mosquito on a human host, about to obtain a
   blood meal

   Yellow fever is caused by an arbovirus of the family Flaviviridae, and
   is one of the smallest RNA viruses isolated. Human infection is begun
   after deposition of viral particles through the skin in infected
   arthropod saliva. Mosquitos are the primary vector in transmission of
   the disease from forest monkeys to humans and in person-to-person
   transmission. The mosquitos involved are Aedes simpsoni, A. africanus,
   and A. aegypti in Africa, and the Haemagogus and Sabethes genera in
   South America.

Symptoms

   After a 3 to 6 day incubation period, the typical symptoms that arise
   are fever, muscle aches, headache, and backache. Other symptoms may
   include a red tongue, flushed face, and reddening of the eyes. In a
   portion of cases there is also involvement of internal organs including
   the liver, kidneys, and heart. There may be hemorrhage from the
   gastrointestinal tract, causing a bloody vomit with a black colour
   called coffee ground vomiting (which explains the name "black vomit").
   Later, the disease is sometimes complicated by jaundice with liver
   failure (which causes yellow skin colour, hence the name "yellow
   fever") and/or kidney insufficiency with proteinuria. If the disease
   progresses, delirium, seizures and coma ensue. Hypotension and
   dehydration are also common.

Pathogenesis

   Yellow fever infections are frequently severe, but more moderate cases
   may occur as the result of previous infection by another flavivirus.
   After infection, the virus first replicates locally, followed by
   transportation to the rest of the body via the lymphatic system.
   Following systemic lymphatic infection, the virus proceeds to establish
   itself throughout organ systems, including the heart, kidneys, adrenal
   glands, and the parenchyma of the liver; high viral loads are also
   present in the blood. Necrotic masses ( Councilman bodies) appear in
   the cytoplasm of hepatocytes.^,

   There is a difference between disease outbreaks in rural or forest
   areas and in towns. Disease outbreaks in towns and non-native people
   are usually more serious.

Prevention

   A vaccine for yellow fever was developed which gives a 10-year or more
   immunity from the disease and effectively protects people traveling to
   the affected areas whilst being a means to control the disease at the
   same time. Woodcutters working in jungle areas should be particularly
   targeted for vaccination. Insecticides, protective clothing and
   screening of houses are helpful but not always enough. In affected
   areas mosquito control methods have proved effective in decreasing the
   number of cases.

   Recent studies have noted the increase in areas affected by
   mosquito-borne viral infections and have called for further research
   and funding for vaccines.^,

Treatment

   There is no real specific cure for yellow fever; therefore vaccination
   is important. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive only. Fluid
   replacement, fighting hypotension and transfusion of blood derivates is
   mostly needed in severe cases. In severe cases resulting in acute renal
   failure, dialysis may be necessary. A fever victim needs to get lots of
   rest, fresh air, and drink plenty of fluids.

Research data

   In the hamster model of yellow fever, early administration of the
   antiviral ribavirin is an effective early treatment of many
   pathological features of the disease. Ribavirin treatment during the
   first five days after virus infection improved survival, reduced tissue
   damage in target organs (liver and spleen), prevented hepatocellular
   steatosis, and normalized alanine aminotransferase (a liver damage
   marker) levels. The results of this study suggest that ribavirin may be
   effective in the early treatment of yellow fever, and that its
   mechanism of action in reducing liver pathology in yellow fever virus
   infection may be similar to that observed with ribavirin in the
   treatment of hepatitis C, a virus related to yellow fever. Because
   ribavirin had failed to improve survival in a virulent primate (rhesus)
   model of yellow fever infection, it had been previously discounted as a
   possible therapy.

Prognosis

   Historical reports have claimed a mortality rate of between 1 in 17
   (5.8%) and 1 in 3 (33%). However, in 2000, the WHO stated that in
   reported cases the fatality rate is between 15% and 50% .

Epidemiology

   Endemic range of yellow fever in Africa, 2005.
   Enlarge
   Endemic range of yellow fever in Africa, 2005.
   Endemic range of yellow fever in South America, 2005.
   Enlarge
   Endemic range of yellow fever in South America, 2005.

   Yellow fever occurs only in Africa, South and Central America, and the
   Caribbean . Most outbreaks in South America are to people who work
   within the tropical rain forests and have direct contact with the
   organisms within the rainforest.

   The disease can remain locally unknown in humans for long periods of
   time and then suddenly break out in an epidemic fashion. In Central
   America and Trinidad, such epidemics have been due to a form of the
   disease (jungle yellow fever) that is kept alive in Red Howler monkey
   populations and transmitted by Haemagogus mosquito species which live
   only in the canopy of rain forests. The virus is passed to humans when
   the tall rainforest trees are cut down. Infected woodcutters can then
   pass on the disease to others via species of Aedes mosquitoes that
   typically live at low altitudes, thus triggering an epidemic.

History

   Photograph taken during the 1965 Aedes aegypti eradication program in
   Miami, Florida
   Enlarge
   Photograph taken during the 1965 Aedes aegypti eradication program in
   Miami, Florida

   Yellow fever has had an important role in the history of Africa, the
   Americas, Europe, and the Caribbean.

Europe 541-549

   Fragile after the fall of Rome, Europe was further weakened by "Yellow
   Plague" (Yellow Fever). The Byzantine Empire suffered as well.

Havana, Cuba: 1762-3

   English and American colonial troops died by the thousands in Havana
   between 1762-1763. Epidemics struck coastal and island communities
   throughout the area during the next 140 years.

Philadelphia: 1793

   In 1793, the largest yellow fever epidemic in American history killed
   as many as 5,000 people or 10% of the population in Philadelphia,
   Pennsylvania. At the time, the port city was the largest in the United
   States and seat of the U.S. Government (prior to establishment of the
   District of Columbia). The city had recently seen the arrival of
   political refugees from the Caribbean. The summer that year was
   especially hot and dry, leaving many stagnant water areas as ideal
   breeding grounds for mosquitos.

   The outbreak began in July and continued through November, when cold
   weather finally eliminated the breeding ground for mosquitos, although
   the connection had not yet then been established.

   Thousands of Philadelphians, including prominent government officials
   like George Washington and Alexander Hamilton fled the national
   capital. Benjamin Rush, the city's leading physician and a signer of
   the Declaration of Independence, advocated the bloodletting of patients
   to combat the disease, but the treatment was controversial. Stephen
   Girard also helped supervise a hospital established at Bush Hill, a
   mansion just outside Philadelphia. Though many high-ranking people of
   Philadelphia fled, a few officials stayed. Mayor Matthew Clarkson as
   well as the mayor's committee tried to hold the city together as the
   death toll increased.

   Matthew Carey published a fast-selling chronicle of the yellow fever
   crisis, A short account of the Malignant Fever, Lately Prevalent in
   Philadelphia that went through four editions. Although other ethnic
   groups were included, Carey's account failed to include the involvement
   of the city's African Americans in the community's response and relief
   efforts, despite the fact that African American leaders Richard Allen
   and Absalom Jones had rallied their church community to assist victims.
   Allen and Jones subsequently wrote a pamphlet, Narrative of the
   Proceedings of the Black People, During the Late Awful Calamity in
   Philadelphia, which detailed the contributions of the African Americans
   during the epidemic.

Haiti: 1802

   In 1802, an army of forty thousand sent by First Consul Napoleon
   Bonaschild of France to Haiti to suppress the Haitian Revolution was
   wiped out by an epidemic of Yellow Fever (including the expedition's
   commander and Bonaparte's brother-in-law, Charles Leclerc). Some
   historians believe Haiti was to be a staging point for an invasion of
   the United States through Louisiana (then still under French control).

Norfolk, Virginia: 1855

   A ship carrying persons infected with the virus arrived in Hampton
   Roads in southeastern Virginia in June of 1855 . The disease spread
   quickly through the community, eventually killing over 3,000 people,
   mostly residents of Norfolk and Portsmouth. The Howard Association, a
   benevolent organization, was formed to help coordinate assistance in
   the form of funds, supplies, and medical professionals and volunteers
   which poured in from many other areas, particularly the Atlantic and
   Gulf Coast areas of the United States. See also "The Mermaids and
   Yellow Jack. A NorFolktale." children's historical fiction written by
   Norfolk Author Lisa Suhay retelling of the event and founding of the
   Bon Secours DePaul Hospital system in the United States in response to
   the epedemic. (
   http://iparentingmediaawards.com/winners/13/20794-2-751.php)

New York Harbour: 1856

   Dr. Lafayette Guild was the medical director of the army post on
   Governor's Island in New York Harbour. He studied the impact of the
   quarantine station, and found that isolating ill soldiers and Navy
   sailors did not prevent the spread of certain diseases such as yellow
   fever. In his opinion, the disease was not merely contagious, but
   infectious and portable. His observations were used to combat and limit
   an outbreak of yellow fever in 1856.

Memphis, Tennessee: 1878

   On August 13th, the first official victim of yellow fever died,
   sparking an exodus of over half of the city's population. When it was
   over, 5,150 would die, and 17,600 would suffer the effects of the
   disease.

California, Panama

   Yellow fever severely hampered early Spanish and American efforts to
   settle California, which lacks the frosts that normally control the
   mosquitos.

   In addition the first failed attempts to build the Panama Canal (by a
   French company) were thwarted in part due to the huge number of deaths
   amongst workers caused by yellow fever. The vaccination for the fever
   was first formulated during the second attempt to build the canal.

Research and Walter Reed

   An entomologist demonstrates the attraction of female yellow fever
   mosquitoes to his hand in an olfactometer.
   Enlarge
   An entomologist demonstrates the attraction of female yellow fever
   mosquitoes to his hand in an olfactometer.

   Walter Reed, M.D., (1851-1902) was an American Army surgeon who led the
   team which confirmed the theory first set forth in 1881 and proven by
   the Cuban doctor and scientist Dr. Carlos Finlay that yellow fever is
   transmitted by mosquitoes rather than direct contact. The risky but
   fruitful research work was done with human volunteers, including some
   of the medical personnel such as Clara Maass and Walter Reed Medal
   winner surgeon Jesse William Lazear who allowed themselves to be
   deliberately infected and died of the virus. By applying methods first
   suggested by Finlay, the elimination of Yellow Fever from Cuba was
   completed, as well as the completion of the Panama Canal. Lamentably,
   almost 20 years passed while the scientific community ignored Finlay's
   methods of mosquito control; the acceptance of Finlay's work was one of
   the most important and far-reaching effects of the Walter Reed
   Commission of 1900.

   Finlay and Reed's work was put to the test for the first time in the
   United States when a yellow fever epidemic struck New Orleans in 1905;
   according to the PBS American Experience documentary The Great Fever,
   houses were fumigated, cisterns for drinking water were inspected, and
   pools of standing water were treated with kerosene. The result was that
   the death toll from the epidemic was much lower than that from previous
   yellow fever epidemics, and that there has not been a major outbreak of
   the disease in the United States since, although no cure has yet been
   discovered.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yellow_fever"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
