   #copyright

Zambia

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Countries;
Countries

   SOS Children works in Zambia. For more information see SOS Children in
   Zambia
                            Republic of Zambia

   Flag of Zambia Coat of arms of Zambia
   Flag           Coat of arms
   Motto: "One Zambia, One Nation"
   Anthem: Stand and Sing of Zambia, Proud and Free
   Location of Zambia
   Capital
   (and largest city)    Lusaka
                         15°25′S 28°17′E
    Official languages   English
   Government            Republic
    - President          Levy Mwanawasa
       Independence      from the United Kingdom
    - Date               October 24, 1964
                                   Area
    - Total              752,618 km² ( 39th)
                         290,586 sq mi
    - Water (%)          1
                                Population
    - July 2005 estimate 11,668,000^1 ( 71st)
    - 2003 census        9,582,418
    - Density            16/km² ( 191st)
                         40/sq mi
        GDP ( PPP)       2005 estimate
    - Total              $10.792 billion ( 133rd)
    - Per capita         $931 ( 168th)
        HDI  (2004)      0.407 (low) ( 165th)
         Currency        Zambian kwacha ( ZMK)
         Time zone       CAT ( UTC+2)
    - Summer ( DST)      not observed ( UTC+2)
       Internet TLD      .zm
       Calling code      +260
   ^1 Estimates for this country explicitly take into account the effects
   of excess mortality due to AIDS; this can result in lower life
   expectancy, higher infant mortality and death rates, lower population
   and growth rates, and changes in the distribution of population by age
   and sex than would otherwise be expected.

   Zambia, officially the Republic of Zambia, is a landlocked country in
   southern Africa. It borders the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the
   north, Tanzania on the north-east, Malawi on the east, Mozambique,
   Zimbabwe, Botswana, and Namibia to the south, and Angola on the west.
   Formerly Northern Rhodesia, the country is named after the Zambezi
   river.

History

   The indigenous Khoisan hunter-gatherer occupants of Zambia began to be
   displaced or absorbed by more technologically-advanced migrating tribes
   around two thousand years ago. The major waves of Bantu-speaking
   immigrants – the Bantu expansion – began in the twelfth century.

   Among them, the Tonga people (also called Batonga) were first to settle
   in Zambia and are believed to have come from the far east near the "big
   sea." The Nkoya people had also come much earlier with some suggesting
   that they came first into what is today called Zambia from the
   Luba-Lunda kingdoms in the north. Other groups followed with the
   greatest influx coming between the late seventeenth and early
   nineteenth centuries. These later migrants came primarily from the Luba
   and Lunda tribes of southern Democratic Republic of Congo and northern
   Angola but were joined in the nineteenth century by Ngoni peoples from
   the south. By the later part of the nineteenth century, the various
   peoples of Zambia were largely established in the areas they currently
   occupy.

   Except for the occasional Portuguese explorer, the area lay untouched
   by Europeans for centuries. After the mid-nineteenth century, it was
   penetrated by Western explorers, missionaries, and traders. In 1855,
   missionary and explorer David Livingstone, became the first European to
   see the magnificent waterfalls on the Zambezi River. He named them
   Victoria Falls after Queen Victoria. The falls are known in Zambia as
   Mosi-O-Tunya (in the Lozi or Kololo dialect), "the smoke that
   thunders." The Zambian town, Livingstone, near the falls is named after
   him.

   In 1888, Cecil Rhodes, spearheading British commercial and political
   interests in Central Africa, obtained a mineral rights concession from
   local chiefs. In the west of the country, which came to be known as
   North Western Rhodesia, the British South African Company, Cecil
   Rhodes’ company, obtained mineral rights for the area from The Litunga,
   the king of the Lozi . In the east, King Mpezeni of the Ngoni resisted
   but he was defeated in battle and that part of the country came to be
   known as North-Eastern Rhodesia. The two were administered as separate
   units until 1911 when they were joined to form Northern Rhodesia. In
   1924, the Company ceded control to the British Government Colonial
   Office under the Devonshire Agreement In the same year, Southern
   Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe) was proclaimed to be within the British sphere
   of influence. Southern Rhodesia was annexed formally and granted
   self-government in 1923, and the administration of Northern Rhodesia
   was by a Governor appointed by the crown. Mining began in the
   Copperbelt in 1934.

   In 1953, both Northern and Southern Rhodesia (now Zambia and Zimbabwe,
   respectively) were joined with Nyasaland (now Malawi) to form the
   Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. The Federation was established
   despite overwhelming opposition from Africans, who demonstrated against
   it in 1960-61 and campaigned for its disbandment. Northern Rhodesia was
   the centre of much of the turmoil and crisis that characterized the
   federation in its last years. The campaign was led initially by Harry
   Mwaanga Nkumbula's African National Congress (ANC) and later by Kenneth
   Kaunda's United National Independence Party (UNIP). A two-stage
   election held in October and December 1962 resulted in an African
   majority in the legislative council and an uneasy coalition between the
   two African nationalist parties. The council passed resolutions calling
   for Northern Rhodesia's secession from the federation and demanding
   full internal self-government under a new constitution and a new
   National Assembly based on a broader, more democratic franchise. Led by
   Kenneth Kaunda, on 31 December 1963, the federation was dissolved, and
   Northern Rhodesia became the Republic of Zambia on 24 October 1964. At
   that time, Kaunda became the country's first president.

   At independence, despite its considerable mineral wealth, Zambia faced
   major challenges. Domestically, there were few trained and educated
   Zambians capable of running the government, and the economy was largely
   dependent on foreign expertise. Abroad, three of its neighbors –
   Southern Rhodesia and the Portuguese colonies of Mozambique and Angola
   – remained under white-dominated rule. Southern Rhodesia's white-ruled
   government unilaterally declared independence in November, 1965. In
   addition, Zambia shared a border with South African-controlled
   South-West Africa (now Namibia). Zambia's sympathies lay with forces
   opposing colonial or white-dominated rule, particularly in Southern
   Rhodesia. During the next decade, it actively supported movements such
   as the National Union for Total Independence of Angola (UNITA); the
   Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU); the African National Congress
   of South Africa (ANC); and the South-West Africa People's Organization
   (SWAPO).

   Conflicts with Rhodesia (so renamed from Southern Rhodesia) resulted in
   the closing of Zambia's borders with that country and severe problems
   with international transport and power supply. However, the Kariba
   hydroelectric station on the Zambezi River provided sufficient capacity
   to satisfy the country's requirements for electricity (despite the fact
   that the hydro control centre was on the Rhodesian side of the border).
   A railroad to the Tanzanian port of Dar es Salaam, built with Chinese
   assistance, reduced Zambian dependence on railroad lines south to South
   Africa and west through an increasingly troubled Angola. Until the
   completion of the railroad, however, Zambia's major artery for imports
   and the critical export of copper was along the TanZam Road, running
   from Zambia to the port cities in Tanzania. Also a pipeline for oil was
   built from Dar-es-Salaam to Ndola in Zambia.

   By the late 1970s, Mozambique and Angola had attained independence from
   Portugal. Zimbabwe achieved independence in accordance with the 1979
   Lancaster House Agreement, but Zambia's problems were not solved. Civil
   war in the former Portuguese colonies generated an influx of refugees
   and caused continuing transportation problems. The Benguela railway,
   which extended west through Angola, was essentially closed to traffic
   from Zambia by the late 1970s. Zambia's strong support for the ANC,
   which had its external headquarters in Lusaka, created security
   problems as South Africa raided ANC targets in Zambia.

   In the mid-1970s, the price of copper, Zambia's principal export,
   suffered a severe decline worldwide. In Zambia's situation, the cost of
   transporting the copper great distances to market was an additional
   strain. Zambia turned to foreign and international lenders for relief,
   but, as copper prices remained depressed, it became increasingly
   difficult to service its growing debt. By the mid-1990s, despite
   limited debt relief, Zambia's per capita foreign debt remained among
   the highest in the world.

Politics

   Zambia's politics takes place in a framework of a presidential
   representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Zambia is
   both head of state and head of government in a pluriform multi-party
   system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative
   power is vested in both the government and parliament. Zambia (formerly
   Northern Rhodesia) became a republic immediately upon attaining
   independence in October 1964.

Administrative divisions

   Map showing Zambia's provinces.
   Enlarge
   Map showing Zambia's provinces.

   Zambia is divided into nine provinces, each administered by an
   appointed deputy minister (essentially performing the duties of a
   governor). Each province are subdivided into four to twelve districts
   to make a total of seventy-two districts. The provinces are:
     * Central
     * Copperbelt
     * Eastern
     * Luapula
     * Lusaka

                   * Northern
                   * North-Western
                   * Southern
                   * Western

   There is also popular demand for a tenth province, Kafue Province.

Education

Lower Education

   Schooling usually falls into three levels: Primary (Years 1 to 7),
   Junior Secondary (Years 8 to 9) and Upper Secondary (Years 10 to 12).
   So-called "Basic" schools teach Years 1 to 9, as Year 9 is considered
   to be a decent level of schooling for the majority of children;
   however, schooling is only free up to Year 7 and most children drop out
   then.

   Both government and private schools exist in Zambia. The private school
   system began largely as a result of Christian mission efforts during
   the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. One of the most
   famous private schools is Catholic run St. Mary's Seminary located in
   the Msupadzi area, south of Chipata, Eastern Province. A popular public
   high school is Chama Secondary School located on the northern tip of
   the eastern province. Private schools operate under either the British
   or American way of schooling.

Higher Education

   Educational opportunities beyond high school are very limited in
   Zambia. There are few schools offering higher education and most
   Zambians cannot afford the fees. The University of Zambia is the
   primary institution of higher learning.

   Several teacher training colleges offer two-year programs beyond high
   school, and there are several Christian schools which offer
   seminary-level training.
     * University of Zambia (in Lusaka)
     * Copperbelt University (in Kitwe)
     * Northrise University (in Ndola)

Geography

   Map of Zambia
   Enlarge
   Map of Zambia
   Satellite image of Zambia, generated from raster graphics data supplied
   by The Map Library
   Enlarge
   Satellite image of Zambia, generated from raster graphics data supplied
   by The Map Library

   Zambia is a landlocked country in southern Africa, with a tropical
   climate and consists mostly of high plateau with some hills and
   mountains. At 290,566 sq. mi. (752,614 sq. km) it is the 39th-largest
   country in the world (after Chile) and is slightly larger than the US
   state of Texas.

   Zambia is drained by two major river basins: the Zambezi River basin,
   in the south; and the Congo River basin, in the north. Of the two
   basins, the part of Zambia drained by the Zambezi River basin is about
   three-quarters of the country's total area. The part drained by the
   Congo River basin is about a quarter of the country's total area.

Zambezi River basin

   In the Zambezi River basin, there are four major rivers that either run
   through Zambia or form the country's borders with its neighbours: the
   Kafue, the Luangwa, the Kwando and the Zambezi. The last three form
   part of Zambia's southern borders. The Kwando River forms Zambia's
   southwestern border with Angola, then it runs eastwards along the
   northern boundary of Namibia's Caprivi Strip before spreading into the
   Linyanti Marshes, which finally drain eastwards into the Zambezi. From
   its confluence with the Kwando, the Zambezi flows eastwards, forming
   the whole of Zambia's border with Zimbabwe. The other two rivers, Kafue
   and Luangwa, lie entirely within Zambia and are major tributaries of
   the Zambezi. Their confluences with the Zambezi are on Zambia's
   Zimbabwean border at Chirundu (for the Kafue) and Luangwa town (for the
   Luangwa River). Before its confluence, the Luangwa River forms part of
   Zambia's border with Mozambique. From Luangwa town, the Zambezi leaves
   Zambia and flows into Mozambique, and eventually spills its waters into
   the Indian Ocean's Mozambique Channel.

   The Zambezi falls 360  feet (100  m) over the one- mile wide (1.6 km)
   Victoria Falls, located in the southwest corner of the country,
   subsequently filling Lake Kariba.

   The Zambezi Valley, running along the southern border, is both deep and
   wide. Moving northwards the terrain shifts into a high plateau ranging
   from three to four thousand feet (900–1,200 m) to over six thousand
   feet (1,800 m) in the northern area of the Copperbelt. In the east, the
   Luangwa valley curves its way south with hills on either side until it
   enters the Zambezi.In the west, large plains are a key geographic
   feature, flooding the western plains during the annual rainy season
   (typically October though April).

Congo River basin

   Zambia hosts two major rivers from the Congo River basin: the Chambeshi
   and the Luapula. The latter forms part of Zambia's border with the
   Democratic Republic of Congo. The Chambeshi lies entirely within Zambia
   and is the furthest headstream of the Congo River. It flows into the
   Bangweulu Wetlands, which provide the waters that form the Luapula
   River. The Luapula flows southward then westward before it turns
   northward until it enters Lake Mweru. The lake's other major tributary
   is the Kalungwishi River, which flows into it from the east. The Luvua
   River drains Lake Mweru, flowing out of the northern end.

   Lake Tanganyika is the other major hydrographic feature that belongs to
   the Congo River basin. The lake's southeastern end receives water from
   the Kalambo River, which forms part of Zambia's border with Tanzania.
   This river has Africa's second highest uninterrupted waterfall, the
   Kalambo Falls. (The continent's highest waterfalls is the Tugela Falls
   of South Africa.)

Economy

   Over 70% percent of Zambians live in poverty. Per capita annual incomes
   are currently at about one-half their levels at independence and, at
   $395, place the country among the world's poorest nations. Social
   indicators continue to decline, particularly in measurements of life
   expectancy at birth (about thirty-seven years) and maternal mortality
   (729 per 100,000 pregnancies). The country's rate of economic growth
   cannot support rapid population growth or the strain which HIV/AIDS
   related issues (i.e. rising medical costs, decline in worker
   productivity) place on government resources. Zambia is also one of
   sub-Saharan Africa's most highly urbanized countries. Almost one-half
   of the country's eleven million people are concentrated in a few urban
   zones strung along the major transportation corridors, while rural
   areas are sparsely populated. Unemployment and underemployment are
   serious problems.

   HIV/AIDS is the nation's greatest problem, with 17% prevalence among
   the adult population. HIV/AIDS will continue to ravage Zambian
   economic, political, cultural, and social development for the
   foreseeable future.

   Once a middle-income country, Zambia began to slide into poverty in the
   1970s when copper prices declined on world markets. The socialist
   government made up for falling revenue with several abortive attempts
   at International Monetary Fund structural adjustment programmes (SAPs),
   which ended after popular outcries from the people. After democratic
   multi-party elections, the Chiluba government (1991-2001) came to power
   in November 1991 committed to an economic reform program. The
   government privatized most of the parastatals (state-owned
   corporations), maintained positive real interest rates, eliminated
   exchange controls, and endorsed free market principles. Corruption grew
   dramatically under the Chiluba government. It remains to be seen
   whether the Mwanawasa government will be aggressive in continuing
   economic reform. Zambia is still dealing with economic reform issues
   such as the size of the public sector and improving Zambia's social
   sector delivery systems. NGOs and other groups have contended that the
   SAPs, in Zambia and other countries, have had very detrimental effects
   on the poor. Zambia's total foreign debt exceeded $6 billion when the
   country qualified for Highly Indebted Poor Country Initiative (HIPC)
   debt relief in 2000, contingent upon meeting certain performance
   criteria. Initially, Zambia hoped to reach the HIPC completion point,
   and benefit from substantial debt forgiveness, in late 2003. In January
   2003, the Zambian Government informed the IMF and World Bank that it
   wished to renegotiate some of the agreed performance criteria calling
   for privatization of the Zambia National Commercial Bank and the
   national telephone and electricity utilities. Although agreements were
   reached on these issues, subsequent overspending on civil service wages
   delayed Zambia's final HIPC debt forgiveness from late 2003 to early
   2005, at the earliest. In an effort to reach HIPC completion in 2004,
   the government drafted an austerity budget for 2004, freezing civil
   service salaries and increasing a number of taxes. The labor movement
   and other components of civil society have objected to the sacrifices
   called for in the budget, and, in some cases, the role of the
   international financial institutions in demanding austerity.

   The Zambian economy has historically been based on the copper mining
   industry. Output of copper had fallen, however, to a low of 228,000
   metric tons in 1998, after a thirty-year decline in output due to lack
   of investment, low copper prices, and uncertainty over privatization.
   In 2002, following privatization of the industry, copper production
   rebounded to 337,000 metric tons. Improvements in the world copper
   market have magnified the effect of this volume increase on revenues
   and foreign exchange earnings. Recently firms like Vedanta Resources, a
   London based metals giant acquired Konkola Copper Mines (KCM)and have
   completely transformed the company allowing it to develop to its full
   potential and maximise the benefits for the employees. They are also
   investing a lot in the Zambian economy by undertaking the largest
   single investment into the country earlier in 2006.

   The Zambian Government is pursuing an economic diversification program
   to reduce the economy's reliance on the copper industry. This
   initiative seeks to exploit other components of Zambia's rich resource
   base by promoting agriculture, tourism, gemstone mining, and hydro
   power. In 2003, nonmetal exports increased by 25% and accounted for 38%
   of all export earnings, previously 35%. The Zambian government has
   recently been granting licenses to international resource companies to
   prospect for minerals such as nickel and uranium.

Demographics and ethnicity

   Thatched-roof church in a Zambian village.
   Enlarge
   Thatched-roof church in a Zambian village.
   A Zambian field.
   Enlarge
   A Zambian field.

   Zambia's population is comprised of about seventy-two Bantu-speaking
   ethnic groups but almost 90% of Zambians belong to the nine main
   ethnolinguistic groups: the Bemba, Nyanja-Chewa, Tonga, Tumbuka (spoken
   in the Eastern Province and eastern part Nothern Province), Lunda,
   Luvale, Kaonde, Nkoya and Lozi. In the rural areas, each ethnic group
   is concentrated in a particular geographic region of the country and
   many groups are very small and not as well known. However, in Lusaka
   and the Copperbelt, all the ethinic groups can be found in good
   proportions.

   The country is 44% urban. Most rural Zambians are subsistence farmers.
   The predominant religion is Christianity which is also the official
   national religion. Expatriates, mostly British (about 15,000) or South
   African, live mainly in Lusaka and in the Copperbelt in northern
   Zambia, where they are employed in mines and related activities. Zambia
   also has a small but economically important Asian population, most of
   whom are Indians. In recent years over three hundred dispossesed white
   farmers left Zimbabwe at the invitation of the Zambian government and
   have taken up farming in the southern region.

   The HIV/AIDS epidemic is ravaging Zambia. Nearly one million Zambians
   are HIV positive or have AIDS. An estimated 100,000 died of the
   epidemic in 2004. Over a half-million Zambian children have been
   orphaned. Life expectancy at birth is just under forty.

Religion

   Zambia's constitution identifies the country as a Christian nation, but
   a variety of religious traditions exist. Traditional religious thought
   blends easily with Christian beliefs in many of the country's syncretic
   churches. Islam also has a visible presence especially in urban
   settings.

   Within the Christian community, a variety of denominations can be
   found: Roman Catholic, Anglican, Pentecostal, Lutheran, Seventh-day
   Adventist: 4.0%, and a variety of Evangelical denominations. These
   grew, adjusted and prospered from the original missionary settlements (
   Portuguese and Catholicism in the east from Mozambique) and Anglican
   (English and Scottish influences) from the south. Except for some
   technical positions (e.g. physicians), western missionary roles have
   been assumed by native believers. After Frederick Chiluba (a
   pentecostal Christian) became President in 1991, Pentecostal
   congregations sprouted around the country.

   Zambian-born Archibishop Emmanuel Milingo was a high-ranking Bishop at
   the Vatican until he left to marry Maria Sung, a 43-year-old Korean
   acupuncturist, at a ceremony officiated by the Rev. Sun Myung Moon in
   New York (May, 2001). He was ex-communicated by the Catholic Church in
   September, 2006 for conducting a consecration of 4 married men as
   bishops.

   Zambia also has a very small Jewish community, mostly of Ashkenazi
   members of the White community. However, there have been notable
   members such as Simon Zukas, retired Minister, MP and a member of Forum
   for Democracy and Development and earlier on the MMD and United
   National Independence Party. Additionally, the economist Stanley
   Fischer, currently the governor of the Bank of Israel and formerly head
   of the IMF also was born and partially raised in Zambia's Jewish
   community.

Culture

   Zambia's present-day culture exhibits a blend of historical and
   cultural features from the past as well as the present. Traditional
   African practices and understandings continue to influence many aspects
   of Zambian culture. The impact of the colonial era can also be seen in
   the lives of the people. Finally, present-day global expressions and
   forces contribute to the cultural landscape.

   Music
          traditional, popular, Christian

   Traditional ceremonies and rituals
          Kathanga (Kafue Province), Ncwala (Eastern Province), Umutomboko
          (Luapula Province), Kuomboka (Western Province), Cing'ande
          (Southern Province)

   Traditional arts
          Tonga baskets, stools, fabrics

   Theatre
   Games
          Nsolo

   Languages
          Chibemba, Nkoya, Chichewa (Chinyanja, Chilunda) or Lunda,
          Chitonga or Tonga, Ila, Mambwe, Namwanga, Kaonde, Lozi, Luvale,
          Shona, Goba, Tumbuka, Yauma, Aushi, Lenje, Lamba, Lala*,
          Fanagalo (a pidgin language used mainly used in the South
          African mines) and others making a total of seventy-eight

   Food
          Nshima, Ibwatu, Inswa (termites), Vinkubala (caterpillars), Dobe
          (fresh maize), chikwangwa (the crust from the bottom of a Nshima
          pot), vimbombo va nkhuku ( a delicacy made from chicken's feet),
          chiwaya cho kazinga (roasted maize)

Geographic locale

   Flag of Democratic Republic of the Congo  Democratic Republic of the
   Congo Flag of Tanzania  Tanzania
   Flag of Angola  Angola North Flag of Malawi  Malawi
   West    Flag of Zambia  Zambia     East
   South
   Flag of Namibia  Namibia Flag of Botswana  Botswana Flag of Zimbabwe
   Zimbabwe •  Flag of Mozambique  Mozambique

   Countries of Southern Africa

   Angola • Botswana • Lesotho • Madagascar • Malawi • Mauritius •
   Mozambique • Namibia • South Africa • Swaziland • Zambia • Zimbabwe
   Countries of Africa

   Sovereign states: Algeria • Angola • Benin • Botswana • Burkina Faso •
   Burundi • Cameroon • Cape Verde • Central African Republic • Chad •
   Democratic Republic of the Congo • Republic of the Congo • Comoros •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Djibouti • Egypt ^1 • Equatorial Guinea • Eritrea •
   Ethiopia • France ^2 • Gabon • The Gambia • Ghana • Guinea-Bissau •
   Guinea • Kenya • Lesotho • Liberia • Libya • Madagascar • Malawi • Mali
   • Mauritania • Mauritius • Morocco • Mozambique • Namibia • Niger •
   Nigeria • Portugal ^2 • Rwanda • Senegal • Seychelles • Sierra Leone •
   Somalia • South Africa • Spain ^2 • Sudan • Swaziland • São Tomé and
   Príncipe • Tanzania • Togo • Tunisia • Uganda • Yemen ^3 • Zambia •
   Zimbabwe

   Dependencies: British Indian Ocean Territory (UK) • French Southern and
   Antarctic Lands (France) • Mayotte (France) • Réunion (France) • Saint
   Helena ^4 (UK)

   Unrecognized countries: Somaliland • Western Sahara •

   ^1  Partly in Asia. ^2  Mostly in Europe. ^3  Mostly in Asia.
   ^4 Includes the dependencies of Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha.
   Flag of the SADC    Member states of the Southern African Development
   Community

   Angola • Botswana • Democratic Republic of the Congo • Lesotho •
   Madagascar • Malawi • Mauritius • Mozambique • Namibia • Seychelles •
   South Africa • Swaziland • Tanzania • Zambia • Zimbabwe
   Member states of the African Union

   Algeria • Angola • Benin • Botswana • Burkina Faso • Burundi •
   Cameroon • Cape Verde • Central African Republic • Chad • Comoros •
   Democratic Republic of the Congo • Republic of the Congo •
   Côte d'Ivoire • Djibouti • Egypt • Eritrea • Ethiopia •
   Equatorial Guinea • Gabon • The Gambia • Ghana • Guinea •
   Guinea-Bissau • Kenya • Lesotho • Liberia • Libya • Madagascar •
   Malawi • Mali • Mauritania • Mauritius • Mozambique • Namibia • Niger •
   Nigeria • Rwanda • São Tomé and Príncipe • Senegal • Seychelles •
   Sierra Leone • Somalia • South Africa • Sudan • Swaziland • Tanzania •
   Togo • Tunisia • Uganda • Western Sahara  (SADR) • Zambia • Zimbabwe
   Niger-Congo-speaking nations
   Kordofanian

   Flag of Sudan  Sudan
   Mande

   Flag of The Gambia  The Gambia • Flag of Guinea  Guinea • Flag of
   Guinea-Bissau  Guinea-Bissau • Flag of Mali  Mali • Flag of Mauritania
    Mauritania • Flag of Senegal  Senegal • Flag of Sierra Leone  Sierra
   Leone
   Atlantic-Congo

   Atlantic

   Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Burkina Faso  Burkina Faso • Flag of
   Cameroon  Cameroon • Flag of Central African Republic  Central African
   Republic • Flag of Chad  Chad • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire •
   Flag of The Gambia  The Gambia • Flag of Guinea  Guinea • Flag of
   Guinea-Bissau  Guinea-Bissau • Flag of Liberia  Liberia • Flag of Mali
    Mali • Flag of Mauritania  Mauritania • Flag of Niger  Niger • Flag of
   Senegal  Senegal • Flag of Sierra Leone  Sierra Leone • Flag of Sudan
   Sudan • Flag of Togo  Togo

   Ijoid: Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria - Dogon: Flag of Mali  Mali
   Volta-Congo

   Senufo: Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire •
   Flag of Mali  Mali

   Gur: Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Burkina Faso  Burkina Faso • Flag
   of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire • Flag of Ghana  Ghana • Flag of Mali
   Mali • Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria • Flag of Togo  Togo

   Adamawa-Ubangi: Flag of Cameroon  Cameroon • Flag of Central African
   Republic  Central African Republic • Flag of Chad  Chad • Flag of
   Nigeria  Nigeria

   Kru: Flag of Burkina Faso  Burkina Faso • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte
   d'Ivoire • Flag of Liberia  Liberia

   Kwa: Flag of Benin  Benin • Flag of Côte d'Ivoire  Côte d'Ivoire • Flag
   of Ghana  Ghana • Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria • Flag of Togo  Togo
   Benue-Congo

   Bantu

   Flag of Angola  Angola • Flag of Botswana  Botswana • Flag of Burundi
   Burundi • Flag of Cameroon  Cameroon • Flag of Democratic Republic of
   the Congo  Democratic Republic of the Congo • Flag of Republic of the
   Congo  Republic of the Congo • Flag of Equatorial Guinea  Equatorial
   Guinea • Flag of Gabon  Gabon • Flag of Kenya  Kenya • Flag of Nigeria
    Nigeria • Flag of Malawi  Malawi • Flag of Mozambique  Mozambique •
   Flag of Namibia  Namibia • Flag of Rwanda  Rwanda • Flag of Somalia
   Somalia • Flag of South Africa  South Africa • Flag of Swaziland
   Swaziland • Flag of Tanzania  Tanzania • Flag of Uganda  Uganda • Flag
   of Zambia  Zambia • Flag of Zimbabwe  Zimbabwe

   Yoruba and Igbo: Flag of Nigeria  Nigeria
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zambia"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
