   #copyright

Zion National Park

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: North American Geography

            Zion National Park
   IUCN Category II ( National Park)
   Zion National Park
   Location:       Utah, USA
   Nearest city:   Springdale, Utah
   Coordinates:    37°18′0″N, 113°3′0″W
   Area:           146,598 acres
                     (143,035.07 federal)
                   593.26 km²
   Established:    July 31, 1909
   Visitation:     2,586,665 (in 2005)
   Governing body: National Park Service
   Zion Canyon as seen from the top of Angels Landing at sunset
   Enlarge
   Zion Canyon as seen from the top of Angels Landing at sunset

   Zion National Park is a United States National Park located in the
   Southwestern United States, near Springdale, Utah. A prominent feature
   in the 229- square-mile ( 593 km²) park is Zion Canyon, 15 miles (24
   km) long and up to half a mile (800 m) deep, cut through the reddish
   and tan-colored Navajo Sandstone by the North Fork of the Virgin River.
   Located at the junction of the Colorado Plateau, Great Basin, and
   Mojave Desert regions, this unique geography and variety of life zones
   allow for unusual plant and animal diversity. A total of 289 bird
   species, 75 mammals (including 19 species of bat), 32 reptiles and
   numerous plant species inhabit the park's four life zones: desert,
   riparian, woodland, and coniferous forest. Notable megafauna include
   Mountain Lions, Mule Deer and Golden Eagles, along with reintroduced
   California Condors and Bighorn Sheep. Common plant species include
   Cottonwood, Cactus, Juniper, Pine, Boxelder, Sagebrush and various
   willows.

   Human habitation of the area started about 8,000 years ago with small
   family groups of Native Americans; the semi-nomadic Basketmaker Anasazi
   (300 CE) stem from one of these groups. In turn, the Virgin Anasazi
   culture (500 CE) developed as the Basketmakers settled in permanent
   communities. A different group, the Parowan Fremont, lived in the area
   as well. Both groups moved away by 1300 and were replaced by the
   Parrusits and several other Southern Paiute subtribes. The canyon was
   discovered by Mormons in 1858 and was settled by that same group in the
   early 1860s. Mukuntuweap National Monument was established in 1909 to
   protect the canyon, and by 1919 the monument was expanded to become
   Zion National Park ( Zion is an ancient Hebrew word meaning a place of
   refuge or sanctuary). The Kolob section was proclaimed a separate Zion
   National Monument in 1937, but was incorporated into the park in 1956.

   The geology of the Zion and Kolob canyons area includes nine formations
   that together represent 150 million years of mostly Mesozoic-aged
   sedimentation. At various periods in that time, warm, shallow seas,
   streams, ponds and lakes, vast deserts and dry near-shore environments
   covered the area. Uplift associated with the creation of the Colorado
   Plateaus lifted the region 10,000 feet (3000 m) starting 13 million
   years ago.

Geography

   Spectacular Zion scenery as seen from the Zion-Mount Carmel Highway
   Enlarge
   Spectacular Zion scenery as seen from the Zion-Mount Carmel Highway

   The park is located in southwestern Utah in Washington, Iron, and Kane
   counties. Geomorphically, it is located on the Markagunt and Kolob
   plateaus, at the intersection of three North American geographic
   provinces: The Colorado Plateaus, the Great Basin, and the Mojave
   Desert. The northern part of the park is known as the Kolob Canyons
   section and is accessible from Interstate 15, exit 40.

   The 8,726 foot (2660 m) summit of Horse Ranch Mountain ( photo) is the
   highest point in the park; the lowest point is the 3,666 foot (1117 m)
   elevation of Coal Pits Wash, creating a relief of about 5,100 feet
   (1500 m).

   Streams in the area follow rectangular paths because they follow
   jointing planes in the rocks. The headwaters of the Virgin River are at
   about 9,000 feet (2700 m) and the river empties into Lake Mead 200
   miles (320  km) southeast after flowing 8,000 feet (2400 m) downward.
   This gives the Virgin a stream gradient that ranges from 50 to 80 feet
   per mile (0.9–1.5%)—one of the steepest stream gradients in North
   America.
   Temple of Sinawava Waterfall
   Enlarge
   Temple of Sinawava Waterfall

   The road into Zion Canyon is 6 miles long, ending at the Temple of
   Sinawava ("Sinawava" refers to the Coyote God of the Paiute Indians).
   At the Temple, the canyon narrows and a foot-trail continues to the
   mouth of the Zion Narrows, a spectacular gorge with walls 40-100 feet
   (12-30 meters) wide and 1000 feet (300 m) tall. The Zion Canyon road is
   served by a free shuttle bus from early April to late October and by
   private vehicles the other months of the year. Other roads in Zion are
   open to private vehicles year-round.

   Other areas of the park also offer outstanding scenery. The east side
   of the park is served by the Zion-Mount Carmel Highway which passes
   through the Zion-Mount Carmel Tunnel and ends at Mt. Carmel Junction.
   On the east side of the park notable park features include Checkerboard
   Mesa and the East Temple and one of the more popular hikes, the Canyon
   Overlook Trail.

   West of Zion Canyon, the Kolob Terrace area features The Subway, a
   famous slot canyon hike, and Lava Point, with a spectacular view of the
   entire area. The Kolob Canyons section, further west near Cedar City,
   features the worlds longest arch, Kolob Arch.
   Map of Zion National Park showing the Zion and Kolob canyon sections.
   Enlarge
   Map of Zion National Park showing the Zion and Kolob canyon sections.

   Spring weather is unpredictable, with stormy, wet days being common,
   mixed with occasional warm, sunny weather. Precipitation is heaviest in
   March. Spring wildflowers bloom from April through June, peaking in
   May. Fall days are usually clear and mild; nights are often cool.
   Summer days are hot (95 ° F to 110 °F; 35 ° C to 43 °C), but overnight
   lows are usually comfortable (65 °F to 70 °F; 18 °C to 21 °C).
   Afternoon thunderstorms are common from mid-July through mid-September.
   Storms may produce waterfalls as well as flash floods. Autumn
   tree-colour displays begin in September in the high country; inside
   Zion Canyon, autumn colors usually peak in late October. Winter in Zion
   Canyon is fairly mild. Winter storms bring rain or light snow to Zion
   Canyon and heavier snow to the higher elevations. Clear days may become
   quite warm, reaching 60 °F (16 °C); nights are often 20 °F to 40 °F
   (−7 °C to 4 °C). Winter storms can last several days and make roads
   icy. Zion roads are plowed, except the Kolob Terrace Road and the Kolob
   Canyons Road, which are closed when covered with snow. Winter driving
   conditions persist from November through March.

Notable geographical features of the park

     * Virgin River Narrows
     * Emerald Pools ( photo) ( photo)
     * Angel's Landing ( photo) ( photo) ( photo)
     * The Great White Throne ( photo)
     * The Three Patriarchs (photo)
     * Kolob Arch, a remote cliff wall arch

Human history

   Archaeologists have divided the long span of Zion's human history into
   four cultural periods, each characterized by distinctive technological
   and social adaptations.

Archaic period

   The first human use in the region dates to 8,000 years ago when family
   groups camped where they could hunt or collect plants and seeds. About
   2,000 years ago, some groups began growing maize and other crops,
   leading to an increasingly sedentary lifestyle. Later groups in this
   period built permanent villages (called pueblos). Archaeologists call
   this the Archaic period and it lasted until about 500 CE. Baskets,
   cordage nets, and yucca fibre sandals have been found and dated to this
   period. The Archaic toolkits included flaked stone knives, drills, and
   stemmed dart points. The dart points were hafted to wooden shafts and
   propelled by throwing devices called atlatls.

   By 300 CE some of the archaic groups developed into an early branch of
   seminomadic Anasazi, the Basketmakers. Basketmaker sites have grass- or
   stone-lined storage cists and shallow, partially underground dwellings
   called pithouses. They were hunters and gatherers who supplemented
   their diet with limited agriculture. Locally collected pine nuts were
   important for food and trade.

Protohistoric period

   The Parrusits and several other Southern Paiute subtribes lived in the
   Virgin River Valley south of Zion Canyon for hundreds of years
   following the departure of the Anasazi and Fremont Indians around 1300
   CE. Tradition and archaeological evidence holds that they are a
   Numic-speaking cousin of the Virgin Anasazi. Parrusits seasonally
   migrated up and down the valley in search of wild seeds and nuts in
   what is called the Neo-Archaic period. Some farming and hunting
   supplemented their diet.

   Evidence suggests the Parrusits had great reverence for the large
   monoliths and turbulent waters in Zion Canyon. They believed the
   monoliths were responsible for the streams and springs they depended
   upon by communicating with the rocks, animals, water, and plants that
   make their home there. Modern bands of Southern Paiute still visit
   sites within the park to perform rituals and collect plants.
   Kaun huts were used by bands of Southern Paiute who lived in the area.
   Enlarge
   Kaun huts were used by bands of Southern Paiute who lived in the area.

Historic period

Early exploration

   The Historic period begins in the late 18th century, with the
   exploration and settlement of southern Utah by Euro-Americans. Padres
   Silvestre Vélez de Escalante and Francisco Atanasio Domínguez passed
   near what is now the Kolob Canyons Visitor Centre on October 13, 1776,
   becoming the first white men known to visit the area. In 1826, trapper
   and trader Jedediah Smith led 16 men to explore the area in a quest to
   find a route to California. These and other explorations by traders
   from New Mexico blazed the Old Spanish Trail, which followed the Virgin
   River for a portion of its length. Captain John C. Fremont wrote about
   his 1844 journeys in the region.

Mormon pioneers and the Powell expedition

   In the 1850s, Mormon farmers from the Salt Lake area became the first
   white people to settle the Virgin River region. In 1851, the Parowan
   and Cedar City, Utah areas were settled by Mormons who used the Kolob
   Canyons area for timber, and for grazing cattle, sheep, and horses.
   They prospected for mineral deposits, and diverted Kolob water to
   irrigate crops in the valley below. Mormon settlers named the area
   Kolob - in Mormon scripture, the star nearest the residence of God.

   In 1858, they had expanded 30 miles south to the lower Virgin River.
   That year, a Southern Paiute guide led young Mormon missionary and
   interpreter Nephi Johnson into the upper Virgin River area and Zion
   Canyon. Johnson wrote a favorable report about the agricultural
   potential of the upper Virgin River basin, and returned later that year
   to found the town of Virgin. More settlers arrived in 1860 and 1861 and
   settled the towns of Rockville and Springdale. Catastrophic flooding by
   the river (especially in the Great Flood of 1861-1862), little arable
   land, and poor soils made agriculture in the upper Virgin River a risky
   venture.

   In 1861 or 1862, Joseph Black made the arduous journey to Zion Canyon
   and was very impressed by its beauty. His stories about the Canyon were
   at first seen as exaggerated, prompting his neighbors to call the
   Canyon "Joseph's Glory". The floor of Zion Canyon was settled in 1863
   by Issac Behunin, who farmed corn, tobacco, and fruit trees. The
   Behunin family lived in Zion canyon near the site of today's Zion Lodge
   during the summer, and wintered in Springdale. Isaac Behunin is
   credited with naming Zion, a reference to a place of peace mentioned in
   the Bible.

   Two more families settled Zion canyon in the next couple of years,
   bringing with them cattle and other domesticated animals. The canyon
   floor was farmed until Zion became a Monument in 1909.
   The Crawford ranch was located near the mouth of Zion Canyon, in
   Springdale.
   Enlarge
   The Crawford ranch was located near the mouth of Zion Canyon, in
   Springdale.

   The John Wesley Powell expedition entered the area in 1869 after their
   first trip through the Grand Canyon. Powell returned in September 1872
   and descended the East Fork of the Virgin River (Parunaweap Canyon) to
   the town of Shunesberg. He may have made the climb up to Zion Canyon,
   and named it Mukuntuweap under the impression that that was the Paiute
   name. In the same year, Geologist Grove Karl Gilbert, working with the
   Wheeler Survey, descended the North Fork of the Virgin River from
   Navajo Lake to Zion Canyon, making the first recorded descent of "The
   Zion Narrows". It is likely that he named this remarkable section of
   canyon in the process.

   Powell Survey photographers, Jack Hillers and James Fennemore, first
   visited the Zion Canyon and Kolob Plateau region in the spring of 1872.
   Hillers returned in April of 1873 to add more photographs to the
   "Virgin River Series" of photographs and stereographs. Hillers
   described wading the canyon for 4 days and nearly freezing to death to
   take his photographs. Geologist Clarence Dutton later mapped the region
   and artist William H. Holmes documented the scenery.

Protection and tourism

   From April through October, the scenic drive in Zion Canyon is closed
   to private vehicles, and visitors ride the frequent shuttle buses
   Enlarge
   From April through October, the scenic drive in Zion Canyon is closed
   to private vehicles, and visitors ride the frequent shuttle buses

   Paintings of the canyon by Frederick S. Dellenbaugh were exhibited at
   the St. Louis World's Fair in 1904, followed by a glowing article in
   Scribner's Magazine the next year. That, along with previously created
   photographs, paintings, and reports, led to U.S. President William
   Howard Taft's proclamation creating Mukuntuweap National Monument on
   July 31, 1909. In 1917, the acting director of the newly created
   National Park Service visited the canyon and proposed changing its name
   Zion from the locally unpopular Mukuntuweap. That occurred the
   following year. The United States Congress added more land and
   established Zion National Park on November 19, 1919. A separate Zion
   National Monument, the Kolob Canyons area, was proclaimed on January
   22, 1937, and was incorporated into the park on July 11, 1956.

   Travel to the area before it was a national park was rare due to its
   remote location, lack of accommodations, and the absence of real roads
   in southern Utah. Old wagon roads were upgraded to the first automobile
   roads starting about 1910, and the road into Zion Canyon was built in
   1917, to as far as The Grotto.

   By the summer of 1917, touring cars could reach Zion Canyon, and the
   Wylie Camp was established - a tent camp providing the first visitor
   lodging in Zion Canyon. The Utah Parks Company, a subsidiary of the
   Union Pacific Railroad, acquired the Wylie Camp in 1923, and offered
   ten-day rail/bus tours to Zion, Bryce, Kaibab, and the North Rim of the
   Grand Canyon. The Zion Lodge complex was built in 1925 at the site of
   the Wylie tent camp. Architect Gilbert Stanley Underwood designed Zion
   Lodge in the "Rustic Style" and the Utah Parks Company funded the
   construction. In 1968, the main lodge building was destroyed by fire
   but was quickly rebuilt. The detached Western Cabins ( photo) survived
   and were added to the National Register of Historic Places.
   Tour buses at Zion Lodge in 1929. Tourism greatly increased after paved
   all-weather highways were built to Zion.
   Enlarge
   Tour buses at Zion Lodge in 1929. Tourism greatly increased after paved
   all-weather highways were built to Zion.

   Work on the Zion-Mount Carmel Highway, started in 1927 to provide
   reliable access between Springdale and the east side of the park. The
   road opened in 1930 and park visitation and travel in the area greatly
   increased. The most famous feature of the highway is the 1.1-mile
   (1.8-km) Zion-Mount Carmel Tunnel, which has six large windows cut
   through the massive sandstone cliff. On the south side of the tunnel,
   switchbacks take motorists from the tunnel to the floor of Zion Canyon.
   On the east side the Zion-Mt. Carmel Highway terminates at Mt. Carmel
   Junction and Highway 89, allowing visitors to travel by car to other
   national parks, including Bryce Canyon and the Grand Canyon.

   In 1896, local rancher John Winder improved the Native American
   footpath up Echo Canyon so he could travel on horseback up to the East
   Rim, and hence to Long Valley. This trail was improved again about 1925
   and became the East Rim Trail. Other trails were built in 1925
   including the West Rim Trail and the Lady Mountain Trail. The auto road
   was extended to the Temple of Sinawava, and a trail built from there
   one mile to the start of the Narrows. The next year saw construction of
   the Angels Landing Trail, and two suspension bridges were built over
   the Virgin River. The Hidden Canyon trail was built in 1928. The West
   Rim and East Rim Trail were built for horse-back riding visitors, and
   were blasted out of the sandstone in many places.
   East portal of Zion-Mt. Carmel tunnel in early 1930s. When it was
   built, the tunnel was the longest of its type in the world.
   Enlarge
   East portal of Zion-Mt. Carmel tunnel in early 1930s. When it was
   built, the tunnel was the longest of its type in the world.

   The original ranger cabin was built at The Grotto in the 1920s. A real
   visitor center was first built in the 1950's, facing the Temples and
   Towers of the Virgin. Park facilities were redesigned in 2000, with the
   visitor centre converted to a human-history museum ( photo) and visitor
   centre functions moved to a new solar powered facility adjacent to the
   south entrance.

   Zion Canyon Scenic Drive provides access to Zion Canyon. Traffic
   congestion in the narrow canyon was recognized as a major problem in
   the 1990s and a public transportation system using propane-powered
   shuttle buses was instituted in the year 2000. From April through
   October, the scenic drive in Zion Canyon is closed to private vehicles,
   and visitors ride the frequent shuttle buses. The new plan restored
   natural quiet to the canyon.

   On April 12, 1995, heavy rains triggered a landslide that blocked the
   Virgin River in Zion Canyon. Over a period of two hours, the river
   carved away 590 feet (190 m) of the only exit road from the canyon,
   trapping 450 guests and employees in the Zion Lodge. A one-lane
   temporary road was contructed within 24 hours to allow evacuation of
   the Lodge. A more stable, albeit temporary, road was completed on May
   25, 1995 to allow summer visitors to access the park. This road was
   replaced with a permanent road during the first half of 1996.

   The Zion-Mount Carmel Highway, can be traveled year-round. Access for
   over-sized vehicles requires a special permit, and is limited to
   daytime hours, as traffic through the tunnel must be one way to
   accommodate large vehicles.

   The 5 mile (8 km) Kolob Canyons Road was built in the mid-1960s to
   provide a scenic drive and access to the Kolob Canyons section of the
   park. This road often closes in the winter.

Geology

   The Three Patriarchs in Zion Canyon are made of Navajo Sandstone.
   Enlarge
   The Three Patriarchs in Zion Canyon are made of Navajo Sandstone.

   The nine known exposed formations visible in Zion National Park are
   part of a super-sequence of rock units called the Grand Staircase; they
   represent about 150 million years of mostly Mesozoic-aged sedimentation
   in that part of North America. The formations exposed in the Zion area
   were deposited as sediment in very different environments:
     * The warm, shallow (sometimes advancing or retreating) sea of the
       Kaibab and Moenkopi formations;
     * Streams, ponds, and lakes of the Chinle, Moenave, and Kayenta
       formations;
     * The vast desert of the Navajo and Temple Cap formations; and
     * The dry near-shore environment of the Carmel Formation.

   Uplift affected the entire region, known as the Colorado Plateaus, by
   slowly raising these formations more than 10,000 feet (3,000 m) higher
   than where they were deposited. This steepened the stream gradient of
   the ancestral Virgin and other rivers on the plateau.
   Kolob Canyons are a set of finger canyons cut into the Kolob Plateau.
   Enlarge
   Kolob Canyons are a set of finger canyons cut into the Kolob Plateau.

   The fast-moving streams took advantage of uplift-created joints in the
   rocks to remove all Cenozoic-aged formations and cut gorges into the
   plateaus. Zion Canyon was cut by the North Fork of the Virgin River in
   this way. During the later part of this process, lava flows and cinder
   cones covered parts of the area.

   High water volume in wet seasons does most of the downcutting in the
   main canyon and carries much of the 3 million tons of rock and sediment
   that the Virgin River transports yearly. The Virgin cuts away its
   canyon faster than its tributaries can cut away their own streambeds,
   so tributaries end in waterfalls from hanging valleys where they meet
   the Virgin. The valley between the peaks of the Twin Brothers is a
   notable example of a hanging valley in the canyon.

   Rock Layer Appearance Where To See Deposition Rock Type Photo
   Dakota Formation Cliffs Top of Horse Ranch Mountain Streams
   Conglomerate and sandstone Dakota Sandstone
   Carmel Formation Cliffs Mt Carmel Junction Shallow sea and coastal
   desert Limestone, sandstone and gypsum Carmel Formation
   Temple Cap Formation Cliffs Top of West Temple Desert Sandstone Temple
   Cap Formation atop Navajo Sandstone
   Navajo Sandstone Steep cliffs 1,600 to 2,200 ft (490 to 670 m) thick

   Red lower layers are colored by iron oxides
   Tall cliffs of Zion Canyon; highest exposure is West Temple.
   Cross-bedding shows well at Checkerboard Mesa ( photo) Desert sand
   dunes covered 150,000 mile² (390,000 km²)

   Shifting winds during deposition created cross-bedding
   Sandstone Navajo Sandstone showing its two tones
   Kayenta Formation Rocky slopes Throughout canyon Streams Siltstone and
   sandstone Kayenta Formation
   Moenave Formation Slopes and ledges Lower red cliffs seen from Zion
   Human History Museum Streams and ponds Siltstone and sandstone Moenave
   Formation
   Chinle Formation Purpleish slopes Above Rockville Streams Shale, loose
   clay and conglomerate Chinle Formation
   Moenkopi Formation Chocolate cliffs with white bands Rocky slopes from
   Virgin to Rockville Shallow sea Shale, siltstone, sandstone, mudstone,
   and limestone Moenkopi Formation
   Kaibab Formation Cliffs Hurricane Cliffs along I-15 near Kolob Canyons
   Shallow sea Limestone Hurricane Cliffs/Kaibab Fm.

Biology

   Taylor Creek with Horse Ranch Mountain in background. Desert, riparian,
   woodland and coniferous forest habitat can be seen in this photo.
   Enlarge
   Taylor Creek with Horse Ranch Mountain in background. Desert, riparian,
   woodland and coniferous forest habitat can be seen in this photo.

   The Great Basin, Mojave Desert, and Colorado Plateau converge at Zion
   and the Kolob canyons. This, along with the varied topography of
   canyon- mesa country, differing soil types, and uneven water
   availability, provides diverse habitat for the equally diverse mix of
   plants and animals that live in the area. In 1999, biologists counted
   289 bird species in the park. Seventy-five mammal and 32 reptile and
   amphibian species are also found. These organisms make their home in
   one or more of four life zones found in the Park:
     * Desert
     * Riparian
     * Woodland
     * Coniferous forest

   Sacred Datura grows on the canyon floor and blooms at night.
   Enlarge
   Sacred Datura grows on the canyon floor and blooms at night.

   Desert conditions persist on canyon bottoms and rocky ledges away from
   perennial streams. Sagebrush, Prickly pear Cactus, and Rabbitbrush,
   along with Sacred Datura and Indian Paintbrush are common. Utah
   Penstemon and Golden Aster can also be found. Milkvetch and Prince's
   Plume are found in pockets of selenium-rich soils. Common daytime
   animals include squirrels, Pinyon Jays, and Whiptail and Collared
   lizards ( photo), while Desert Cottontails, Jackrabbits, and Merriam's
   Kangaroo Rats come out at night.
   Chipmunks can be found roaming Zion Canyon.
   Enlarge
   Chipmunks can be found roaming Zion Canyon.

   Cougars, Coyotes, Gray Foxes, and Ringtails are the top predators.

   Cooler conditions persist at mid-elevation slopes, between 3900 to 5500
   feet (1190 to 1680 m). Stunted forests of pinyon pine and Juniper
   coexist here with manzanita shrubs, cliffrose, serviceberry, Scrub Oak,
   and yucca.

   Stands of Ponderosa Pine, Gambel Oak, manzanita and aspen populate the
   mesas and cliffs above 6000 feet (1830 m).
   Mule Deer graze throughout the area and are the most-often seen
   megafauna.
   Enlarge
   Mule Deer graze throughout the area and are the most-often seen
   megafauna.

   Golden Eagles, Red-tailed Hawks, Peregrine Falcons, and White-throated
   Swifts can be seen in the area. California Condors and Bighorn Sheep
   were introduced in the 1990s. Nineteen species of bat also live in the
   area.

   Boxelder, Fremont Cottonwood, maple, and willow dominate riparian plant
   communities. Animals such as the Bank Beaver, Flannel-mouth Suckers,
   Gnatcatchers, Dippers, Canyon Wrens, the Virgin Spinedace, and Water
   Striders all make their homes in the riparian zones. Mule Deer browse
   on vegetation throughout the park.

Activities

   For many, the highlight of Zion is a trip up the main canyon to the
   Temple of Sinawava, via the park-run propane-powered free shuttle buses
   (operating April 1st to October 31st) or driving in their own vehicles
   the rest of the year. Spectacular, colorful sandstone cliffs soar into
   the sky above a flat-bottomed, forested valley floor.

   Driving through the east side of Zion to U.S. Route 89 allows access
   north to Bryce Canyon National Park or south to the north rim of the
   Grand Canyon. Due to the narrowness of the Zion-Mount Carmel Tunnel,
   RVs and buses must obtain a special pass and run through the tunnel
   during limited hours.

   The more primitive sections of Zion include the Kolob Terrace and the
   Kolob Canyons. The Grotto in Zion Canyon and the viewpoint at the end
   of Kolob Canyons Road have the only designated picnic sites.

   More than 150 miles (240 km) of maintained trails provide access to the
   roadless interior. Seven popular trails with round-trip times of half
   an hour (Weeping Rock) to 4 hours (Angels Landing) are found in Zion
   Canyon. Two popular trails, Taylor Creek (4 hours round trip) and Kolob
   Arch (9 hours round trip) are in the Kolob Canyons section of the park
   (near Cedar City). Hiking up into The Narrows from the Temple of
   Sinawava is a popular summertime diversion. Orderville Canyon, a
   narrower slot canyon, is also a favorite. Heartier souls can backpack
   down The Narrows from the top in two days, or hike down in one long day
   (12 hours). Other popular backpack trips include the West Rim Trail and
   LaVerkin Creek/Kolob Arch.

   Zion is a centre for Rock climbing, with short walls like Touchstone,
   Moonlight Buttress, Spaceshot and Prodigal Son being very popular.
   There are many short free climbs, and a large number of hard, long aid
   climbs. Rockclimbing does not require a permit, though any anticipated
   bivy on a wall does. Certain areas are closed for raptor nesting in the
   spring.
   Horseback riding in Zion
   Enlarge
   Horseback riding in Zion

   Zion is the USA's most concentrated centre for canyoneering. Popular
   routes like Pine Creek and Mystery Canyon were first descended in the
   1950s and 1960s, with the last of the big drainages (Heaps) descended
   in 1982. Zion has a concentration of about 50 technical canyons,
   characterized by downclimbing and rappels in beautiful sandstone
   canyons. The most difficult canyons have long sections of entrenched
   narrows, with keeper potholes that require technical gear and
   specialized techniques to escape.

   Lodging in the park is available at Zion Lodge, located halfway through
   Zion Canyon. Zion Lodge is open year-round and has motel units, cabins,
   a restaurant, café, and gift shop but rooms fill up fast. Three
   campgrounds are available; South and Watchman at the far south side of
   the park, and a primitive site at Lava Point in the middle of the park
   off Kolob Terrace Road. Watchman is the only campground in the park
   that takes reservations and Lava Point has only primitive facilities
   and is usually open from May to October. Camping in the backcountry
   requires permits.

   Guided horseback riding trips, nature walks, and evening programs are
   available from late March to early November. The Junior Ranger Program
   for ages 6 to 12 is active from Memorial Day to Labor Day at the Zion
   Nature Centre.

   Rangers at the Zion Canyon Visitor Center and the smaller Kolob Canyons
   Visitor Center can help visitors plan their stay. A bookstore attached
   to the Zion Canyon Visitor Centre, run by the Zion Natural History
   Association, offers books, maps, and souvenirs for sale, with proceeds
   benefiting the park. The Association also runs the Zion Human History
   Museum.

   Zion Canyon IMAX in nearby Sprindale, features many interesting
   documentaries about the natural history of Zion Canyon and the American
   Southwest

   Adjacent to the park on the south, is the town of Springdale, Utah
   which offers services such as lodging, food, and entertainment. There
   is also lodging, food and entertainment offered on the east side of the
   park along the Zion-Mount Carmel Highway and in Mt Carmel Junction.
   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zion_National_Park"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
