   #copyright

Zuid-Gelders

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: European Geography;
Languages

   This article is a part of

   the Dutch dialects series.
   The Dialects
   Brabantian
   Hollandic
   West Flemish
   Zealandic
   East Flemish
   Zuid-Gelders
   Dutch Low Saxon
   Limburgish
   Position of Zuid-Gelders (Marked dark Blue) within the Dutch speaking
   area
   Enlarge
   Position of Zuid-Gelders (Marked dark Blue) within the Dutch speaking
   area

   Zuid-Gelders (Kleverlands) is the dialect of the Dutch language that is
   spoken in the Veluwezoom, around Nijmegen, in the Bommelerwaard, other
   areas of the Netherlands, and traditionally parts of Germany including
   Duisburg and partly Wuppertal up to Wenden, which is the only
   Westphalian municipality.

   Each of the dialects from the Zuid-Gelders group has most features
   shared with the Brabantic dialects. The Zuid-Gelders dialects form no
   unity against the Brabantic dialects, i.e. they are not more closely
   related to each other than to any Brabantic dialect. There also exists
   no isogloss bundle between the "Brabantic" and "Zuid-Gelders" dialects:
   the distinction is thus purely conventional. To the south of Venlo and
   -at least formerly- in the area of today's Duisburg it borders to the
   Limburgish language. Zuid-Gelders is part of the Low Franconian
   languages, which are West Germanic languages. Zuid-Gelders is
   considered a dialect of Low Rhenish in Germany. Low Rhenish is to
   include Limburgish as the only other form according to this definition.
   Together they belong to the greater Maas-Rhine area, a large group of
   southeast Low Franconian dialects. This group is called Maas-Rhenish
   (Dutch: Maas-Rijnlands, German: Rheinmaasländisch) by the Amsterdam
   Linguist Ad Welschen.
   A dialect of Zuid-Gelders origin spoken in the United States is Pella
   Dutch. Among the local variants of Zuid-Gelders spoken in the
   Netherlands are Zevenaars, Waals and Nijmegens.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zuid-Gelders"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
