   #copyright

Zulu

2007 Schools Wikipedia Selection. Related subjects: African Geography

   Zulus

   Zulu Warriors, late 19th century (with some Europeans in the
   background)
   Total population 10.4 million (2001 est. ^1)
   Regions with significant populations KwaZulu-Natal Province: 7.6
   million

   Gauteng Province: 1.9 million
   Mpumalanga Province: 0.8 million
   Free State Province: 0.14 million (2001 est. ^1)
   Language Zulu, many also speak English or Afrikaans or Portuguese or
   other African tribal languages such as Xhosa.
   Religion Christian, Animist
   Related ethnic groups Bantu

   Nguni Basotho Xhosa Swazi Matabele Khoisan

   The Zulu ( South African English and isiZulu: amaZulu) are an African
   ethnic group of about 11 million people who live mainly in the province
   of KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Small numbers also live in Zimbabwe,
   Zambia, and Mozambique. Their language, isiZulu, is a Bantu language;
   more specifically, part of the Nguni subgroup. The Zulu Kingdom played
   a major role in South African History during the 19th and 20th
   centuries. Under apartheid, Zulu people were classed as second-class
   citizens and severely discriminated against. Today, they are the most
   numerous ethnic group in the country, and have equal rights along with
   all other South Africans.

History

Origins

   The Zulu were originally a minor clan in what is today Northern
   KwaZulu-Natal, founded ca. 1709 by Zulu kaNtombhela. In the Zulu
   language, Zulu means heaven, or sky. At that time, the area was
   occupied by many small Nguni tribes and clans (also called
   isizwe=nation, people or "isibongo"=clan). Nguni tribes had migrated
   down Africa's east coast over thousands of years, probably arriving in
   what is now South Africa in about the year 800 AD

Kingdom

The rise of the Zulu kingdom under Shaka

   Shaka Zulu was the illegitimate son of Senzangakona, chief of the
   Zulus. He was born ca 1787. He and his mother, Nandi, were exiled by
   Senzangakona, and found refuge in the Mthethwa. Shaka fought as a
   warrior under Dingiswayo, chief of the Mthethwa. When Senzangakona
   died, Dingiswayo helped Shaka claim his place as chief of the Zulu
   Kingdom.

The bloody ascendancy of Dingane

   Shaka was succeeded by Dingane, his half brother, who conspired with
   Mhlangana, another half-brother, to murder him. Following this
   assassination, Dingane murdered Mhlangana, and took over the throne.
   One of his first royal acts was to execute several more of his royal
   kin. In the years that followed, he also executed many past supporters
   of Shaka in order to secure his position. One exception to these purges
   was Mpande, another half-brother, who was considered too weak to be a
   threat at the time.

Clashes with the Voortrekkers and the ascendancy of Mpande

   In October 1837, the Voortrekker leader Piet Retief visited Dingane at
   his royal kraal, to negotiate a land deal for the voortrekkers. In
   November, about 1000 Voortrekker wagons began descending the
   Drakensberg mountains from the Orange Free State into what is now
   KwaZulu-Natal.

   Dingane asked that Retief and his party retrieve some cattle stolen
   from him by a local chief. This Retief and his men did, returning on 3
   February 1838. The next day, a treaty was signed, wherein Dingane ceded
   all the land south of the Tugela River to the Mzimvubu River to the
   Voortrekkers. Celebrations followed. On 6 February, at the end of the
   celebrations, Retief's party were invited to a dance, and asked to
   leave their weapons behind. At the peak of the dance, Dingane leapt to
   his feet and yelled "Bambani aba thakathi!"( isiZulu for "Kill the
   wizards"). Retief and his men were overpowered, taken to the nearby
   hill kwaMatiwane, and executed. It is believed that they were killed
   for withholding some of the cattle they recovered. Dingane's army then
   attacked and massacred a group of 500 Voortrekker men, women and
   children camped nearby. The site of this massacre is today called
   Weenen, (Dutch for "to weep").

   The remaining Voortrekkers elected a new leader, Andries Pretorius, and
   Dingane suffered a crushing defeat at the Battle of Blood River on 16
   December 1838, when he attacked a group of 470 Voortrekker settlers led
   by Pretorius.

   Following his defeat, Dingane burned his royal household and fled
   north. Mpande, the half-brother who had been spared from Dingane's
   purges, defected with 17,000 followers, and, together with Pretorius
   and the Voortrekkers, went to war with Dingane. Dingane was
   assassinated near the modern Swaziland border. Mpande then took over
   rulership of the Zulu nation.

Succession of Cetshwayo

   Following the campaign against Dingane, in 1839 the Voortrekkers, under
   Pretorius, formed the Boer republic of Natalia, south of the Thukela,
   and west of the British settlement of Port Natal (now Durban). Mpande
   and Pretorius maintained peaceful relations. However, in 1842, war
   broke out between the British and the Boers, resulting in the British
   annexation of Natalia. Mpande shifted his allegiance to the British,
   and remained on good terms with them.

   In 1843, Mpande ordered a purge of perceived dissidents within his
   kingdom. This resulted in numerous deaths, and the fleeing of thousands
   of refugees into neighbouring areas (including the British-controlled
   Natal). Many of these refugees fled with cattle. Mpande began raiding
   the surrounding areas, culminating in the invasion of Swaziland in
   1852. However, the British pressured him into withdrawing, which he did
   shortly.

   At this time, a battle for the succession broke out between two of
   Mpande's sons, Cetshwayo and Mbuyazi. This culminated in 1856 with a
   battle that left Mbuyazi dead. Cetshwayo then set about usurping his
   father's authority. In 1872, Mpande died of old age, and Cetshwayo took
   over rulership.

Fall of the kingdom

Anglo-Zulu War

   On 11 December 1878, agents of the British delivered an ultimatum to 14
   chiefs representing Cetshwayo. The terms of the ultimatum were
   unacceptable to Cetshwayo. British forces crossed the Thukela river at
   the end of December 1878. The war took place in 1879. Early in the war,
   the Zulus defeated the British at the Battle of Isandlwana on January
   22. However, the war ended in Zulu defeat at the Battle of Ulundi on
   July 4.

Division and the death of Cetshwayo

   Cetshwayo was captured a month after his defeat, and then exiled to
   Cape Town. The British passed rule of the Zulu kingdom onto 13
   "kinglets", each with their own subkingdom. Conflict soon erupted
   between these subkingdoms, and in 1882, Cetshwayo was allowed to visit
   England. He had audiences with Queen Victoria, and other famous
   personages, before being allowed to return to Zululand, to be
   reinstated as king.

   In 1883, Cetshwayo was put in place as king over a buffer reserve
   territory, much reduced from his original kingdom. Later that year,
   however, Cetshwayo was attacked at Ulundi by Zibhebhu, one of the 13
   kinglets, supported by Boer mercenaries. Cetshwayo was wounded and
   fled. Cetshwayo died in February 1884, possibly poisoned. His son,
   Dinuzulu, then 15, inherited the throne.

Dinuzulu and the Boer mercenaries

   In order to fight back against Zibhebhu, Dinuzulu recruited Boer
   mercenaries of his own, promising them land in return for their aid.
   These mercenaries called themselves "Dinuzulu's Volunteers", and were
   led by Louis Botha. Dinuzulu's Volunteers defeated Zibhebhu in 1884,
   and duly demanded their land. They were granted about half of Zululand
   individually as farms, and formed an independent republic. This alarmed
   the British, who then annexed Zululand in 1887. Dinuzulu became
   involved in later conflicts with rivals. In 1906 Dinuzulu was accused
   of being behind the Bambatha Rebellion. He was arrested and put on
   trial by the British for "high treason and public violence". In 1909,
   he was sentenced to ten year's imprisonment on St Helena island. When
   the Union of South Africa was formed, Louis Botha became its first
   prime minister, and he arranged for his old ally Dinuzulu to live in
   exile on a farm in the Transvaal, where Dinuzulu died in 1913.

   Dinuzulu's son Solomon Solomon kaDinuzulu was never recognized by South
   African authorities as the Zulu king, only as a local chief, but he was
   increasingly regarded as king by chiefs, by political intellectuals
   such as John Langalibalele Dube and by ordinary Zulu people. In 1923
   Solomon founded the organization Inkatha YaKwaZulu to promote his royal
   claims, which became moribund and then was revived in the 1970s by
   Mangosuthu Buthelezi, chief minister of the KwaZulu bantustan. In
   December 1951, Solomon's son Cyprian Bhekuzulu kaSolomon was officially
   recognized as the Paramount Chief of the Zulu people, but real power
   over ordinary Zulu people lay with white South African officials
   working through local chiefs who could be removed from office for
   failure to cooperate.

Apartheid years

The KwaZulu homeland

   Under apartheid, the homeland of KwaZulu was created for Zulu people.
   In 1970, the Bantu Homeland Citizenship Act provided that all Zulus
   would become citizens of KwaZulu, losing their South African
   citizenship. KwaZulu consisted of a large number of disconnected pieces
   of land, in what is now KwaZulu-Natal. Hundreds of thousands of Zulu
   people living on privately owned "black spots" outside of KwaZulu were
   dispossessed and forcibly moved to worse land previously reserved for
   whites contiguous to existing areas of KwaZulu in the name of
   "consolidation." By 1993, approximately 5.2 million Zulu people lived
   in KwaZulu, and approximately 2 million lived in the rest of South
   Africa. The Chief Minister of KwaZulu, from its creation in 1970 (as
   Zululand) was Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi. In 1994, KwaZulu was joined
   with the province of Natal, to form modern KwaZulu-Natal.

Inkatha

   In 1975, Buthelezi revived the Inkatha YaKwaZulu, predecessor of the
   Inkatha Freedom Party. This organisation was nominally a protest
   movement against apartheid, but held more conservative views than the
   ANC. For example, Inkatha was opposed to the armed struggle, and to
   sanctions against South Africa. Inkatha was initially on good terms
   with the ANC, but the two organizations came into increasing conflict
   beginning in 1979 in the aftermath of the Soweto Uprising.

   Because its stances were more in accordance with the apartheid
   government's views, Inkatha was the only mass organisation recognised
   as being representative of the views of black South Africans by the
   apartheid government. (The ANC, and other movements, were banned.) In
   the last years of apartheid, this acceptance extended to the covert
   provision of funds and guerilla warfare training to Inkatha by the
   government. Yet unlike the leaders of the Transkei, Ciskei,
   Bophuthatswana and Venda bantustans, Buthelezi never accepted the
   pseudo-independence offered under the policy of Separate Development,
   despite strong pressure from the ruling white government.

Political violence

   From 1985, members of opposing protest movements in what is now
   KwaZulu-Natal began engaging in bloody armed clashes, with combatants
   armed with AK-47's. This political violence occurred primarily between
   Inkatha and ANC members, and included atrocities committed by both
   sides. It was believed to be frequently instigated by a branch of the
   apartheid government's security forces, which became known as the
   "third force". The violence continued through the 1980s, and escalated
   in the 1990s in the build up to the first national elections in 1994.

The modern Zulu population

   The modern Zulu population is fairly evenly distributed in both urban
   and rural areas. Although KwaZulu-Natal is still their heartland, large
   numbers have been attracted to the relative economic prosperity of
   Gauteng province. Indeed, isiZulu is the most widely spoken home
   language in the province, followed by Sesotho. IsiZulu is also widely
   spoken in rural and small-town Mpumalanga province.

   Zulus also play an important part in South African politics. Mangosuthu
   Buthelezi served for a number of years as a Deputy President in a
   government of national unity in the 1990s, when reduction of civil
   conflict between ANC and IFP followers was a key national issue. Within
   the ANC, both the immediate past ( Jacob Zuma) and current ( Phumzile
   Mlambo-Ngcuka) Deputy President of the country have been Zulu, in part
   to bolster the ANC's claim to be a pan-ethnic national party and refute
   IFP claims that it was primarily a Xhosa party.

Zulu music

   The singing styles of the Zulu people and their Nguni heritage are
   worthy of special mention. As in much of Africa, music is highly
   regarded, enabling the communication of emotions and situations which
   could not be explained by talking. Zulu music incorporates rhythm,
   melody and harmony — the latter is usually dominant and known as "
   isigubudu" (which can be translated as converging horns on a beast,
   with tips touching the animal, a spiralling inward that reflects inner
   feelings).

   Maskanda and Mbaqanga are other Zulu music genres. Notable Maskandi
   musicians include Phuzekhemisi and Mfazomnyama.

   Zulu music has also been carried worldwide, often by white musicians
   using Zulu backing singers, or performing songs by Zulu composers.
   Examples of the former are Paul Simon and South African Johnny Clegg.
   Examples of the latter are the song " Wimoweh" and several tunes on the
   first non-cassette album by Bow Wow Wow. In the case of both Bow Wow
   Wow and to a lesser extent "Wimoweh", the original Zulu musicians went
   largely unidentified and uncompensated by the white musicians.

   The internationally successful Zulu group Ladysmith Black Mambazo are
   among the artists who have made Zulu musical traditions known
   throughout the world. After contributing to Paul Simon's Graceland
   album they have toured the world with numerous stars and received two
   Grammy Awards.

Language

   The language of the Zulu people is Zulu or isiZulu, a Bantu language;
   more specifically, part of the Nguni subgroup. Zulu is the most widely
   spoken language in South Africa, with more than half of the South
   African population able to understand it (Ethnologue 2005). Many Zulu
   people also speak English, Portuguese, SeSotho and others from among
   South Africa's 11 official languages.

Religion

   Zulu can be Christians (whether Roman Catholics or Protestants in
   Mozambique, South Africa, and Zimbabwe, or part-Christian, part-
   animist-African in Zimbabwe) or pure-animists.

   Zulu religion includes belief in a creator god (Nkulunkulu), who is
   above interacting in day-to-day human affairs. It is possible to appeal
   to the spirit world only by invoking the ancestors (AmaDlozi) through
   divination processes. As such, the diviner, who is almost always a
   woman, plays an important part in the daily lives of the Zulu. It is
   believed that all bad things, including death, are the result of evil
   sorcery or offended spirits. No misfortune is ever seen as the result
   of natural causes. Another important aspect of Zulu religion is
   cleanliness. Separate utensils and plates were used for different
   foods, and bathing often occurred up to three times a day. Christianity
   had difficulty gaining a foothold among the Zulu, and when it did it
   was in a syncretic fashion. Isaiah Shambe, considered the Zulu messiah,
   presented a form of Christianity which incorporated traditional
   customs.

   Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zulu"
   This reference article is mainly selected from the English Wikipedia
   with only minor checks and changes (see www.wikipedia.org for details
   of authors and sources) and is available under the GNU Free
   Documentation License. See also our Disclaimer.
